
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00867/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Considered on the papers (P)                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 17 February 2021                          |On 03 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     EM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Meah, promulgated on 6 October 2020. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 30 October 2020.

Anonymity

 2. No direction was made  previously,  however  out  of  an  abundance  of
    caution, given that this is a protection matter, I  have  made  such  a
    direction below.

Background

 3. The appellant applied for asylum in the United Kingdom on 6 March 2015,
    aged 15. That claim was based on the appellant's  fear  that  he  would
    face mistreatment and a lack of support  following  the  death  of  his
    primary carer. That application  was  refused  but  the  appellant  was
    granted leave to remain as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child  until
    4  January  2018.  The  appellant  withdrew  his  appeal  against  that
    decision. On 11 December 2017, the appellant applied for further  leave
    to remain on the same basis as before and also made reference to a risk
    of trafficking. That claim was refused in a decision dated  15  January
    2020.

 4. The detailed reasons for refusal ran to some 13 pages. In refusing  the
    claim, the respondent came to the view that the appellant had  provided
    a false identity and account of events. The respondent decided that the
    appellant  could  obtain  effective  assistance   from   the   Albanian
    authorities should he be at risk of trafficking.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant and  submissions  from  both  parties.  The
    judge found the appellant was an unreliable witness and  dismissed  his
    appeal on all bases.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal were fourfold. Firstly, it was  argued  that  the
    judge took an erroneous approach to the appellant's credibility and the
    export  report.  Secondly,  the  judge  had  erred  in  rejecting   the
    appellant's account on the basis that it  was  inherently  implausible.
    Thirdly, it  was  submitted  that  the  judge's  aforementioned  errors
    infected his assessment of the Humanitarian Protection/Article 3 claim.
    Lastly, there was said to be a  failure  to  provide  adequate  reasons
    under Article 8.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the following basis:

         "2. The crux of the grounds is that the judge erred in first making
         adverse credibility findings and then considering a country  expert
         report.

         3. It is true that the judge concluded first, that the  appellant's
         account was not credible, and then went onto consider  the  country
         expert report. Having made adverse credibility findings, the  judge
         stated that the  country  expert  report  could  not  take  matters
         further. Procedurally, that does appear to be the  wrong  approach.
         Whether the judge would have arrived at a different conclusion  had
         the correct procedure been followed  is  debateable,  but  must  be
         explored further."

 8. Permission was not refused on any ground.

 9. The respondent's Rule 24 response was received on 6 November  2020.  In
    short, the respondent did not oppose the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal and invited the Tribunal to remit  the  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all issues.

Procedural matters

10. Directions were emailed to the parties on 4  December  2020.  The  said
    directions communicated that a provisional view had been taken that the
    matter  could  be  decided  without  a  hearing  and  invited   written
    submissions regarding whether the First-tier Tribunal made an error  of
    law and whether that decision should be set  aside.  The  parties  were
    further invited to submit reasons if it was considered that  a  hearing
    was necessary.

11. Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  states
    that the Upper Tribunal may make any decision with or without a hearing
    but must have regard to any view expressed by  a  party  when  deciding
    whether to do.

12. The appellant's response was sent by email  on  5  December  2020.   In
    essence, counsel for the appellant was of the view that a  hearing  was
    not necessary  provided  the  Tribunal  agreed  with  the  respondent's
    concession, allowed the appellant's appeal and remitted the  matter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

13. On 8 December 2020, the Upper Tribunal received the respondent's  reply
    which said the following. "Further to the attached  Rule  24  response,
    the respondent does not see the need for a  hearing  to  determine  the
    error of law in this case."

14. I have considered the judgment in JCWI v The  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin) and conclude that the appellant  will
    not be disadvantaged by the error of law issue being decided without  a
    hearing in this instance for the  following  reasons.  The  appellant's
    representatives  raised   no   objections   to   the   proposed   paper
    consideration in  certain  circumstances  which  have  been  met.   The
    respondent conceded the grounds of appeal  as  a  whole,  a  concession
    which I have accepted below. In addition, the matter is to be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  hearing  before  a  different
    judge.

Decision on error of law

15. A fundamental issue to be determined by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    whether the appellant had been dishonest as to  his  identity.  In  the
    decision letter at paragraph 11, the Secretary of  State  relied  on  a
    letter from the British Embassy in Tirana which stated that there  were
    no Albanian nationals registered on  the  National  Civil  Register  of
    Albania with the details  given  by  the  appellant  for  himself,  his
    parents or siblings. The appellant relied upon  expert  evidence  which
    put forward an explanation as to why this might be the case.

16. The grounds argue  that  the  judge  appeared  to  have  completed  his
    assessment of  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim  prior  to
    considering the expert evidence. It is  worth  noting  that  the  judge
    appeared to have directly himself appropriately, in  that  at  [16]  he
    stated that he had taken into account all the evidence and  submissions
    and at [33] he said of the expert evidence, "even taking the report  at
    its highest, and when viewing it independently, and distinct  from  the
    incredibility finding I have made against the appellant, I do not  find
    that its contents are capable of persuading me that  the  appellant  is
    speaking the truth ..."

17. Nonetheless, the way in which the  decision  and  reasons  is  set  out
    demonstrates that the judge rejected the credibility of the appellant's
    account between [20-28] before assessing the expert evidence from  [29]
    onwards.

18. The judge's use of the phrase "Turning now to the expert  reports,"  at
    [29] onwards, gives the distinct impression that the report in question
    was not taken into account in the assessment of the appellant's  claim,
    applying Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 36 at [24]

         "Where the report is specifically relied on as a factor relevant to
         credibility, the Adjudicator should deal with  it  as  an  integral
         part of the findings on credibility rather than just as an  add-on,
         which  does  not  undermine  the  conclusions  to  which  he  would
         otherwise come. "

19. There was also an absence of engagement  with  the  conclusion  of  the
    expert given that the judge was satisfied with the expert's credentials
    [30]. The explanation provided by the expert for the appellant and  his
    family not appearing on  the  National  Civil  Register  was  that  the
    Registry was digitalised in 2008, whereas the  appellant's  family  had
    disappeared in 2004. In addition the expert opinion was that  the  said
    Register was not infallible. While the judge commented on these  issues
    at [20-22], he mischaracterised it as being a "line of argument" rather
    than expert evidence. The judge did not return to  the  issue  when  he
    turned to look at the expert report at [29] onwards.

20. The judge's error in not considering the expert evidence in the  round,
    was material as  it  formed  one  of  the  two  principal  reasons  for
    rejecting the credibility of the appellant's account. The other  reason
    was the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  arrangements  for
    travelling to the United Kingdom were inherently implausible which is a
    problematic finding  given  the  consistent  account  provided  by  the
    appellant as well as that this is a somewhat peripheral issue.

21. In view of my comments above, I do not propose to address grounds 3 and
    4. I find that the First-tier Tribunal judge made  material  errors  of
    law, as set out in grounds 1 and 2, which renders the decision unsafe.

22. The parties are both of  the  view  that  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is the appropriate course. While mindful of statement 7 of the
    Senior President's Practice Statements of 10 February 2010, it  is  the
    case that the appellant has yet to have an  adequate  consideration  of
    his protection appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and it would be unfair
    to deprive him of such consideration.


Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Meah.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date 17 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

