
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00816/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2018                            |On 6 November 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                  MR S B M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Tabassum
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Tobin dated 19 March 2018 dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 3  January  2018  refusing
    the Appellant leave to remain and refusing his protection claim.

2.   The Appellant is a national of  Iraq  of  Kurdish  ethnic  origin.   He
    originates from Kirkuk.  The  Respondent  accepted  at  [43]  that  the
    Appellant was from Iraq, and  at  [53]  that  the  Appellant  was  from
    Kirkuk.  It is to be noted that Kirkuk is of course a part  of  central
    and southern Iraq, not part of the Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  (IKR).   The
    Appellant had given an account that he was a soldier,  and  had  formed
    part of  the  unit  acting  as  bodyguard  to  former  President  Jalal
    Talabani, the  first  non-Arabic  President  of  Iraq,  who  served  as
    President of Iraq from 2006 to 2014.  The Appellant's account was  that
    he lived principally in Kirkuk but that he served three weeks  on  duty
    in Baghdad, and then returned for three weeks leave at home in  Kirkuk,
    in cycles.  Although it was accepted at [60]  that  the  Appellant  had
    been a soldier in the Iraqi Army, the Respondent did  not  accept  that
    the Appellant had  been  part  of  the  bodyguard  unit  for  President
    Talabani.  The Appellant's account was that in 2014  and  2015  he  had
    been the subject of threats made by ISIS because of his association  as
    bodyguard for President Talabani.   That  element  to  the  Appellant's
    account was not accepted either.

3.   The Appellant had provided a number of documents to the  Respondent  in
    support of his claim for protection.  These are set out at paragraph 35
    of the decision letter: An Iraqi MOD card, ID card for the security  of
    the Presidency, further ID cards (showing address  information),  CSID,
    nationality card and food ration card.  Paragraph 35  of  the  decision
    letter continues to assert: "these documents have been  assessed  by  a
    Home Office immigration official and have not been found to be  genuine
    therefore this detracts weight from your claim".

4.   The refusal letter also states as follows at paragraph 69:

         "It is noted that you have provided documentation in regard to your
         claim to have been a bodyguard to the  Iraqi  President  including:
         Iraqi MOD card, ID card for the  security  of  the  Presidency  and
         further ID cards.  These have not been found to be genuine and this
         further detracts weight from your claim."

5.   Further, at paragraph 76 of the refusal letter the Respondent asserts:

         "It is noted that you have submitted several  copies  of  documents
         including the letter claimed to be from ISIS and reports which  you
         claim were provided by the Kirkuk police and  Sulaymaniah  Asayesh.
         These have been considered in line with the  case  law  of  Tanveer
         Ahmed IAT [2002] UKIAT 00439*.  This means it is for  you  to  show
         that any documents you rely on to support your case can  be  relied
         on.  Your documents have not been viewed in isolation.  This  means
         that they have  been  considered  as  part  of  all  the  available
         evidence that they relate to.  These documents are found to be non-
         genuine, therefore no weight can be added to these documents."

6.   The Respondent provided two document examination reports in support  of
    its reasoning, to be found at  page  E1  and  E2  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle.  Both are dated 23 November 2017.  One states on its face  that
    it refers to  document  00893737  and  states  that  the  document  was
    examined at the National Documentation Fraud Unit in  Liverpool  on  23
    November 2017 and that the document was found to be a counterfeit,  and
    should not be relied upon as evidence of nationality or identity.   The
    reasons are given as follows:

         "The above detailed purported Iraqi ID card has been printed  using
         a digital, four colour inkjet print process ..."

7.   The other document examination report also refers to document  00893737
    and again states that the document was  found  to  be  counterfeit  and
    should not be relied upon as evidence of nationality or  identity,  and
    in the reasons for the above conclusion, the document is  described  to
    be a "purported Iraqi Jansiyya".

8.   The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  the  judge  on  16
    February 2018.  The Appellant gave evidence.  In dismissing the appeal,
    the judge made findings which included the following:

    (i)  At [25] the judge referred to the  two  documentation  examination
         reports and held:


             "By submitting forged  documents  the  Appellant  has  totally
             undermined his evidence, such that I do not accept any of  his
             evidence.  His account was so weak that I  may  have  come  to
             that conclusion anyway bearing in mind the inconsistencies and
             implausible evidence noted in his determination;  however,  by
             submitting  forged  documents  I  am  in  no  doubt  that  the
             Appellant's whole story cannot be relied upon to any degree";


    (ii) at [26] the judge accepted that the Appellant was an Iraqi soldier
         and to some extent he could be viewed as  a  target  by  ISIS  (and
         there, I might add seemingly contradicting his observation in  [25]
         that the Appellant's whole story  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  any
         degree), the judge did not accept that the Appellant had been  part
         of the Presidential Guard;


    (iii)    at [27] the judge noted that the Appellant had claimed to have
         started work in the Presidential Guard in 2008 and it had been  six
         years before his first threat from ISIS; the judge  held  that  the
         absence of any credible catalyst for such an approach  by  ISIS  at
         that time makes a fundamentally weak story even less believable;


    (iv) at [31] the judge did not accept the Appellant was  no  longer  in
         contact with his family;


    (v)  at [32] the judge did not find credible  that  the  Appellant  had
         claimed to have lost his Iraqi passport  en  route  to  the  United
         Kingdom on a boat near Greece, whilst  at  the  same  time  keeping
         other documents including his forged documents and his mobile phone
         and photographs safe; this was not plausible; he may still have his
         passport;


    (vi) at [34] the judge held that the Appellant would be able to  get  a
         CSID for his return to Iraq, either through his family  or  through
         the Iraqi Embassy; the judge was not satisfied with the Appellant's
         explanation that his family are not contactable; that evidence  was
         not credible and was entirely self-serving.

9.   The Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

10.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  in  grounds  of  appeal
    dated 3 April 2018, but permission to appeal was refused  on  18  April
    2018.  The Appellant renewed his application for permission on  16  May
    2018, and permission was granted on  21  June  2018.   The  Appellant's
    grounds of appeal are, in summary, that  the  judge  erred  in  law  as
    follows:

         Ground 1:  failure to follow country guidance given in AA  (article
         15 (c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 IAC, AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA
         Civ 944, and BA (Returns to Bahgdad) Iraq [2017]  UKUT  00018  IAC,
         resulting in errors relating  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
         following issues:


         Ground 1.1    Feasibility of return


         Ground 1.2    Appellant's stability to obtain a CSID card


         Ground 1.3    Return to Baghdad


         Ground 1.4    Relocation to IKR

11.  I intend no disrespect to the Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  in  not
    setting 1.1 to 1.4 out in any further detail, but a fundamental part of
    the argument that is advanced by the Appellant throughout Ground  1  is
    that the Appellant does not have a CSID card, and his ability to  enter
    and survive in Iraq without such document and  to  internally  relocate
    from Baghdad to the IKR would all be dependent  on  his  possession  of
    such a document, and the judge erred in law in purporting to find  that
    the Appellant could obtain a new CSID card through his family, who  the
    judge had found he was still in contact with.

12.  Ground 2 argues that the judge misapplied Section 8 of the  Asylum  and
    Immigration  (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

13.  Ground 3 alleges that the judge erred in law in a  number  of  ways  in
    his assessment of the Appellant's credibility including:

         (i) finding it implausible that the Appellant was not  targeted  by
         ISIS for six years from 2008 to 2014, on the basis that  the  judge
         had failed to  take  into  account  that  ISIS  did  not  gain  any
         prominence until 2014 when  country  information  establishes  that
         this was the time of their rise to influence in Iraq;


         (ii) the judge erred in law in his assessment of the credibility of
         the Appellant's account to have lost contact with his family in  or
         around October 2017, as the judge had failed to take  into  account
         country information brought to his attention regarding evidence  of
         armed conflict in the Kirkuk  area  at  that  time,  when  'Popular
         Mobilisation Forces' overtook Kirkuk, and Kurdish Peshmerga  forces
         were forced to retreat, with 61,000 people  fleeing  the  city  and
         over 100,000 people from the overall  area  being  displaced  (that
         evidence being referred to in the Appellant's skeleton argument  at
         paragraph 35, and in the Appellant's bundle page  48);   the  judge
         erred by failing to  state  why  he  did  not  take  that  material
         evidence into account when assessing the Appellant's credibility of
         having lost contact with his family;


         (iii) failing, when assessing the credibility  of  the  Appellant's
         account  to  have  lost  his  passport,  to  have  regard  to   the
         Appellant's explanation in his witness statement (paragraphs 17 and
         35) that whereas he lost his passport from his top pocket  when  in
         an inflatable boat whilst travelling from Turkey  to  Greece  which
         started to sink, other documents submitted to the Home Office  were
         delivered to him from Iraq only after he was already in the  United
         Kingdom; therefore, the judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account
         relevant evidence when assessing the credibility of the Appellant's
         possession of certain documentation.

14.  Before me I heard from the parties in the appeal.  Ms Tabassum  adopted
    the grounds of appeal, adding little to them, and Mr Tan defending  the
    judge's decision by addressing each ground in turn.

15.  During the course of the hearing before me I raised with the parties  a
    concern that although there were only two document verification reports
    before the judge, which appeared to refer to the Appellant's CSID  card
    and his Jansiyya Iraqi nationality certificate, it was not  clear  what
    documents the judge was treating as being  forged  in  his  finding  at
    [25].  The Respondent appears at paragraphs [35], [69] and [76] of  the
    decision letter to assert that all of the Appellant's documentation had
    been found to be forged or non-genuine. I find that the Respondent  was
    not entitled to arrive at that conclusion merely on the  basis  of  the
    two document verification reports, which referred only to  two  of  the
    Appellant's documents.

16.  Having heard submissions from the parties on this point,  I  find  that
    if and insofar as the judge finds at [25] that all of  the  Appellant's
    documentation including his  Iraqi  MOD  card,  his  ID  card  for  the
    security of the Presidency, his food ration card, a letter  from  ISIS,
    and the  documents  provided  by  the  Kirkuk  police  and  Sulaymaniah
    Asayesh, had all been found to be forged or non-genuine, I find that he
    was not entitled to make such  a  finding  on  the  basis  of  the  two
    documentation verification reports  before  him.  Further,  as  I  find
    above, it is not clear what documents the judge refers to  at  [25]  as
    being non-genuine.

17.  There is  thus  no  sustainable  finding  on  the  reliability  of  the
    Appellant's documentation relating to the Iraqi MOD  card  and  the  ID
    card for the security of the Presidency.  I find that just because  two
    particular documents have been found to be forged or non-genuine,  that
    does not, without more, justify either  the  Respondent  or  the  judge
    finding that any and all of the  Appellant's  documents  are  similarly
    forged.

18.  I turn to the Appellant's challenge regarding certain  of  the  judge's
    findings on credibility.  I find that the following  grounds  are  made
    out:

    (i)  the judge was not entitled to treat the Appellant's credibility as
         diminished merely because he was threatened by ISIS for  the  first
         time only in 2014,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  he  had  been
         allegedly part of the Presidential Bodyguard Unit from  2008;  this
         is because it is clear that  ISIS  did  not  have  any  significant
         presence or influence in Iraq until 2014;


    (ii) further, the judge  has  failed  to  take  into  account  relevant
         country information about the circumstances prevailing in Kirkuk in
         or around October 2017, when dismissing the Appellant's account  to
         have lost contact with his family around that time;


    (iii)    further, insofar as the judge treats the Appellant's  evidence
         as incredible on the basis that he lost his passport  en  route  to
         the United Kingdom but not other documents,  the  judge  materially
         errs in law in failing to take into account the explanation  quoted
         above from his witness statement that it was his passport that  was
         lost from his top pocket when  the  inflatable  boat  was  sinking,
         whereas other documents were delivered to him later from Iraq.

19.  I accept that the first of the points  I  raised  above  regarding  the
    fact that the two document verification reports  could  not  sustain  a
    finding that all of the Appellant's documents are  forged,  was  not  a
    ground raised by the  Appellant  himself  in  his  grounds  of  appeal.
    However, I find that the point is a Robinson obvious point  of  Refugee
    Convention law, and I find the point made out.  Although I accept  that
    the judge offered  other  reasons  in  his  decision  for  finding  the
    Appellant not credible, I find that the cumulative effect of the errors
    I have outlined above to be such that the judge's  overall  finding  on
    credibility is not sustainable in this appeal.

20.  Thus, the judge's assessment that the Appellant was  still  in  contact
    with  his  family  and  could  obtain  their  assistance  to  obtain  a
    replacement CSID card is a finding which has no proper basis.

    Notice of Decision


    I find that the making of the decision included the making of  material
    errors of law.


    I set aside the judge's decision.


    I remit the appeal for rehearing by the First-tier Tribunal, due to the
    extent of the findings of fact that need to  be  made  to  decide  this
    appeal.


Signed                     Date 25.10.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This is a protection claim. Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                     Date 25.10.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
