
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00083/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 October 2018                             |On 23 October 2018            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                  mr K-D A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E A Mottershaw, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Malik  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 12 December 2017 to refuse to  grant
    him asylum in the UK.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born in 1992.   He  initially
    claimed asylum on 5 November 2013 in the UK, having he claimed to  have
    left Afghanistan  in  2012.   On  31  August  2011  the  appellant  was
    fingerprinted in Italy as part of an  asylum  claim  and  again  on  24
    November 2011.  He then travelled to France where he stayed for  twenty
    days.  He then travelled to the UK on 5 November 2013.   The  appellant
    was detained and he stated he entered the UK on 1 April 2012, concealed
    in a lorry.  On 15 January 2014 he was removed to Italy by third  party
    proceedings.

3.   On 27 November 2015 the appellant entered the  UK  again  and  provided
    false details.  His asylum application was refused on 12 December 2017.

4.   He claimed that he lived  with  his  parents,  two  brothers  and  four
    sisters in Afghanistan.  He had a twin  brother  Jamil  and  a  younger
    brother Jamal.  He never went to school as his  father  needed  him  to
    help him.  His twin brother and younger brother  attended  a  madrassa.
    He was born into a very religious family.  His father was a  member  of
    the Taliban and was killed in a bomb attack.  After his father's death,
    which occurred about 10 years ago, he became responsible for the family
    and worked on the land.

5.   He said his brothers attended the madrassa six  times  a  week  and  he
    believes from there they developed a  liking  for  the  Taliban.   They
    became friends with men who were involved with the  Taliban  who  would
    from time to time come to their house to eat.  His mother  and  sisters
    were frightened someone would inform the government  that  the  Taliban
    were visiting and they were afraid their house would be bombed  by  the
    Afghan army.  His brothers would not  listen.   His  twin  brother  had
    already  joined  the  Taliban  and  participated  in   kidnappings   of
    government members.

6.   The appellant said in 2008 to 2009, the Taliban  took  control  of  his
    area and established checkpoints.  At that time there was  no  pressure
    on him to join as his twin was  already  a  member.   He  was  strongly
    against his twin brother's involvement and tried to persuade him to cut
    his connections, but he would not listen.

7.   In 2010 his twin did  not  return  home.   He  made  enquiries  at  the
    madrassa and was told his twin was in hiding  and  would  soon  return.
    After two days a family member living in the city called and told  them
    that they had seen his twin brother on the TV news and that he had been
    caught by the government in Kabul.  After a few  weeks  with  his  twin
    still in prison, a Taliban member told him the head of the Taliban said
    he must go to the mosque on Friday.  He went and in front  of  all  the
    people the head of the Taliban said he must  take  his  twin  brother's
    place.  He said he could not refuse as his life would be in danger.  He
    returned home, told his mother, who told him  he  should  go.   A  week
    later he did not report to the Taliban and  did  not  show  up  at  the
    checkpoint.  The Taliban came to his house and he asked for  more  days
    saying he would come.  He never became a Taliban member officially  and
    never participated in any action.   His  brother-in-law  found  him  an
    agent who sent him to Iran and then he arrived in the UK.

8.   He said that his twin brother was in prison for four years until  2014.
     On return to the village, his twin brother  resumed  working  for  the
    Taliban and became the head of the Taliban in the  village.   His  twin
    brother was married for 25 days before being killed in action.  He  was
    in the UK at the time and his brother-in-law told him of the death  and
    sent photographs via e-mail.

9.   He said he and his twin brother were always  together  and  close.   He
    was scared of being sent back and his depression worsened.  His  mother
    said he must go back and marry his twin brother's widow, which he  said
    is a part of the culture in Afghanistan.  He said  he  could  never  do
    that and as his twin brother  was  a  member  of  the  Taliban,  if  he
    refused, he would be killed by them or  by  his  widow's  family.   His
    widow continued living with his family.  Her father would not take  her
    back and she would not be allowed to marry anyone else.

10.  After his twin brother's death, his younger brother went  to  Iran  and
    disappeared.  They later found out that he was in prison for two  years
    before being deported to Afghanistan.  His younger brother returned  to
    the village, joined the Taliban and was killed 40  days  later  at  the
    beginning of 2017.

11.  The appellant said he did not have any  health  issues  in  Afghanistan
    but he now suffers from depression and has  been  on  medication  since
    2015.  His health will deteriorate if the counselling he  is  currently
    receiving is stopped.  He would not be able to cope.

12.  The judge said that at the start of the hearing she was  provided  with
    a further report by Mr Zadeh.  It was submitted that  effectively  this
    was the same report as provided in the  appellant's  bundle,  with  the
    exceptions of additional paragraphs 37 to 45.  The amended  report  was
    also dated 23 May 2018, the same date as the first report.   The  judge
    said she was also shown footage of what was said to be the  appellant's
    twin brother's funeral and photographs of his younger brother.

13.  The judge did not consider it reasonably likely that the appellant  was
    at risk on return to Afghanistan for any claimed involvement either  by
    his brothers or himself with the Taliban or from the state authorities.
     Her findings are set out at paragraphs 40(i) to (viii).

14.   At  40(i)  the  judge  found  discrepancies  between  the  appellant's
    screening interview where he had said he and his family were members of
    the Taliban and that because government forces were after ex-members of
    the Taliban and arresting and  incarcerating  them,  his  life  was  in
    danger.  However, he now denied he was a member of the Taliban and that
    the risk  to  him  from  state  authorities  was  because  he  fed  and
    accommodated Taliban members, although his  siblings  and  father  were
    members.  The judge held even  taking  the  appellant's  claim  at  its
    highest that his twin brother was incarcerated by  the  government  for
    four  years,  there  was  no  reasonable  explanation  as  to  why  the
    authorities did not come to his house after his twin brother's  arrest,
    given that his evidence was that his twin brother's arrest was on TV.

15.  At 42(ii) the judge said the report of Mr Zadeh said if a husband  dies
    a widow has to marry another family member and it is also  possible  to
    marry family members, such as a cousin.  The  judge  did  not  find  it
    reasonably likely that the appellant would  be  at  risk  of  a  forced
    marriage or return to Afghanistan.  She did not believe that his mother
    would say that he had  to  return  home  to  marry  his  deceased  twin
    brother's wife as this would place the appellant, on his  own  account,
    at risk from the Taliban and the state.  Furthermore, given that it  is
    the appellant's claim that his mother had lost two of her sons  through
    their involvement with the Taliban and her husband was killed in a bomb
    attack, she did not find it reasonably likely that she would  now  also
    place her remaining son at risk.

16.  In the light of the  documentary  evidence  including  the  photographs
    provided by the appellant, the  judge  at  42(iii)  accepted  that  the
    appellant and his twin brother were related in  view  of  the  likeness
    between them.  However this did not lead  her  to  find  to  the  lower
    standard that the individuals in the photographs/video were members  of
    the Taliban.  Whilst she accepted that some of the  photographs  showed
    the individuals in the  company  of  others  and/or  in  possession  of
    weapons, given the appellant's lack of credibility  on  his  first  and
    second arrival in the UK regarding who he was, his status  in  the  UK,
    and the contradictory evidence regarding whether he had  been  educated
    at school or not, she did not accept that the appellant's siblings were
    members of the Taliban.  Even if she was wrong in this finding, and his
    siblings were indeed members of  the  Taliban,  there  was  nothing  to
    suggest given his claims that his twin was released by the  authorities
    after  four  years,  that  his  twin  was  of  any  interest  to  them.
    Consequently she found that the appellant would not be of  interest  to
    them either.

17.  The judge at 40(iv) considered the  appellant's  account  that  he  was
    effectively able to stall the Taliban due to his family  matters.   She
    noted Mr Zadeh's report at paragraph 37 that "he had not been  able  to
    find an independent source to  comment  on  the  circumstances  of  the
    Taliban  recruitment  in  the   case   of   the   appellant   and   the
    excuse/moratorium he sought to look after his mother.  Therefore,  this
    section of his report was based on the appellant's  statements  and  Mr
    Zadeh's knowledge of the  Pashtun  communities  in  Afghanistan."   The
    judge considered Mr Zadeh's assertion that it is highly plausible  that
    the Taliban did approach the appellant to join them  in  place  of  his
    twin in view of the coercive methods  the  Taliban  use  in  recruiting
    members among their co-ethnic Pashtuns. When a Pashtun family is  known
    to the Taliban, it is the Taliban's practice to recruit as many  people
    from the family as possible.  Often it is the father, uncles,  brothers
    and cousins who were targeted for recruitment".  Yet, as  held  by  the
    judge, it was the appellant's claim that his brothers-in-law  were  not
    members of the Taliban.  The judge also considered Mr Zadeh's assertion
    that due to  the  effective  control  of  the  district  in  which  the
    appellant lived, the Taliban members thought that the  appellant  would
    not escape.  The judge did not  find  it  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant would have taken the risk  of  escaping  given  that  he  was
    leaving behind his younger brother and family members if it would  have
    been known to him that in his absence he would  have  effectively  been
    condemning his younger brother to joining the Taliban.  The appellant's
    evidence was that the Taliban set up checkpoints in the  area,  yet  it
    appears he was able to leave without any difficulties from the  Taliban
    or the state.  She did not find it reasonably likely that the appellant
    would have been able to escape without coming to their attention.

18.  The judge held at paragraph 40(v)

         "Mr Zadeh also speaks of the culture of Pashtun  men  giving  their
         promise and this has the unique application and for some is  highly
         valued.  This is provided  as  a  rationale  as  to  why  when  the
         appellant asked for more time,  the  Taliban  did  not  reject  his
         request as it would be  seen  as  'unmanly'  -  but  I  find  these
         concepts without objective  evidence  to  support  it  -  given  my
         credibility findings, does not take his claim any further - more so
         it is predicated on the appellant's account which  I  find  is  not
         reasonably likely to have occurred."

19.  The grounds upon which Ms Mottershaw relied on submitted that  although
    the judge noted what Mr. Zadeh said at paragraphs  44  and  45  of  his
    report, her findings at paragraph 40(v)  were  flawed.   Ms  Mottershaw
    submitted that the judge reached credibility findings at 40(v)  without
    regard to the expert report.  Further the  judge  considered  that  the
    fact that the  report  was  "predicated  on  the  appellant's  account,
    reduced its weight."  This was contrary to case  law  on  the  holistic
    approach to be taken to expert evidence.  It was argued that the  judge
    placed weight on the absence of objective evidence.  She failed to take
    into account that the expert report itself was objective evidence.  The
    expert understood his overriding duty to the court  and  his  need  for
    independence.  Ground 3  argued  that  further  to  ground  1,  it  was
    incorrect to consider the expert's comments on this particular issue  -
    a cultural norm - were predicated on  the  appellant's  account.   They
    were clearly the expert's opinion on  relevant  culture  and  were  not
    based on the appellant's account.

20.  Ms Mottershaw relied on the decision in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ
    367 where the Court of Appeal emphasised the importance of  considering
    medical evidence relevant to credibility as  part  of  the  process  of
    reaching a conclusion as to credibility.  The Court of Appeal said  the
    Adjudicator's failing was that she artificially separated  the  medical
    evidence from the rest of the evidence and reached  conclusions  as  to
    credibility without reference to that medical evidence.

21.  Ms Mottershaw said that her grounds also referred to SA (Somalia)  EWCA
    Civ 1302 where it was held that the expert report should be  considered
    as part of the whole package.  The key aspect of the appellant's  claim
    is that he was given extra time by the Taliban.  By placing  weight  on
    the  expert  report  being  predicated  on  the   appellant's   account
    (referring to paragraph 40(v)), reduced the weight the  judge  attached
    to the expert report.  Ms  Mottershaw  submitted  that  inevitably  the
    report would have some basis on the appellant's account.  She relied on
    R (AM (Angola)) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 521 where the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered whether basing a  report  on  the  appellant's  own  account
    undermined its status as independent evidence.   The  Court  of  Appeal
    held that refusing the expert report because it sets out the account of
    the  applicant  takes  away  the  important  meaning  of   policy.    A
    requirement of "evidence" is not the same as a  requirement  of  proof,
    conclusive or otherwise.  Whether evidence amounts  to  proof,  on  any
    particular standard is a matter of weight and assessment.

22.  Ms Mottershaw said that the expert report's evidence was based  on  the
    appellant's account in one section  and  his  report  on  the  cultural
    background  was  his  own  opinion  and  was  not  predicated  on   the
    appellant's account.   Ms  Mottershaw  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    mistaken in finding that she required background evidence because  this
    was an expert report which was independent  evidence.   The  judge  was
    wrong to say that the report was predicated on the appellant's account.



23.  Mr. Whitwell submitted that the judge made credibility findings in  the
    context of the expert report.

24.  I find that the judge's findings at paragraph 40(v) have to be read  in
    conjunction with her findings at 40(iv).   At  40(iv)  the  judge  took
    notice of what Mr. Zadeh at paragraph 37 of his report.  Mr. Zadeh said
    therein that he had not been able to  find  an  independent  source  to
    comment on the  circumstances  of  the  Taliban's  recruitment  of  the
    appellant and the excuse/moratorium he sought to look after his mother.
    Mr. Zadeh said that in the circumstances,  that  this  section  of  his
    report was based on the appellant's statement and Mr. Zadeh's knowledge
    of the Pashtun communities in Afghanistan.   It is noteworthy that  the
    judge's findings at 40(iv) have not been challenged.

25.  I find that the judge's findings at paragraph 40(v) are in  respect  of
    one aspect of the appellant's claim, namely the culture  of  a  promise
    given by a Pushtun man and the high value placed on this  culture  such
    that it would have appeared as unmanly if the Taliban had rejected  the
    appellant's request for extra time to  look  after  his  mother  before
    joining them. I find that Mr. Zadeh's report on this matter was  indeed
    predicated on the appellant's evidence.  I  find  that  Mr.  Zadeh  was
    explaining the cultural background to the appellant's evidence based on
    his own knowledge of the Pushtun communities in Afghanistan.  Where the
    judge went wrong was, as submitted by Ms  Mottershaw,  her  failure  to
    accept this part of Mr. Zadeh's report as independent evidence  in  the
    absence of objective evidence to support  his  views.  Nevertheless,  I
    find that this error does  not  materially  affect  the  whole  of  the
    judge's decision.

26   The judge found that in the light of  her  credibility  findings  those
    concepts did not take the claim any further.   She  did  not  find  the
    appellant's account credible and did not find it reasonably likely that
    his account of asking for more time and it being granted by the Taliban
    to have occurred.

27.  I find that the judge took a holistic approach to the expert  evidence.
     She did not artificially separate the expert report from the  rest  of
    the  appellant's  evidence.   She  reached  conclusions   as   to   the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence with reference  to  the  expert
    report.


28.  Ms Mottershaw raised an issue which she had not raised in the  grounds.
     This issue was in respect of internal flight relocation.  She said the
    grounds focused mainly on the risk to the appellant in  his  home  area
    and not in Kabul.  Because the judge has not fully taken account of the
    expert report, the overarching argument is  that  the  appellant  would
    also be at risk in Kabul and the judge's  finding  on  this  issue  was
    flawed.

29.  I note that at paragraph  45  the  judge  said  there  was  nothing  to
    suggest that the appellant could not seek the assistance of the  family
    in Afghanistan even if he chose not to return to  his  home  areas  and
    relocate to Kabul.  Whilst the appellant's mental health is  a  factor,
    there was nothing  to  suggest  that  he  was  physically  unwell.   He
    previously worked in Afghanistan and there was nothing  to  suggest  he
    could not do so again.

30.  Ms Mottershaw did not explain what evidence there  was  in  the  expert
    report that undermined the  judge's  findings  at  paragraph  45.   Her
    submission was vague and not particularised.  She drafted  the  grounds
    and if the judge's findings at paragraph 45  were  deeply  flawed,  she
    would no doubt have said so.  She did not.  I got the  impression  that
    she raised this issue at the last minute for good measure.

31.  I find that the judge's  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  18 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

