
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00162/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 July 2021                     |On 17 September 2021               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JARVIS


                                   Between

                                     MAH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr  D.  Sellwood,  Counsel  instructed  by  Brighton
                    Housing Trust
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction regarding anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant  or  members  of
his family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.



INTRODUCTION

 1. The Appellant is an Egyptian national, born on 1 February 1986.  On  25
    October 2016 the Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  and  claimed
    asylum on arrival. The Appellant's international protection  claim  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 10 December 2018.

Procedural history

 2. The Appellant exercised his right of appeal against  that  decision  by
    virtue of the provisions in section 82 of NIAA 2002 and the  subsequent
    appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on  6  February  2019.  The
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Judge Cas  O'Garro  on  14  February
    2019. The Appellant appealed against that decision and  was  eventually
    granted permission by the Upper Tribunal on 29 May  2019.  On  16  July
    2019 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun  found  error  of  law  in  that
    decision and the appeal was remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    full rehearing.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal heard the remitted appeal on  the  21  November
    2019 and the appeal was again dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pears in a decision promulgated on  26  November  2019.  The  Appellant
    subsequently  challenged  that  decision  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  itself  on  26
    February 2020.

 4. On 29 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill considered  the  grounds  of
    appeal lodged by the Appellant and made a decision under rule 34 of the
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules without a hearing. Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Gill concluded that the Appellant's challenges to the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal had been made out and, at para. 29 of her decision,
    Judge Gill set aside the First-tier Judge's decision in its entirety.

 5. The appeal then came before Upper Tribunal Judge Smith  on  14  January
    2021. The issue before Judge Smith was whether, in light  of  the  High
    Court's decision in The Joint Council for the Welfare of  Immigrants  v
    The President of the Upper Tribunal (Immigration  And  Asylum  Chamber)
    And The Lord Chancellor [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin), either party objected
    to the use of rule 34 by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in disposing of  the
    error of law issues without a hearing.

 6. At para. 4 of Upper Tribunal Judge Smith's decision it is recorded that
    neither side objected, however Mr Sellwood, Counsel on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, made the submission that the positive  credibility  findings
    made by Judge Pears should in fact have been preserved rather than  all
    of the relevant credibility findings being set aside. For reasons which
    are unclear from the judgment Mr Walker, Senior Presenting  Officer  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, confirmed that he took  no  objection
    to the findings at paragraphs 44 and 45 of Judge Pears' decision  being
    maintained. As  a  consequence  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  formally
    recorded that  those  paragraphs  should  be  preserved  for  the  next
    substantive hearing. It is also recorded at para. 8 of the UT  decision
    that Mr Walker had no objection to the Appellant seeking  to  admit  an
    unreported decision of the Upper Tribunal in  AE  v  The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department, (Tribunal ref: PA/13406/2017).

The legal framework

 7. The Appellant's right of appeal  and  the  Tribunal's  main  powers  to
    determine the appeal are detailed in Part V of the 2002 Nationality and
    Immigration Act ("NIAA 2002").

 8. The Appellant claims that the Secretary of State's decision would be  a
    breach of the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  1951  Geneva
    Convention relating to the status of refugees  and  the  1967  Protocol
    thereto (the Refugee Convention). The Appellant therefore claims to  be
    a refugee within the definition in The Refugee or  Person  in  Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006.

 9. In the alternative the Appellant is to be taken to  claim  Humanitarian
    Protection pursuant to paragraph 339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (by
    which  has  been  implemented  EU  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC).  In
    addition, the Appellant says that his removal from the  United  Kingdom
    would be a  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
    European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
    Freedoms - now incorporated into English Law by the provisions  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.

10. A refugee  is  defined  by  Regulation  2  of  the  2006  Qualification
    Regulations by reference to Article 1A of the Refugee  Convention,  and
    thus as someone who, owing to a well-founded fear of  being  persecuted
    for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular
    social group, or political opinion, is outside  the  country  of  their
    nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail
    himself of the protection  of  that  country;  or  who,  not  having  a
    nationality and being  outside  the  country  of  his  former  habitual
    residence as a result of such events is unable or, owing to such  fear,
    is unwilling to return to it. The burden is on the Appellant to show in
    an asylum appeal that their return will expose them to a real  risk  of
    an act of persecution for a Refugee Convention reason.

11. A grant of Humanitarian Protection is  only  to  be  made  pursuant  to
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules. The  Rules  require  that  the
    relevant person must not qualify as a  refugee,  and,  must  not  be  a
    person who is excluded by virtue of paragraph 339D. An  Appellant  must
    show substantial grounds  for  believing  that  if  returned  to  their
    country of return, they would face a real  risk  of  suffering  serious
    harm and that they are unable, or, owing to  such  risk,  unwilling  to
    avail themselves of the protection of that  country.  Serious  harm  is
    also defined in paragraph 339C.

12. In relation to an asylum appeal, a Humanitarian Protection appeal,  and
    a Human Rights appeal we are obliged to look at the case in the  round,
    and to Judge the situation at the time of hearing the appeal,  applying
    paragraph 339J-P of the Immigration Rules.

The substantive appeal hearing

13. The hearing of the substantive protection appeal  was  carried  out  at
    Field House with all of  the  relevant  parties  appearing  in  person.
    During the course of the hearing the Tribunal attempted to allow all of
    those who had attended to be present in the hearing  room,  however  in
    light of current social distancing regulations  we  were  unfortunately
    unable to accommodate everyone at the same time. We confirmed  with  Mr
    Sellwood, Counsel for the Appellant,  if  he  was  content  to  proceed
    without the  Appellant's  personal  adviser  from  West  Sussex  County
    Council,  Tracey  Beard,  being  present  during  the  hearing  and  he
    confirmed that there was no objection to  that  course  of  action.  We
    should also recall for completeness that attempts were made by Tribunal
    staff to deploy the use of remote hearing technology to try  to  assist
    Ms Beard and Mr Sellwood's pupil in observing the hearing remotely, but
    this unfortunately was not possible.

14. In respect of the relevant paperwork we have had  full  regard  to  the
    Home Office bundle consisting of sections running from A to J. We  have
    also had regard to the skeleton argument provided by Mr Sellwood  dated
    11 February 2021, as well as the Appellant's appeal bundle  running  to
    208 pages. We have also had sight of the letter dated 6 July 2021  from
    Tracey Beard, as well as the document from  the  Tahrir  Institute  for
    Middle East Policy, Egypt's  Security  Watch,  (ESW),  week  in  brief:
    September 7 - 13, 2019 dated 13 September 2019.

15. It became clear at the beginning of the hearing that Mr  Tufan  (Senior
    Presenting Officer) had not seen the Appellant's September 2020 witness
    statement - this was given to him by the Tribunal and, having had  time
    to read this document, Mr Tufan confirmed that he had had  enough  time
    to prepare and was happy to proceed.

16. Although the Appellant was plainly  reasonably  fluent  in  English  he
    nonetheless gave his  evidence  using  the  Tribunal's  interpreter  in
    Arabic (North African dialect). There  was  no  indication  during  the
    hearing from either the Appellant, the interpreter or Mr Sellwood  that
    there were any difficulties with understanding.

17. The Appellant was cross examined by Mr Tufan and  we  also  heard  oral
    submissions from both  parties.  We  have  made  a  full  note  of  the
    questions,  answers  and  competing  arguments   in   the   record   of
    proceedings.

18. At the end of the hearing we formally reserved our  judgment  which  we
    now give with full reasons.

The Appellant's core claim

19. The Appellant's core claim is that laid out in his SEF statements dated
    28 February 2017 and 21 September 2017 (the following summary is  drawn
    from the witness statement dated  28  February  2017  unless  otherwise
    stated). In those statements the Appellant claims that his  father  was
    put in prison in January 2013 (corrected to 2014, witness statement  at
    para. 3, (21 September 2017)) having been accused of being one  of  the
    Muslim Brotherhood and at the date of that statement,  his  father  was
    being held in a prison in a town called Wadi Al Natroun. The  Appellant
    was not present during  his  father's  arrest,  that  occurred  in  the
    family's other house in their home village; the Appellant was  informed
    of his  father's  arrest  by  his  father's  cousin  Yehia  Haraz.  The
    Appellant  did  however  claim  that  he  had  been  present  when  the
    government had come to one of  the  family  homes  in  respect  of  the
    "Muslim Brotherhood issue".

20. The Appellant claimed that his father  had  been  tried  in  Khafre  Al
    Sheikh. The Appellant was again not present but states at para. 18 that
    his uncles and other family members went to the trial. It is also  said
    that the Appellant's father had a lawyer and that the trial resulted in
    the Appellant's father being sentenced to 6 years imprisonment.

21. At para. 19, the Appellant clarifies that he did not know if his father
    was in fact involved with the Muslim Brotherhood but it was his  belief
    that the government interest in  his  father  was  because  of  alleged
    involvement with the Muslim Brotherhood.

22. The Appellant claims to have left Egypt on 1 August 2015, travelling by
    boat to Italy where he stayed (in Rome) for one year and three  months.
    He states that he did not claim asylum in Italy but nonetheless studied
    there and learned some of the Italian language and was given government
    money. The Appellant goes on to say at para. 36,  that  he  left  Italy
    because life was difficult there and travelled by train to France. From
    France the Appellant was assisted by people who he knew from  Egypt  to
    travel to Belgium and was later brought to the United Kingdom hidden in
    a lorry on 25 October 2016.

23. Since being in the UK, the Appellant claims that he has  been  informed
    by his mother and maternal cousin (Saad Abdrabbo) that the  Appellant's
    paternal  cousin,  Gamal  Haraz,  and  his   brother-in-law,   Mohammed
    Abdrabbo, have also been arrested by authorities. The Appellant  claims
    that both men had been in hiding in  Egypt  for  some  time  after  his
    father was arrested but that  they  were  eventually  detained  at  the
    beginning of February 2017. He goes on to say that  because  they  were
    religious men, they were then accused of being supporters of the Muslim
    Brotherhood. The Appellant later explained that he had been  told  that
    these two men had been held in the village police station (Al Gazira Al
    Khadra), investigated for their possible involvement  with  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood and then released a few weeks to  a  month  later  with  no
    charges being brought against either  of  them  (witness  statement  at
    para. 4, (21 September 2017)).

24. At para. 23, the Appellant alleges that the Egyptian  authorities  have
    been to the Appellant's family home  looking  for  him.  The  Appellant
    claims to know this on the basis  of  receiving  information  from  his
    maternal cousin and his mother. The Appellant confirms at para. 32 that
    he is in contact with his mother "every now  and  again"  amounting  to
    "about every 10 days" (witness statement  at  para.  5,  (21  September
    2017).

25. In the witness statement dated 31 January 2019, the  Appellant  asserts
    that the authorities had stopped searching for him at the  family  home
    when they found out that he had left the country (see para. 16). In the
    same paragraph the Appellant says that when the authorities went to his
    house on that occasion they ransacked the property and as a result  the
    Appellant's family reported this incident to a government human  rights
    organisation  in  Khafre  Al  Sheikh.  The  Appellant  says  that  this
    organisation came and looked at the house but took no further action.

26. By the time of this witness statement the Appellant's father  had  died
    (according to the documentation  on  26  April  2018  from  a  cerebral
    haemorrhage). It is important to note that  at  paragraph  19  of  this
    witness statement the Appellant explains  that  he  gave  the  document
    showing that his father was in Wadi Al Natroun prison (dated 20 January
    2016) to the Home Office at the full Asylum Interview ("AI").  In  this
    paragraph he clarifies that the document is a photograph of a certified
    copy of the original document and was sent  to  the  Appellant  by  his
    maternal cousin Saad via Facebook and that this copy  was  obtained  by
    the Appellant's father's  lawyer.  At  para.  20,  the  Appellant  also
    clarifies that the documents relating to the Appellant's father's death
    were also sent by Saad via Facebook. At page  16A  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle there is a statement from Olivia Cavanagh, legal  representative
    at BHT dated 5 February 2019, in which she records  that  she  received
    the Egyptian  documents  "dated  26  April  2018"  by  email  from  the
    Appellant's support worker at the time.

27. The Appellant also mentions, at para.  28,  that  his  paternal  cousin
    Gamal Haraz is now in the UAE because of his  problems  in  Egypt;  the
    Appellant also claims that his brother-in-law Mohammed Abdrabbo is  now
    in Libya working as a fisherman.

28. In the final statement dated 3 September 2020, the Appellant states  at
    para. 12 that he had contacted his mother and asked her to give him the
    details of his father's lawyer. The Appellant goes on to say "she  said
    that she has tried to contact him but it has not been possible  as  she
    lost contact with him when my  father  died.  My  mum  is  not  a  very
    educated woman, she left school when she  was  young  and  doing  these
    kinds of things is difficult for her" (sic).

The Assessment of credibility - the law

29. In assessing the Appellant's  credibility  then,  we  have  taken  into
    account that the standard of proof is the lower standard,  and  as  per
    Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000]  3  All
    ER 449 and Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97 we must take into account  all
    of the material issues in the round.

30. The burden is upon the Appellant to establish the core elements of  the
    protection claim. A failure to do so  will  mean  that  the  person  in
    question has failed to make out their claim in those key  respects,  as
    per MA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2010]
    UKSC 49 at [48] and HH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 569 at [9].

31. We have also been guided in that assessment by the terms of  Article  4
    of EU Council Directive (2004/83/EC) as well as  the  transposition  of
    this Article into the Immigration Rules at 339L.

32.  We  have  borne  in  mind  that  genuine  protection  claimants  might
    exaggerate or fabricate evidence in their claim in order to reduce  the
    risk of the appeal being wrongly dismissed as per SB (Sri Lanka) v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ  160  ("SB")
    at [43].

33. In the same judgment the Court laid out the approach to the  assessment
    of credibility at [46]:

         "In cases (such as  the  present)  where  the  credibility  of  the
         Appellant  is  in  issue  courts  adopt  a  variety  of   different
         evaluative techniques to assess the evidence. The  court  will  for
         instance consider: (i) the consistency (or otherwise)  of  accounts
         given to investigators  at  different  points  in  time;  (ii)  the
         consistency (or otherwise) of an  Appellant's  narrative  case  for
         asylum with his actual conduct at earlier  stages  and  periods  in
         time; (iii)  whether,  on  facts  found  or  agreed  or  which  are
         incontrovertible, the Appellant is a person who can be  categorised
         as at risk if returned, and, if so, as to the nature and extent  of
         that risk (taking account of applicable Country Guidance); (iv) the
         adequacy (or by contrast paucity) of evidence  on  relevant  issues
         that, logically, the Appellant should be able to adduce in order to
         support his or her case; and (v), the overall  plausibility  of  an
         Appellant's account."

34. We have also taken into account the  Court  of  Appeal's  view  of  the
    applicability of the 'Lucas Direction[1]' to the IAC  in  Uddin  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 338 at [11]:

         "... A witness may lie for many reasons, for example, out of shame,
         humiliation, misplaced loyalty, panic,  fear,  distress,  confusion
         and emotional pressure. That is because a person's motives  may  be
         different as respects different questions. The warning is not to be
         found in the judgments before this court. This is perhaps a  useful
         opportunity to emphasise that the utility of the self-direction  is
         of general application and  not  limited  to  family  and  criminal
         cases."

35.  We  have  additionally  reminded  ourselves  of  the  Court's   recent
    clarification that the terms:  credibility  and  plausibility  are  not
    terms of art and do not have "special technical meaning", see MN v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 3) [2020] EWCA Civ 1746
    ("MN") at [127].

36. We have also been careful to heed the Tribunal's warning in TK  (Tamils
    - LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UIT 00049 to avoid  treating  country
    evidence as automatically 'objective' and  have  therefore  scrutinised
    the relevant background evidence provided with appropriate care:

         "7. The emphasis we place on assessment based  on  objective  merit
         prompts us to make one further  comment.  It  is  still  widespread
         practice for  practitioners  and  Judges  to  refer  to  "objective
         country  evidence"  when  all  they  mean  is  background   country
         evidence. In our view, to refer to  such  evidence  as  "objective"
         obscures the need for the decision-maker to subject  such  evidence
         to scrutiny to see if it conforms to the COI standards just  noted.
         This practice appears to have  had  its  origin  in  a  distinction
         between evidence relating to  an  individual  applicant  (so-called
         "subjective evidence") and evidence about country  conditions  (so-
         called "objective evidence"), but as our  subsequent  deliberations
         on the Appellant's case illustrate (see below  paras  153-9),  even
         this distinction can cause confusion when there is an  issue  about
         whether  an  Appellant's  subjective  fears   have   an   objective
         foundation. We hope the above practice will cease."

The Appellant's credibility - FINDINGS AND REASONS

    Our starting point - the preserved findings

37. Our starting point for the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to
    international protection must start, as directed  previously  by  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Smith,  with  the  preserved  findings  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pears at paragraphs 44 and 45:

         "44. I make the following observations. The crackdown on the Muslim
         Brotherhood seems to be in the period  of  2013  and  onwards.  The
         Appellant says his father was arrested in either 2013 or  2014  and
         whichever date is correct that is consistent with such a crackdown.

         45. I accept that on the lower standard of proof and based  on  the
         background evidence, the board claimed by the  Appellant  that  his
         father was arrested and the documentary evidence that suggested  he
         had been arrested fact that that indeed happened and I accept  that
         he has since died." (sic)

38. A further effect of this  finding  is  that  the  documentary  evidence
    provided by the Appellant is taken to be reliable.  We  have  obviously
    considered  this  important  aspect  when  assessing  the   Appellant's
    credibility  overall  in  line  with  the  Tribunal's  guidance  in  QC
    (verification of documents; Mibanga duty) [2021] UKUT 33 (IAC):

         "Verification of documents

         (1) The decision of the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  in  Tanveer
         Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 remains good law as  regards  the  correct
         approach  to  documents  adduced  in   immigration   appeals.   The
         overarching question for the judicial fact-finder will  be  whether
         the  document  in  question  can  be  regarded  as  reliable.    An
         obligation  on  the  respondent  to  take  steps  to   verify   the
         authenticity of the document relied on by an Appellant  will  arise
         only exceptionally (in the sense of rarely).  This  will  be  where
         the document is central to the claim; can easily be  authenticated;
         and where (as in  Singh  v  Belgium  (Application  No.  33210/11)),
         authentication is unlikely to leave any  "live"  issue  as  to  the
         reliability of its contents.  It is for the tribunal to decide,  in
         all the circumstances of the case, whether the  obligation  arises.
         If the respondent does not fulfil the  obligation,  the  respondent
         cannot  challenge  the  authenticity  of  the   document   in   the
         proceedings; but that does  not  necessarily  mean  the  respondent
         cannot question the reliability of what the document says.  In  all
         cases, it remains the task of the judicial  fact-finder  to  assess
         the document's relevance to the claim  in  the  light  of,  and  by
         reference to, the rest of the evidence.

         The Mibanga duty

         (2) Credibility is not necessarily  an  essential  component  of  a
         successful claim to be in need of international  protection.  Where
         credibility has a role  to  play,  its  relevance  to  the  overall
         outcome will vary, depending on the nature of the case.  What  that
         relevance is to a particular claim needs  to  be  established  with
         some care by the judicial fact-finder. It is only once this is done
         that the practical application of the "Mibanga  duty"  to  consider
         credibility "in the round" can be understood  (Francois  Mibanga  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367).
         The significance of a piece of evidence that emanates from a  third
         party source may well depend upon what is at stake in terms of  the
         individual's credibility.

         (3) What the case law reveals is that the judicial fact-finder  has
         a duty to make his or her decision by reference to all the relevant
         evidence and needs to show in their decision that  they  have  done
         so.  The actual way in which the fact-finder goes about  this  task
         is a matter for them.  As has been pointed out, one  has  to  start
         somewhere.  At the end of the day,  what  matters  is  whether  the
         decision contains legally adequate reasons for  the  outcome.   The
         greater the apparent cogency and relevance of a particular piece of
         evidence, the greater is the need for the judicial  fact-finder  to
         show that they have had due regard to that evidence;  and,  if  the
         fact-finder's overall conclusion is contrary to the apparent thrust
         of that evidence, the greater is  the  need  to  explain  why  that
         evidence has not brought about a different outcome."

    The Appellant's minority

39. Throughout our assessment of the Appellant's credibility we  have  also
    kept at the forefront of our minds that the Appellant was only 14 years
    old at the time that his father was sent to prison in Egypt and that he
    left Egypt when he was  15.  We  therefore  fully  accept  the  overall
    submission that we should approach the Appellant's evidence in  respect
    of his recollection of events with proper caution bearing in  mind  his
    minority at the relevant times.

40. We have also weighed into our overall assessment the reports of  Alison
    Pargeter (dated 14 September 2020) and Mr  Walter  Armbrust  (dated  31
    January 2019 and 27 September 2017) which we now  set  out  in  summary
    form.

    The report of Ms Pargeter (14 September 2020)

41. Ms Pargeter describes herself as an analyst and consultant specialising
    in political and security issues in North Africa and the  Middle  East,
    as well as in political Islam and radicalisation. She goes on to  state
    that she is a senior research associate at the  Royal  United  Services
    Institute (RUSI) where she recently completed a research project on the
    Muslim Brotherhood: Beyond  the  Arab  Spring,  which  focused  on  the
    movement in Egypt and Libya as well as its affiliate in  Tunisia.  This
    project entailed Ms Pargeter conducting fieldwork in Egypt on  numerous
    occasions (page 1 of the report).

42. The report provides a useful summary of the events leading  up  to  the
    hostility towards President Mohammed Morsi and the  Muslim  Brotherhood
    which by June 2013 led to millions of people taking to the  streets  to
    demand his resignation. It details that on 3  July  2013  the  Egyptian
    military deployed troops and armoured vehicles and  overthrew  Morsi  -
    and as a consequence of this  coup,  the  military  performed  a  heavy
    clampdown on the Muslim Brotherhood. At  para.  2.11,  page  4  of  the
    report, Miss Pargeter  details  the  large  number  of  fatalities  and
    injuries caused by the military breaking up a protest camp at Rabbaa Al-
    Adawiya on 14 August 2013. It is said that Human  Rights  Watch  called
    this massive use of lethal force as "the most serious incident of  mass
    unlawful killings in modern Egyptian history."

43. Since then, it is said at para. 2.12, the military backed regime  under
    Al-Sisi (who became President in June 2014) has continued its  campaign
    against the Brotherhood, arresting members, supporters and sympathisers
    alike. Ms Pargeter refers to an Amnesty International  report  entitled
    'roadmap to repression: no end in sight to  human  rights  violations',
    which indicates that thousands of perceived  pro-Morsi  supporters  and
    sympathisers have been rounded up. At para. 2.13, she also refers to an
    Human Rights Watch article from 2019 which indicates that the  Egyptian
    security forces had arrested or  charged  at  least  60,000  people  on
    political grounds, although this was disputed by the President himself.

44. At para. 2.26, page 8, Ms Pargeter summarises the situation  by  saying
    that the "human rights situation in Egypt is dire and the regime has  a
    zero-tolerance approach to dissent of any kind. While the  majority  of
    arrests of Muslim Brotherhood members took place in the first couple of
    years after the coup of July 2013, anyone suspected of being part of or
    linked to the movement continues to be at risk."

45. In terms of the issue of family members of those perceived to  be  part
    of the Muslim Brotherhood, Ms Pargeter indicates at paragraph 3.1, that
    the Egyptian regime has also  pursued,  and  in  some  cases  arrested,
    family members of Muslim Brotherhood members and supporters.  She  goes
    on to record that "it is not uncommon for the security services to raid
    the family homes of those suspected of involvement  with  the  movement
    and  for  them  to  arrest  family  members,  this  being  a  form   of
    intimidation usually aimed at pressurising the  suspected  individual."
    She also notes an article from the Middle East Monitor (para. 3.7, page
    11) from October  2019  which  noted  "Egypt  also  has  a  history  of
    punishing entire families to get to one member, as we  have  seen  with
    the detention of Aisha  Al-Shater,  the  daughter  of  top  Brotherhood
    leader Khairat Al-Shater, and Ola  Al-Qaradawi,  the  granddaughter  of
    Islamic scholar Yusuf Al-Qaradawi, both  of  whom  are  being  held  in
    solitary confinement."

46. At para. 3.15, Ms Pargeter expresses the view that it is clear that the
    Egyptian regime has targeted family members of those with links to  the
    Muslim Brotherhood, in some cases arresting and  detaining  them  as  a
    means of intimidation.

47. In respect of this Appellant's claim, Ms Pargeter  concludes  at  para.
    4.1, that it is entirely plausible that if the Appellant's  father  had
    been suspected of being a Brotherhood member  or  sympathiser  that  he
    would have been arrested and detained as claimed. At paragraph 4.2, she
    goes on to also find plausible the Appellant's claim  that  his  father
    was incarcerated in the Wadi El Natroun prison. She  notes  that  Liman
    440  is  a  maximum-security  unit  where  many  political   prisoners,
    including suspected Islamist and members of the Muslim Brotherhood  are
    held. It is a place notorious for torture and mistreatment.

48. At para. 4.3, Ms Pargeter considers that it is likely that the Egyptian
    regime would have sought to target and pressurise other family  members
    as a potential source of information regarding the  Appellant's  father
    and his associates. She also concludes that the fact that the  security
    services ransacked the family home indicates they were seeking  further
    information about the Appellant's father and that they were  trying  to
    intimidate the family.

49. We have, overall, found Ms Pargeter's report to be useful in respect of
    the background to political events ongoing in Egypt at the time of  the
    Appellant's  father's  arrest  and  imprisonment  in  2014,  which  she
    considers to be plausible. We have also placed weight on Ms  Pargeter's
    views about the potential for family members  of  suspected  or  actual
    Muslim Brotherhood supporters/members to be of adverse interest to  the
    Egyptian state.

    The reports of Walter Armbrust (31 January 2019 and 27 September 2017)

50. Mr Armbrust is an associate Professor  at  the  University  of  Oxford,
    faculty of Oriental Studies at St Antony's College. We have  had  sight
    of Mr Armbrust's CV at pages 17 to 34 of the Appellant's bundle: it  is
    clear that Mr Armbrust has a fairly extensive history of research on  a
    wide range of themes on Egyptian  culture  and  history.  He  has  been
    studying and working in Egypt since 1981 for periods ranging  from  two
    years (on more than one occasion) to a few weeks.

51. In the report dated 31 January 2019, Mr Armbrust, inter alia,  explains
    that he considers it plausible that the Appellant's  father  might  not
    have attended demonstrations in Egypt despite  his  membership  of  the
    Muslim Brotherhood.

52. He also rejects the Home Office's criticism of the spelling of the name
    of the person named in one of the translated  documents  on  the  basis
    that these were typographical or errors of transliteration  which  were
    inconsequential. Mr Armbrust also states that Liman 440 is a  notorious
    prison which is part of the Wadi Natroun prison complex - he goes on to
    clarify that this prison complex is a series of sites clustered  around
    Sadat City on the Cairo-Alexandra Road  west  of  the  Delta.  He  also
    asserts that the Liman 440  is  notorious  as  a  place  for  torturing
    political prisoners and specifically Muslim Brotherhood  prisoners  but
    recognises that the fact that the Appellant's father was held  in  that
    prison  was  not  conclusive  evidence  that  the  Egyptian  government
    considered him a Muslim Brotherhood member (page 38 of the  Appellant's
    bundle).

53. Mr Armbrust also explains that he considers that  the  Appellant  would
    face a risk on return on account of his imputed political opinion based
    on the Egyptian authorities' assumption that the Appellant would  be  a
    member of the Muslim Brotherhood or sympathiser  due  to  his  father's
    presumed membership of that organisation.

54. Despite Mr Armbrust  effectively  playing  advocate  on  at  least  one
    occasion in this report, contrary to his overall duty as an  expert  to
    the Tribunal, (see for instance his contention that the discrepancy  in
    the  Appellant's  father's  death  certificate  in   respect   of   his
    profession, listed as  fishermen  rather  than  mechanic,  "is  not  an
    important detail" and his clear speculation that the Appellant's father
    "could easily have  worked  for  others  as  both  a  fisherman  and  a
    mechanic" (page 39 of the Appellant's  bundle)),  we  are  prepared  to
    place weight on Mr Armbrust's conclusions in this report. We have  been
    careful to factor in his comments on plausibility as well  as  risk  on
    return into our own assessment of this appeal.

55. In the report  dated  27  September  2017,  Mr  Armbrust  assesses  the
    reliability of a copy of a document sent  to  him  by  the  Appellant's
    solicitor. Mr Armbrust records that the document is a  memo  sent  from
    the Metobas police station in the Kafr Al-Shaykh Province  relating  to
    an investigation of properties owned by the Appellant's father. He also
    records inaccuracies in the translation of the  original  document  but
    goes on to say that of the three officials named in the document two of
    them could be corroborated as people in  official  positions.  He  also
    clarifies a further flaw in the interpretation which incorrectly, in Mr
    Armbrust's view, interpreted the words 'Liman 440 Al-Sahrawi' as a name
    rather than the notorious prison facility.

56.  He  secondly  goes  on  to  conclude  that  it's  plausible  that  the
    authorities would have searched the Appellant's father's properties  in
    January 2016 even though he had  already  been  arrested  in  2014.  Mr
    Armbrust also cites the Egyptian authorities' common practice of  using
    family members to coerce confessions or information from prisoners  and
    that is also common for investigations to continue for years.

57. We are again prepared to give weight to the two main conclusions  drawn
    by Mr Armbrust  in  this  report  and  we  accept  his  view  that  the
    investigation unit memo at  page  49  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  was
    inaccurately translated and that the reference  to  'Mr  Liman  Naa  Al
    Sahrawi' (at page 49 of the Appellant's bundle) is  a  misunderstanding
    of the Arabic document which is addressed to the prison (not a  person)
    in which the Appellant's father was being held.

58. We also accept the views given by both Ms Pargeter and Mr Armbrust that
    the Liman 400 prison is a place in which some political  prisoners  are
    held (including Muslim Brotherhood members) and, it seems, mistreated.

59. In approaching issues to do with plausibility we have been  careful  to
    keep in mind the Court's view of the  approach  to  the  assessment  of
    plausibility as described in Y  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 (at paras. 25-27) and been  careful  to
    make such findings as there are through the prism  of  the  appellant's
    own claim and the conditions in the proposed country of return.

60. Bringing all of this together so far, we are prepared to accept in  the
    round that:

      a. It is not implausible that the Appellant's father could have been a
         member of the  Muslim  Brotherhood  without  necessarily  attending
         demonstrations.

      b. It is not implausible that the authorities might have searched  the
         family properties in January 2016.

      c. The Liman 400 prison does house political prisoners,  although  not
         exclusively and that this is the prison in  which  the  Appellant's
         father was held.

      d. The Appellant's father's arrest in 2014 is  not  inconsistent  with
         the  specifics  of  the  crackdown  going  on  against  the  Muslim
         Brotherhood at that time.

61. We also reject the Secretary of State's reliance upon s.  8(4)  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  (see
    paras. 53-59 of the RFRL). In those paragraphs the Secretary  of  State
    criticises the Appellant for not claiming  in  other  countries  deemed
    safe by the Home Office, on his route to the UK.

62. In our judgment the Secretary of State has wholly  failed  to  properly
    factor in the Appellant's  minority  at  the  time  he  was  travelling
    through Italy to the UK. On the Appellant's chronology, he  left  Egypt
    in 2015 when he was 14 and arrived in the UK in October 2016  (when  he
    was 15) as an unaccompanied minor. The Secretary of State's  criticism,
    which was not relied upon with any great vigour by Mr Tufan in his oral
    submissions, also falls foul of the Court  of  Appeal's  view  of  this
    issue in KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 914 at [47]:

         "I would add that irrespective of Mr Bedford's third point,  as  to
         the compatibility of s.8(4) with Article  8.4  of  the  Dublin  III
         Regulation, it is clear that an unaccompanied minor (with no family
         connection in the EU) is entitled to make an asylum claim in any EU
         country without risk of being returned to the EU country  in  which
         he or she made his or her first footfall or his or her first asylum
         claim: see R (MA(Eritrea) & ors.) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department (CJEU - June 6, 2013) Case C-648/11 [2013] 1  WLR  2961,
         especially paragraphs 55 to 66 of the judgment. In such a case, one
         might  expect  a  decision  maker  not  to  be   over-exacting   in
         downgrading a child's credibility for having failed to make earlier
         claims in other countries. In my judgment, the question of  failure
         to make an earlier asylum claim might be thought  to  attract  less
         adverse weight in the case of an unaccompanied minor than in  other
         cases."

63. We have therefore concluded that this issue does not materially  impact
    the core of the Appellant's credibility.

64. We have however, despite the expert evidence providing some support for
    the plausibility of the Appellant's claim and despite our rejection  of
    some of the points made against the Appellant's core credibility by the
    Secretary  of  State,  ultimately  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant is not a credible witness, applying the lower  standard,  for
    the reasons that we now give.

    The Appellant's knowledge of his father's involvement with  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood

65. One of the recurring issues over the course of  these  proceedings  has
    been the Appellant's knowledge as to what his father had  been  accused
    of by the Egyptian authorities. It is  plain  that,  although  we  have
    preserved findings that the submitted documentary evidence is in effect
    reliable, those particular documents do not provide any  detail  as  to
    the reason why the Appellant's father had been arrested and imprisoned.



66. In his oral argument, Mr Sellwood relied upon the  background  evidence
    and the expert view that the Appellant's father had been arrested at  a
    time when the military were clamping down  on  those  perceived  to  be
    associated with  the  Muslim  Brotherhood  and  argued  that  this  was
    sufficient  to  meet  the  lower  standard  taking  into  account   the
    Appellant's minority when he was in Egypt.

67. In our judgment, whilst the  background  evidence  certainly  does  not
    contradict the Appellant's belief as to why his father was arrested  it
    also does not, for  instance,  suggest  that  people  were  only  being
    arrested  at  that  time  if  they  were  associated  with  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood.  We  have  explained  below  why,  despite  this   general
    consistency with the background/expert evidence, we have  rejected  the
    reliability of the Appellant's claim as to the reasons for his father's
    arrest.

68. Mr Sellwood also made the submission that it was difficult to see  what
    other reason there could be for the Appellant's father being  detained,
    but in our view there is, with respect, no merit in that point. Neither
    expert suggested that Liman 440 prison only houses political  prisoners
    and so that clearly means that the Appellant's father could  have  been
    imprisoned for other, non-political, reasons.

69. During the oral evidence the Appellant stated that he had  never  asked
    his mother what the indictment to the trial was specifically about.  He
    went on to say to the Tribunal that he only knew  that  the  accusation
    was that his father was involved with the Muslim  Brotherhood.  In  his
    submissions Mr Tufan argued that it was simply not  credible  that  the
    Appellant would still have not  asked  his  father's  lawyer  what  the
    indictment against his father was after all the years which had passed.

70. We have considered this  point  very  carefully  bearing  in  mind  the
    documentary evidence provided by the Appellant  has  been  accepted  as
    reliable by the First-tier Tribunal, but we have  ultimately  concluded
    that this is an adverse point which goes against the  Appellant's  core
    claim.

71. In the final witness statement dated 3 September  2020,  the  Appellant
    states at para. 12 that he had contacted his mother and  asked  her  to
    give him the details of his father's lawyer  in  Egypt.  The  Appellant
    goes on to say "she said that she has tried to contact him but  it  has
    not been possible as she lost contact with him when my father died.  My
    mum is not a very educated woman, she left school when  she  was  young
    and doing these kinds of things is difficult for her" (sic).

72. In our judgment it is not unreasonable to expect  that  the  Appellant,
    now an adult, and with legal representation, would have made enquiry as
    to the identity of his father's  lawyer  with  his  mother  and/or  his
    extended family and sought to  obtain  evidence  from  that  lawyer  to
    confirm the material issue before us  as  to  whether  the  Appellant's
    father's imprisonment, corroborated by the reliable documentation  sent
    from Egypt, was in fact predicated upon an accusation by  the  Egyptian
    authorities that the Appellant's father was  a  member  of  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood. In our view the Appellant's claim that his mother was  not
    a very educated woman does not reasonably explain such an  absence.  We
    note that other members of  the  family  were  at  the  trial  and  the
    Appellant's cousin sent documents to the UK via Facebook.

73. We see no merit in any suggestion that even if relevant information had
    been obtained it was likely that charges against the father  would  not
    have stated the true nature of  the  prosecution.  There  is  no  sound
    reason why the Egyptian authorities would have wished to disguise this:
    after all, from their perspective, they were simply  seeking  to  bring
    those allegedly connected to a terrorist organisation to justice.

74. We have therefore concluded that this is, overall, a significant  point
    against the Appellant's core credibility.

    The raid on the family home - authorities' interest in the Appellant

75. The Appellant has also claimed that the family home was raided  on  the
    basis that the Egyptian authorities were looking for him and that  this
    adverse interest remains to this day. During the hearing the  Appellant
    was asked by the panel, with  reference  to  paragraph  16  of  his  31
    January 2019 witness statement, whether he had made  any  contact  with
    the governmental human rights organisation whom, he says, came  to  the
    family home in order to view the aftermath of the raid. His answer  was
    no and that he had felt safe in the United Kingdom.

76. In his submissions Mr Sellwood argued that it was important to note the
    Appellant's evidence in the witness statement  was  that  this  unnamed
    human rights organisation had taken no further action. He  went  on  to
    contend that it was difficult to see what  further  contact  with  that
    organisation would bring to the advancement of the Appellant's case  if
    they had taken the view that no further action was appropriate.

77. Overall, we have  reached  the  conclusion  that  this  is  an  adverse
    credibility point. We consider that we have not been given a reasonable
    explanation as to why, again bearing in mind the  length  of  time  the
    Appellant has been going  through  these  proceedings  and  with  legal
    representation during that time, he has not sought to at least  attempt
    to make contact with the human rights organisation in Khafre Al Sheikh.
    It is of course possible that the organisation could have responded  by
    saying that they had no record of attending the property  on  that  day
    but is clearly also possible that this organisation could hold a record
    of the complaint and would be able to confirm this even if the  outcome
    had been to take no further action.

78. We consider that this evidence could plainly  have  been  important  in
    corroborating the Appellant's underlying claim and the failure to  even
    seek to obtain it is a matter which  damages  his  credibility  at  the
    lower standard.




    Other family involvement in the Muslim Brotherhood

79. We also consider that the Appellant's claim  that  two  family  members
    were also arrested and held for some time by the  Egyptian  authorities
    in respect of allegations of involvement with  the  Muslim  Brotherhood
    has not been credibly made out at the  lower  standard  of  proof  when
    placed in the overall context of the evidence that we have considered.

80. We have been drawn to that conclusion by the additional failure of  the
    Appellant to seek to provide evidence from his two family members  who,
    he claims, had relocated to the UAE and Libya respectively in order  to
    be away from difficulties in Egypt. It is already the Appellant's  case
    that one of his family members Saad has access  to  Facebook  (and  has
    sent images of documents to the Appellant) and we consider  that  there
    is ultimately no reasonable explanation in this case for the absence of
    evidence from the family in Egypt or elsewhere to corroborate  the  two
    arrests (and indeed the reasons for apparently leaving Egypt).

81. Such a finding also extends to the failure of the Appellant to  provide
    any supporting evidence from his mother or cousin  in  respect  of  his
    father's political involvement, the raid  on  the  house,  the  ongoing
    adverse interest in the Appellant and so on. We note that the Appellant
    claims that his  mother  is  not  well  educated  but  we  consider  it
    reasonable to conclude that she could have been assisted in providing a
    witness statement or letter by the family in Egypt or  the  Appellant's
    legal representatives.

82. In his oral submission, Mr Sellwood averred that the  fact  that  there
    were potentially gaps in the documentary evidence was a matter  in  the
    Appellant's favour bearing in  mind  that  the  Appellant  had  already
    produced documents which had been accepted as reliable. He argued  that
    there would not be gaps if the Appellant was seeking to pursue a  false
    claim.

83. We reject that submission.  The  Tribunal's  role,  as  established  in
    authority, is to assess if there is a reasonable  explanation  for  the
    absence of evidence which could logically have been adduced (see SB  at
    [46], as quoted above) and in our  view,  for  the  reasons  given,  we
    consider that the Appellant has not reasonably explained his failure to
    attempt to obtain potentially highly important  corroboratory  evidence
    from his father's lawyer, the human rights organisation  in  Khafre  Al
    Sheikh, or his family members, especially where his family have already
    assisted in providing him with some documents.

84. As we have sought to emphasise throughout these findings, we  recognise
    that there is no legal duty  upon  the  Appellant  to  corroborate  his
    claim, but we have also sought  to  explain  why,  in  our  view,  even
    applying the lower standard of proof, the  absence  of  evidence  which
    could have substantiated his case has not been reasonably explained and
    leaves significant gaps in the overall evidential picture.

85. On that basis we have not been able  to  accept  the  Appellant's  core
    claim that his  father  was  imprisoned  on  the  basis  of  actual  or
    perceived involvement with the Muslim Brotherhood or that there was  or
    is adverse interest in the Appellant.

Risk of persecution/risk of serious harm on return to Egypt

86. We have therefore reached the  overall  conclusion  that  although  the
    Appellant has established that his father was imprisoned in  Egypt  for
    six years and that his father died of a brain haemorrhage in  2018,  he
    has not credibly made out his claim that the reason  for  his  father's
    imprisonment was because the Egyptian  authorities  considered  him  to
    have association with the Muslim Brotherhood.

87. As a consequence we have also reached the conclusion that the Appellant
    has not been truthful in  respect  of  his  claim  of  ongoing  adverse
    interest from the Egyptian authorities against him either on the  basis
    of the father's real or imputed political beliefs and connections or on
    the basis of the Appellant's imputed political beliefs or connections.

88. On that basis then we have concluded that the Appellant would not be at
    real risk of persecution and/or serious harm on return to Egypt on  the
    basis of any adverse interest from the Egyptian  authorities.  We  also
    satisfied that the Appellant has no other reason for  claiming  a  real
    risk of persecution/serious harm on return to Egypt  and  therefore  we
    have reached the overall conclusion that there would be  no  breach  of
    the refugee convention or  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  ECHR  by  this
    Appellant's removal to Egypt.

89. Equally the Appellant has not shown a real risk of serious harm for the
    purposes of Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive  or  339C(iii)
    of the Immigration Rules (humanitarian protection).

Article 8 ECHR

90. Mr Sellwood indicated during the hearing that he  was  not  withdrawing
    his reliance upon Article 8 ECHR but would not be concentrating upon it
    as the main focus of his submissions to the tribunal. We have sought to
    apply the guidance in Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  v
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 as  endorsed  by  the  UKSC  in  Sanambar  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021] UKSC 30.

91. In our view there would  not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's reintegration into Egypt as per the test  in  276ADE(1)(vi)
    of the Rules. We bear in mind that the appellant is now  an  adult,  he
    speaks Arabic, he has no  particular  health  problems  and  he  is  in
    contact with his  family.  Again,  as  a  consequence  of  our  earlier
    findings there is simply no reason why the appellant could  not  return
    to his family unit in Egypt.

92. In applying s. 117B of NIAA 2002, we have decided that ss. 117B(2 &  3)
    do not apply against the Appellant but  are  effectively  neutral;  the
    Appellant's residence in the UK has been precarious since he entered in
    2016 and we give little weight to  his  private  life  in  the  UK  (s.
    117B(5)).

93. We therefore take the view that there are no other reasons outside  the
    Rules which constitute the  kind  of  exceptional  circumstances  which
    might otherwise lead to a grant of Leave to Remain.



DECISION

The Appellant's Refugee Convention appeal is dismissed.

The Appellant's humanitarian protection appeal is dismissed.

The Appellant's Articles 2/3 ECHR appeals are dismissed.

The Appellant's Article 8 appeal is dismissed.



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                          Date 25 July 2021




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Jarvis



____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

-----------------------
[1] CACD in R v Lucas [1981] QB 720

