

                                    [pic]
The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/00658/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                 |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 5 July 2016                         |       On 6 July 2016               |
|Prepared on 6 July 2016                |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    N. B.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Gambia. She  entered  the  UK  as  a
      visitor in April 2009,  and  then  sought  to  vary  her  leave  as  a
      dependent of her father. That consisted of a  number  of  applications
      that were all refused, before she claimed asylum on 1 June 2015. On 20
      July 2015 the Respondent refused the asylum claim, and made a decision
      to remove her from the UK. The Respondent was not satisfied  that  the
      Appellant had told the truth about her experiences.
   2. The Appellant's appeal against the removal decision was  heard  on  14
      March  2016,  and  it  was  dismissed  on  asylum,  Article   3,   and
      humanitarian protection grounds, but allowed on Article 8 grounds,  in
      a decision promulgated on 18 April 2016 by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Robson.
   3. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal that decision on 6 May
      2016 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Davidge on the basis it was arguable
      the Judge's findings of fact were inconsistent,  and  that  there  had
      been a failure to engage with the Appellant's case through the lens of
      the Immigration Rules and s117A-D, in the light of the guidance to  be
      found in decisions such as SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387.  Thus  the
      matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   4. Ultimately both parties were agreed that the Judge's approach  to  the
      Article 8 was flawed for two reasons.  First,  given  her  immigration
      history there was a clear inconsistency between the findings  made  in
      paragraphs 62-3 of the decision which rejected her  claim  to  face  a
      risk of harm in the Gambia, and her claim to have no family support in
      the Gambia, and the conclusion that her return to the Gambia would  be
      disproportionate and unduly harsh. Moreover it  was  not  possible  to
      ascertain from  the  decision  how  the  Judge  had  arrived  at  this
      conclusion, because the reasoning offered  in  the  decision  did  not
      justify it.


  Future conduct of the appeal
   5. Since both parties were agreed that the decision upon  the  Article  8
      claim had to be set aside and remade, the focus of  the  hearing  then
      turned to the mechanism for doing so. Neither the Appellant,  nor  any
      of her family members had attended the hearing, at the instruction  of
      her solicitors. Since the majority of those who would give evidence in
      relation to the Article 8 claim live close  to  the  Bradford  hearing
      centre (where the appeal was originally heard) it was agreed  that  it
      would be most expedient for any future hearing to  take  place  there.
      Legal Aid would not be available for that hearing since  it  would  be
      confined to the Article 8 claim
   6. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the
      Article 8 appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be  reheard,  as
      requested by both parties. In the circumstances of  the  appeal  I  am
      satisfied that this is the correct approach. In circumstances where it
      would  appear  that  the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
      considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law
      has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for her  case  to
      be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of
      the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover  the  extent  of
      the judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard  to  the
      over-riding objective, it is appropriate that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012. Having reached that  conclusion,  with
      the agreement of the parties






Decision

   7. The decision promulgated on 23 March 2016 did involve the making of an
      error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside and  the  appeal
      to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is  set  aside
      and the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  with  the
      following directions;
     i) The decision upon the Article 8 appeal is set aside. The  appeal  is
        remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing of the  Article  8
        appeal. The findings of fact set out  in  paragraphs  52-63  of  the
        decision are preserved. The appeal is not to be listed before  Judge
        Robson.
    ii) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The Appellant must inform the Tribunal by 5pm on 15 July 2016  what
        further evidence she seeks to rely upon.
    iv) The appeal is to be listed on  the  first  available  date  at  the
        Bradford hearing centre after 19 July 2016.
     v) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 6 July 2016

