
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00222/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2020                           |On 12 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Masih of Counsel instructed by Clyde Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew promulgated on 8 August 2019 in which the Appellant's appeal was
    refused on protection and human rights grounds.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 8 March 1981.   He  left
    Pakistan on 6 November 2015 arriving in the UK on 26 January 2016.   On
    28 January 2016 he  requested  an  appointment  with  the  Respondent's
    asylum unit, and on 18 February 2016 the Respondent  formally  recorded
    him as having made an application for asylum.


3.   His application was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 15 December 2017.


4.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


5.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the Decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Aziz promulgated on 22 May 2018.


6.   The Appellant made an application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal which was granted. In due course his case was considered
    by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman on 1 May  2019.   Judge  Chapman
    found that there was a material error of law in the decision  of  Judge
    Aziz; the appeal  was  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge
    Chapman indicated  that  certain  findings  of  Judge  Aziz  should  be
    preserved.  Those findings  were  limited  in  nature  and  essentially
    related to the  Appellant's  background  and  his  qualification  as  a
    pharmacist: (now see paragraph 18 of the  Decision  of  Judge  Andrew).
    These findings were of some relevance  to  the  protection  claim:  the
    Appellant had claimed that as a pharmacy technician he had  been  taken
    by members of the Taliban to assist in the treatment of injured Taliban
    fighters; whether this was on the basis of a mistaken  belief  that  he
    was a doctor, or whether  it  was  considered  that  his  skills  as  a
    pharmacist would be of value, is less clear.


7.   The Appellant had provided  supporting  documents  in  respect  of  his
    professional qualifications at the time  of  his  application.  In  the
    first instance these were rejected by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    findings of Judge  Aziz  in  substance  reversed  that  aspect  of  the
    Respondent's  decision;  nonetheless  Judge  Aziz  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's account was otherwise such that  he  was  not  entitled  to
    protection.


8.   Pursuant to the remittal to the First-tier Tribunal - with the  limited
    preserved findings of fact - the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Andrew.


9.   Judge Andrew dismissed the Appellant's appeal for reasons  set  out  in
    her 'Decision and Reasons' promulgated on 8 August 2019.


10.  The Appellant again applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe on 11  September  2019,  but  was  subsequently
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on 2 October 2019.


11.  The background to the Appellant's case  is  set  out  in  succinct  but
    clear detail in the decision of Judge Chapman, which  is  a  matter  of
    record - (see in particular paragraphs 1-4).  In the circumstances I do
    not  repeat  Judge  Chapman's  rehearsal  of  the  Appellant's   claim.
    However, for present purposes it is appropriate to note two matters  in
    particular.

         (i) As alluded to above, the Appellant claims he was taken  by  the
         Taliban to treat injured fighters  He  claims  that  on  a  further
         occasion he was being transported by the Taliban when there  was  a
         firefight with security forces.  It is his case that he  was  being
         taken as a pillion passenger on a motorbike, whilst  other  Taliban
         members were travelling by car.  It was the car and its  passengers
         that became engaged in the shooting incident; the motorbike  eluded
         the  incident,  and  so  the  Appellant  did  not  become  directly
         involved. However, it is the Appellant's  case  that  the  security
         services were able to connect  him  to  the  incident  because  his
         wallet was found in the car.  He claims that the security  services
         came looking for him accordingly.

         (ii) Further to this, the Appellant also  claims  that  he  is  the
         subject of an arrest warrant.  He has produced what he  says  is  a
         copy of the arrest warrant, and he has also provided evidence which
         he  says  was  secured  pursuant  to  an  attempt  to  verify   the
         authenticity of the arrest  warrant  through  the  services  of  an
         advocate based in Pakistan.


12.  The Appellant's consolidated bundle before Judge Andrew  included  what
    was said to be supporting evidence from the advocate in Pakistan;  such
    evidence was in two distinct sections of the bundle.  The  consolidated
    bundle comprises in part the bundle that was before Judge Aziz, and  in
    part further materials filed  and  served  for  the  second  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing before Judge Andrew.  The relevant materials  include:
    a letter dated 22 January 2018 from the Pakistan  advocate,  which  was
    also before Judge Aziz (consolidated bundle, tab 2, page 42); documents
    seeking to bolster the evidence of  the  advocate  including  documents
    said to relate to his standing, and by way of verification that such  a
    person was a practising lawyer in Pakistan (tab 1, pages 5-9).


13.   Judge  Andrew  set  out  her  consideration  of  this  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's case from paragraph 40 of the Decision: the nature  of  the
    materials filed by the Appellant were identified  (paragraph  40);  the
    Judge expressed surprise - "I am surprised" -  at  the  fact  that  the
    Respondent had not attempted to verify the  arrest  warrant  (paragraph
    41); and the Judge expressed at the format of the arrest warrant  -  "I
    am surprised that the claimed arrest warrant has been written  on  what
    appears to be  a sheet of blank paper and there is no heading  as  such
    to confirm that it comes from the PA's office.  It is apparently signed
    and with an official seal but as I have not seen the  original  of  the
    document I am unable to comment on this." (paragraph 42).


14.  The Judge then turned her attention to the evidence relied upon by  the
    Appellant by way of verification, purportedly sourced from the advocate
    in Pakistan (paragraph 43).  Paragraphs 44-46 are in these terms:

         "44. I then turn to the document  at  page  5  of  the  Appellant's
             Bundle which purports to be a Certificate  for  permission  to
             appear completed by the Bar Council.  I do have doubts  as  to
             the authenticity of this document.  I note that it is misspelt
             i.e. 'The NWFP Bar Councilhere by certifies...'.    I  further
             note that the alternatives have not been deleted, as  I  would
             have expected them to be had the Certificate  been  a  genuine
             one.


         45.  The ID Card  gives  [the  advocate]'s  place  of  practice  as
             Charsadda whereas the letter at page 42  of  Tab  B  indicates
             that his address is Peshawar.  Further, bearing  in  mind  the
             Appellant's evidence that the ID card was received on 28  June
             2019 I note that the ID card is only valid until  25  February
             2018 and was out of date by the time it was received.


         46.  The number on the claimed Licence to Practice at page 5 Tab  A
             of the  Appellant's  Bundle  is  [**]71  yet  throughout  [the
             advocate's] number is given as BC-10-[**}98."

     (I have included the asterisks above  in  keeping  with  the  anonymity
    direction herein.)


15.  The reference at paragraph 44 to the  'alternatives'  not  having  been
    deleted  is  in  respect  of  a  pro  forma  document  which  has   the
    alternatives 'Mr/Miss/Mrs' and 'Son/Daughter/Wife of Mr', which had not
    been 'struck through' to indicate applicability.


16.  The Judge went on to observe that these matters  "taken  in  the  round
    with the other evidence that I have heard leads  me  to  find  that  no
    weight can be placed on the claimed arrest warrant",  which  the  Judge
    considered "adds to my finding that the Appellant is  not  credible  in
    his claim" (paragraph 47).


17.  The Judge also stated:

     "I would also add that despite the Appellant being in contact with  his
         brother I have nothing to confirm the Appellant's assertions either
         about what happened to  him  in  Pakistan  or  the  claimed  arrest
         warrant" (paragraph 48).


18.  In my judgement the reference to there  being  'nothing  to  confirm...
    the claimed arrest warrant' can only sensibly be  reads  as  indicating
    that the Judge did not merely marginalise the weight to be attached  to
    the evidence from the advocate, but proceeded on the premise that  such
    evidence could be accorded no weight whatsoever -  inherently  implicit
    is that the Judge rejected such evidence outright.


19.  The difficulty that such reasoning encounters is that  it  is  apparent
    that neither the Respondent nor the Judge raised any particular  issues
    or concerns with  the  Appellant  or  his  representative  directly  in
    respect of this supporting documentation.  The Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal not only make complaint about unfairness, but also  seek
    to address in some detail each of the concerns expressed by  the  Judge
    at paragraphs 44-46.  It is submitted that the  failure  to  strike-out
    alternatives on the pro forma certificate was essentially  trivial  and
    not  sufficiently  substantial  to  undermine  the  validity  of   that
    certificate; there were two addresses because  the  advocate  has  more
    than one office from which he practices; the numbers on the certificate
    and the Bar Council number  were  different  because  they  related  to
    different things. Such matters could  have  been  advanced  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal had the issues been raised.


20.  I note that the Appellant has now  filed  further  supporting  evidence
    from Pakistan in an attempt to address these matters in the event  that
    the decision in the appeal requires to be remade.  I  acknowledge  that
    at this stage such 'new' evidence is to be disregarded  in  considering
    'error of law'.  However, they are an  indication  that  the  Appellant
    would likely have sought to put himself in a position  to  address  the
    concerns that informed a significant  aspect  of  the  Judge's  adverse
    findings had they been raised directly, and - if there is error on  the
    part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  -  are  otherwise  relevant  to  a
    consideration of how the exercise of discretion under section  12(2)(a)
    of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 should be  exercised.




21.  I am persuaded that there was a material error of  unfairness  in  that
    significant supporting documentary evidence was  rejected  without  the
    issues  of  concern  having  been  raised  during  the  course  of  the
    proceedings.  Notwithstanding that other aspects of the Decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal appear to  be  cogently  and  sustainably  reasoned
    (subject to the caveat below), I conclude that this error  is  of  such
    significance that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand.




22.  Although for the main part I consider the First-tier Tribunal  decision
    cogently reasoned, there is  one  further  significant  aspect  of  the
    analysis which I find  not  to  have  been  adequately  or  sustainably
    reasoned.  This is in respect  of  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
    circumstances surrounding the Appellant being connected to the shooting
    incident by reason of his wallet having been found in  the  vehicle  in
    which Taliban members had been travelling.


23.  The  Judge's  consideration  of  this  particular  incident  starts  at
    paragraph 29 of the Decision where the Judge states:

     "The Army knew he was on the back of the bike  because  the  leader  of
         the Taliban had taken the Appellant's wallet which had his ID cards
         in it and said  that  when  they  reached  his  home  it  would  be
         returned.  The Appellant claims that it was found in  the  ambushed
         vehicle."

    The Judge essentially rejected this aspect of the Appellant's testimony
    for the reasons set out at paragraphs 30-32.


24.  At paragraph 31 the Judge says this:

     "I am further concerned as to the manner in which the Appellant  claims
         he was identified.  He was not in the car which was involved in the
         shooting of the Army soldiers.  He was on a motorcycle that was not
         involved and managed to get away.  I find it incredible that  given
         he was on a different  vehicle  the  Appellant's  wallet  would  be
         placed in the car with the other members of the Taliban".


25.   It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  Appellant  explained   exactly   the
    circumstances as to why he claimed his wallet had been in the car.   It
    had not been in his possession when he was on the motorbike because  it
    had been  taken  by  one  of  the  members  of  the  Taliban  who  then
    subsequently got into the vehicle.  To that extent it is entirely clear
    on the face of the Appellant's account -  whether  it  be  rejected  or
    otherwise - the manner in which the  wallet  would  have  been  in  the
    vehicle rather than with the Appellant on the motorcycle.


26.  In this context the Judge states that she can find "no credible  reason
    why the Taliban would wish to take the Appellant's  wallet"  (paragraph
    32).  It seems to me that that is to look at  the  situation  from  the
    detachment of a hearing room without due consideration  of  what  might
    happen on the ground in Pakistan, how the Taliban  might  operate,  and
    the significance to  an  individual  of  being  deprived  of  a  wallet
    containing significant matters - including ID documents -  which  might
    make render its possession a coercive tool.


27.  The Judge goes on to consider matters in the alternative:

     "Even if I am wrong about this  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  the
         Appellant's  wallet  in  a  car  would   lead   to   the   soldiers
         automatically assuming he had been involved in any shoot out.   The
         wallet could have been there for any number of  reasons  -  it  had
         been stolen, it had been misplaced, for example.   I  am  satisfied
         that this part of  the  Appellant's  claim  has  been  manufactured
         merely to explain  why  the  army  should  suspect  the  Appellant"
         (paragraph 32).


28.  It may well be that there are cogent 'innocent' reasons  why  a  wallet
    would be in a vehicle used by the Taliban. But missing from the Judge's
    analysis is any contemplation of how the security forces would react to
    such a discovery. The Judge's reasoning is only sustainable if it might
    be thought that there is no reasonable likelihood of any outcome  other
    than the security forces assuming  that  the  wallet  was  in  the  car
    'innocently'.  Put  another  way,  the  Judge's   reasoning   is   only
    sustainable if it is not reasonably likely that the  security  services
    on finding such a wallet at the scene of  an  incident  would  seek  to
    investigate the owner  of  the  wallet  -  even  if  then  an  innocent
    explanation might be offered and accepted.  The  Judge's  reasoning  is
    essentially premised on the security forces assuming an innocent reason
    and taking no action by way of investigation.  I find that the  Judge's
    reasoning lacks cogency and is ultimately  unsustainable.  The  Judge's
    use of the phrase "...lead to the soldiers  automatically  assuming..."
    does not allow of a 'reasonable likelihood'  that  the  soldiers  would
    suspect the Appellant, or at least seek to investigate him.


29.  For  the  reasons  given,  the  Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    requires to be set aside. Although this case  has  already  been  heard
    twice by the First-tier Tribunal, it seems to me that on both occasions
    the Appellant has not had a full and fair consideration of his case: in
    such circumstances, with some hesitation, I conclude that the case must
    go back yet again to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by any  Judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz or First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew. The findings of  fact  previously  preserved  should  again  be
    preserved: Judge Andrew did not go behind  those  findings  recognising
    the direction of the Upper Tribunal, and there is nothing that  emerged
    during the course of proceedings before Judge  Andrew  or  subsequently
    which would point in a different direction.  Accordingly, the  findings
    of fact preserved from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz -
    as set out at paragraph 18 of the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Andrew - are again to be preserved.  The  decision  in  the  appeal  is
    otherwise to be remade with all other issues at large.


Notice of Decision

30.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


31.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Aziz  or
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew, with preserved findings  of  fact  as
    identified above and otherwise all other issues at large.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 9 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


