

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/00553/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October  2017                          |On 12 October 2017            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                                     SS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Fisher, instructed by Malik & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant, arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 July 2016, concealed
      in the back of a lorry. On being discovered at Dover Docks he  claimed
      asylum, his wife and two adult sons being dependent  upon  his  claim.
      The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs who, by  a  determination
      promulgated on 8 March 2017, dismissed his appeal against  refusal  of
      his asylum and human rights claim.


   2. The nature of that claim is, of course, well known to the parties and,
      for present purposes, it is sufficient to reproduce the summary of the
      appellant's protection claim set out by the judge at  paragraph  9  of
      his determination:
           "The appellant is a Sikh. His claim is based on his fear that if
           he is returned to Afghanistan he will be killed by  the  Taliban
           or other Muslims on account of his religion. The appellant  says
           that approximately eight or nine months before he arrived in the
           United Kingdom he was kidnapped by members of  the  Taliban.  He
           was released after about three hours only after the intervention
           of a Muslim neighbour. Two months later he was threatened  by  a
           man telling him that if he did not leave Afghanistan he would be
           killed. Whilst in the UK at the Southall temple,  the  appellant
           said he was given a letter from the Taliban threatening him."
      The respondent refused the application for asylum because it  was  not
      accepted  that  the  appellant  and  his  family  were  nationals   of
      Afghanistan or that they had been living in that country  and  so  the
      account of their experiences could not be true.  In  the  alternative,
      the respondent rejected the claim as lacking in  credibility  and  not
      likely to be true, even if the appellant were  from  Afghanistan.  The
      respondent noted also that the appellant and his family had  travelled
      through other safe countries on their journey to the  United  Kingdom,
      including Austria and France, and so their  failure  to  claim  asylum
      before arriving in the United Kingdom further damaged the  appellant's
      credibility.


   3. Although the judge accepted that the appellant  and  his  family  were
      nationals of Afghanistan and that they had been residing in  the  area
      of Kabul, he did not accept to be true any  part  of  the  appellant's
      account of his experiences  in  Afghanistan  or  of  the  reasons  for
      travelling to the United Kingdom, save that the  appellant  had  said,
      both in interview and in  oral  evidence  at  the  hearing,  that  the
      availability of NHS medical treatment for the  whole  of  his  family,
      particularly for his disabled son, was an important  consideration  in
      his choice of the United Kingdom as a destination.  At paragraph 36 of
      his determination the judge recorded that  the  appellant,  in  giving
      oral evidence:


           "...was asked whether medical help was the only reason  he  came
           to the United Kingdom and he said yes it was the only reason. He
           was then asked further whether it was safe for him to return  to
           Afghanistan. He said no, because  the  Muslims  would  kill  him
           there. He repeated that the reason his family came to the United
           Kingdom was so that they, and in particular his son,  could  get
           the necessary medical treatment."


   4. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and from one  of  his
      adult sons. The appellant's wife was unable to give  evidence  as  she
      was, at the date of the hearing,  receiving  in-patient  treatment  in
      hospital. In closing submissions, Mr Oyemike,  who  appeared  for  the
      appellant, relied upon the current country guidance in TG  and  others
      (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595  (IAC)  and
      submitted that the appellant should be found to  be  credible  in  his
      account and so the appeal should be allowed. In respect of the  letter
      the appellant said had been  given  to  him  at  the  Sikh  temple  in
      Southall, the judge recorded, at paragraph 34  of  his  determination,
      that:


           "Mr Oyekie said he would  not  be  relying  on  the  letter  and
           therefore it had not been translated."


   5. The judge gave extensive reasons for his conclusion that the appellant
      and his son were not credible witnesses and that  he  did  not  accept
      their account to be true. These are set out between  paragraphs  60-80
      of  the  determination.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant,   in
      particular, had given a  contradictory  and  inconsistent  account  of
      events at the core of his claim.


   6. The appellant had given conflicting accounts of his work situation. In
      his screening interview he said  he  was  a  servant.  In  his  asylum
      interview he said that he  worked  for  a  clothing  company.  In  his
      witness statement, he said he  worked  in  a  fabric  shop  "for  some
      Hindus" and that he was unable to  pay  a  ransom  to  those  who  had
      kidnapped him because he was an employee. Contradicting that, in  oral
      evidence he said that he owned a family shop and that he was the  sole
      owner of the shop which was in his name. He had said also that he  had
      given the shop away to fund the journey to the United  Kingdom  which,
      of course, would not have been possible had he  been  an  employee  or
      servant. This led the judge to conclude that the  appellant  "has  not
      been honest" about his circumstances in Afghanistan.


   7. In the asylum interview the appellant said that his  son's  disability
      was due to him having been tortured by the Taliban,  saying  later  in
      the interview, when reminded that his account had been that  no  other
      member of his family had experienced problems with the  Taliban,  that
      his son had been tortured not by the Taliban but by "normal  Muslims".
      However, when that son gave evidence, he did not claim  to  have  been
      tortured by anyone.


   8. This led the judge to conclude that the evidence of the  appellant  in
      this  regard  was  also  "not  honest".  The  judge  found  that   the
      appellant's son had not been attacked or injured by anyone,  but  that
      his deteriorating health is due to a genetic condition.


   9. The credibility of the appellant as a witness was damaged  further  by
      his claim that he had never left Afghanistan before travelling to  the
      United Kingdom because in interview he had said that he had previously
      taken his son to Delhi for medical treatment.


  10. The judge next explained why  he  found  lacking  in  credibility  the
      appellant's account of being kidnapped. The judge did not accept  that
      all the events that occurred during the  asserted  abduction  and  his
      negotiated release at the demand of his Muslim  neighbour  could  have
      taken place during the short period clamed, and nor did the judge find
      credible that, if the appellant had been kidnapped for ransom  by  the
      Taliban that they would give him up and release him at the request  of
      a neighbour, there being no asserted  Taliban  standing  of  authority
      vested in that neighbour according to the appellant's account in  oral
      evidence, who was said simply  to  have  pleaded  on  the  appellant's
      behalf. Elsewhere, during the interview, contradicting  that  account,
      the appellant had said that this neighbour was "a  well  known  figure
      and has influence" and that this neighbour "threatened  them  that  if
      they did not release me because of his  high  chair  and  position  he
      would  get  all  the  Taliban  wiped  out".  The  judge  rejected  the
      appellant's claim in evidence not to have given this answer,  recorded
      in the transcript of the interview.


  11. The judge observed that if the Taliban had yielded to this threat from
      the neighbour so that the appellant was released unharmed and  without
      the payment of any ransom, then it was unlikely that  further  threats
      would be made by the Taliban to the appellant just two months later.


  12. As for the evidence given by the appellant's son, the judge found this
      gave  rise  to  yet  further  credibility  difficulties.  Whilst   the
      appellant himself had said that his fear of  violence  in  Afghanistan
      had begun 8 or 9 months earlier, his son  said  that  the  family  had
      lived in fear for a long time and that was the reason he  had  stopped
      attending school when just 9 years old. This witness  said  also  that
      because of the fear of being killed, the family  had  never  left  the
      Kabul area before coming to the United Kingdom  but,  as  has  already
      been noted, the appellant said that he  took  his  son  to  Delhi  for
      medical treatment whilst they were living in Afghanistan.


  13. Drawing all of this together, the judge said:


           "It was clear from various aspects of the  appellant's  evidence
           that a major driving force for the family to come to the  United
           Kingdom was to seek help for their son  [M]  who  is  wheelchair
           bound...
           ...
           Taking into account the appellant's credibility  generally,  the
           implausibility in his  account  of  threats  received  from  the
           Taliban (or Afghani Muslims generally) and  his  clear  evidence
           that he was very keen to come to the UK  for  medical  treatment
           for his son, I do not find it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the
           appellant has suffered any of the violence or  threats  that  he
           has claimed."
      The judge was referred to the guidance in TG & Ors but, unsurprisingly
      given his findings of fact, had regard to the guidance set out in  the
      headnote:
           "A consideration of whether an individual member of the Sikh  or
           Hindu communities is at real risk of persecution upon return  to
           Afghanistan is fact-sensitive."
      and concluded that there was no real risk of  the  appellant  and  his
      family facing  persecutory  ill-treatment  or  treatment  contrary  to
      articles 2 or 3 ECHR on return to Afghanistan.


  14. Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan granted  permission  to  appeal  for  two
      reasons. First, she considered it to be arguable that:
           "... the judge may have failed to consider the  credibility  and
           plausibility of the claim  in  the  context  of  the  background
           evidence and with sufficient reference t the  country  guidance.
           It is arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether,
           despite his credibility findings relating to the specific  event
           outlines by the appellant, there would be a risk  on  return  in
           light of the background evidence relating to  the  treatment  of
           Afghan  Sikhs  and  the  deteriorating  security  situation   in
           Afghanistan."
      Secondly, even though the appellant, who had been legally  represented
      throughout, did not advance  a  claim  under  article  8  ECHR,  Judge
      Canavan considered such a claim to be "Robinson obvious" such that the
      judge "had a duty to consider any relevant human rights issues..."
  15. I address the second of  those  concerns  first.  Ms  Fisher,  who  is
      instructed by fresh solicitors and not those who drafted  the  grounds
      of appeal, submitted that this  was  a  Robinson  obvious  point  that
      should have been addressed by the judge. The judge,  however,  had  to
      determine the appeal on the basis of the evidence that was before  him
      and in the light of submissions  advanced  by  the  appellant's  legal
      representative. With respect, it is hard to see how there was any duty
      upon the judge to determine an article  8  claim  that  had  not  been
      advanced. Indeed, although  the  grounds  for  seeking  permission  to
      appeal extend to 9 closely typed pages, there is no mention  there  of
      any asserted infringement of rights protected by  article  8.  In  the
      light of the evidence then being relied upon, it is not  hard  to  see
      why. This family had, on their account, lived in Afghanistan  for  the
      whole of their lives and had been in the United Kingdom only 7  months
      at the date of the hearing. They faced being returned to their country
      of nationality together, as a complete family unit, the  judge  having
      rejected as untrue their account of the  only  difficulties  they  had
      claimed to have faced while living in Afghanistan. Although there  was
      evidence in the appellant's bundle concerning the disability of one of
      the  appellant's  sons,  the  evidence  was  that  while   living   in
      Afghanistan the appellant  had  secured  medical  treatment  for  him,
      including taking him for treatment  in  Delhi.  In  not  addressing  a
      ground of appeal that was not advanced before him, the judge  made  no
      error of law.




  16. Ms Fisher pursued a similar challenge  articulated  in  terms  of  the
      immigration rules, although there is in that, as she recognised,  some
      overlap. She submitted that the judge fell into legal error in failing
      to consider whether the appellant and his family should have succeeded
      under para 276ADE(1)(vi) because, given  the  characteristics  of  the
      family, they would face very  significant  obstacles  to  integration.
      Once again, this point was not taken before the judge, either  in  the
      grounds of appeal or in oral submissions and it was not  an  error  of
      law for the judge not to raise it himself.


  17. The grounds complain that before making adverse  credibility  findings
      on the basis of perceived contradictions  or  inconsistencies  in  the
      evidence, the judge should first have put those contradictions to  the
      appellant and his witness for them to deal with. But both parties were
      represented and fully aware of all the evidence that had  been  given,
      including that which did not sit  happily  with  what  had  been  said
      previously, so that there was no duty upon the judge to raise  with  a
      witness something that the appellant's representative had  chosen  not
      to. The task of the judge was to  explain  in  his  determination  the
      reasons for reaching the conclusions  he  did  and  he  was  under  no
      obligation to rehearse his reasoning before the parties before setting
      that out in his written determination.


  18. The rejection by the judge of the appellant's evidence that his  son's
      disability was a result of violence was a finding founded  upon  sound
      credibility findings and evidence of diagnosis in the  United  Kingdom
      of the cause of the condition. This conclusion was plainly open to the
      judge and is one that discloses no legal error.


  19. There is to be found in the grounds an expression of disagreement with
      a number of findings made by the judge but none of those identify  any
      error of law by the judge. The tasks of the judge was to make what  he
      could of the evidence and to make clear his reasons for so doing. This
      is precisely what the judge has done.


  20. The closest the grounds come to the reasons for permission  to  appeal
      being granted is to be found at paragraph 23 of the grounds. There  it
      is said that:
           "... the judge should have been aware from as far  back  as  the
           late 90's Sikhs have been leaving on mass (sic) and are in  fear
           because of what happened to them so to state this  narrative  is
           not credible is one that shows the judge has erred in law..."
      This was a main focus of the submissions advanced by  Ms  Fisher.  She
      submitted that the judge made an error  of  law  in  failing  to  make
      findings on credibility in the context of the  country  evidence  and,
      even if he were correct to make those adverse credibility findings, he
      should still have found that this family would be at  risk  on  return
      because of the  characteristics  disclosed.  It  was,  she  submitted,
      established by the country guidance that the appellant's wife would be
      particularly vulnerable as a woman, having given up his  business  the
      appellant would have no independent means  of  support  and  would  be
      unlikely to secure employment, he would be unlikely to secure adequate
      support from the Gurdwara because of dwindling  contributions  from  a
      much reduced Sikh community, and he would find it  very  difficult  to
      find accommodation.








  21. However, as is recognised by the current country guidance, whilst some
      members of the Sikh and Hindu communities in Afghanistan  continue  to
      suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim zealots, not all  will.  That
      is why a fact-based assessment is needed. In this case  the  appellant
      had not set out a credible account of having  experienced  persecutory
      ill-treatment  and  his  account  of  the  specific   experiences   of
      difficulties had been rejected by the judge as untrue, for  the  clear
      and legally sufficient reasons given. The judge had to  determine  the
      appeal on the basis of the evidence the parties chose  to  put  before
      him. In this case, that evidence, to the extent that it  was  accepted
      as credible, established only that the appellant had  for  many  years
      operated his own shop in  the  Kabul  area  without  experiencing  any
      difficulties other than that of his sons' disability,  which  was  not
      the consequence of any ill-treatment by any third party, and  that  he
      had brought his family to the United Kingdom not to escape persecution
      but to have access to medical treatment for his family that they could
      not secure in Afghanistan. At paragraph 29 of the grounds  upon  which
      permission to appeal was  secured,  it  is  said  that  TG  &  Ors  is
      authority for the proposition  that  Sikhs  will  have  difficulty  in
      obtaining an independent living in Afghanistan and the appellant would
      have to pay for the medical treatment required by  his  son.  But  the
      appellant is a person who has  demonstrated  that  he  does  have  the
      ability to secure an independent income in Afghanistan and has not set
      out any sustainable explanation as to why he could  not  do  so  again
      upon return to Afghanistan. Indeed, the fact  that  his  own  account,
      rejected as untrue, was that a  Muslim  neighbour  intervened  on  his
      behalf to secure his release from the Taliban  abduction  without  and
      cost and without suffering any injury is, perhaps, a  good  indication
      of how this particular appellant perceives his relationship  with  the
      Muslim community he engages with in Kabul.


  22. The findings of fact made were plainly open to the judge and  he  made
      no error of law in arriving at them.


  23. It may be that, given the nature of the disability of the  appellant's
      son and the need for the appellant's wife to have in-patient treatment
      after her arrival in the United Kingdom there was more that could  and
      should have been said about those matters. But if  there  is  more  to
      say, even if that  may  make  appropriate  the  advancing  of  further
      submissions to the respondent that cannot be a basis to  identify  any
      arguable error of law by a judge before whom that information was  not
      advanced.


   Summary of decision:
  24. First-tier Tribunal Judge Issacs made no material error of law and his
      decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.


  25. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

Signed           [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 12 October 2017


