
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00736/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|means)                               |                                     |
|On 24th March 2021                   |On 27 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     WN
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Ahmad, Legal Representative of Hanson Law
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andrew promulgated on 17 July 2020,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim dated 13 January 2020 was dismissed on all  grounds.



 2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, who claims to have arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 12 March 2009.  He claimed asylum, which was  refused
    by the Respondent on 30 April 2009 and the appeal against that  refusal
    was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 1
    July  2009,  following  which  the  Appellant  became   appeal   rights
    exhausted.  The Appellant made further submissions on 11 November  2019
    on the basis that he would be at risk on return  to  Iraq  because  his
    father had worked for the US military and because he was Kurdish;  that
    he would be at risk of a risk of indiscriminate  violence  contrary  to
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive; that did not have a  CSID
    card and on the basis that  he  would  be  destitute  on  return.   The
    Appellant also claimed that he was in  a  relationship  in  the  United
    Kingdom with a Latvian national.

 3. The Respondent refused  the  application  for  the  following  reasons.
    First, that there was no new evidence or submissions in relation to the
    Appellant's claim to be at risk on return due to  his  connection  with
    his father, a claim which had previously been refused and dismissed  on
    appeal.  Secondly, on the basis of the findings in the country guidance
    case of SMO, KSP & IM  (Article  15(c):  identity  documents)  Iraq  CG
    [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC) the Appellant would not be at risk on return  due
    to his Kurdish ethnicity or at risk of indiscriminate harm contrary  to
    Article 15(c).  Thirdly, the Appellant could return to Baghdad where he
    had lived previously with his family and would be able to obtain a  new
    CSID card through details of his  family  book  entry.   Fourthly,  the
    Appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  either  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  for  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain on family or private  life  grounds.   Finally,  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances to otherwise warrant  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain.

 4. Judge Andrew dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 17  July
    2020 on all grounds, the detailed reasons for which I return to, so far
    as relevant, below.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  five  grounds,  with
    permission to appeal only granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  the  fifth
    and final ground.   The  grounds  upon  which  permission  was  refused
    related to the refusal to grant an  adjournment  of  the  hearing;  the
    First-tier Tribunal's application of the principles in  Devaseelan  and
    its assessment of evidence in relation to the Appellant's visit to  the
    Iraqi Embassy and  approach  to  the  Red  Cross  for  family  tracing.
    Towards the end of the  oral  hearing  the  Appellant's  representative
    sought to renew the application on these other grounds (or somehow  set
    aside the refusal of permission on the other grounds), but this was not
    ultimately pursued given the lack of clarity as to  the  basis  of  the
    application; the procedural mechanism  relied  upon;  the  difficulties
    caused by the timing of the request and how the  Appellant  wanted  the
    request to be dealt with.

 6. The ground of appeal upon which permission was granted falls  into  two
    separate parts.  First, that the First-tier Tribunal  materially  erred
    in law in failing to properly consider internal  relocation  given  the
    Appellant's claim that he was from Kirkuk, a former contested area.  It
    is said that the Tribunal has failed to apply the country  guidance  in
    SMO, by (a) failing to consider the extent of ongoing ISIL activity  in
    Kirkuk; (b) failing to consider whether the Appellant has an actual  or
    perceived association with ISIL (relying on the Appellant's claim  that
    ISIL attended the family home on 24 February 2009 threatening  to  kill
    his father); (c) failing to consider the Appellant's Kurdish ethnicity;
    (d) failing to  consider  the  Appellant's  associations  with  Western
    organisations  or  security  forces,  namely  his  father's  work   for
    Megaforce (albeit not accepted in the Appellant's appeal in 2009);  and
    (e) failing to consider the level of family support the Appellant would
    have on return given he has no contact details for them.

 7. The second part of the ground of appeal is in relation to  whether  the
    Appellant has or would be able to obtain a CSID or INID card; his claim
    is that he does not and would not be able to travel within Iraq without
    one in accordance with the  country  guidance  in  SMO.   Further,  the
    Appellant would not be able to  obtain  a  replacement  in  the  United
    Kingdom without relevant documents and information  and  would  not  be
    able to obtain a replacement on return to Baghdad  with  or  without  a
    proxy as he is not from there and does not have the required documents.

 8. Permission to appeal on this  ground  was  granted  for  the  following
    reasons:

         "I am concerned, however, that the judge might arguably have  erred
         in the respects contended in ground five.  There  seem  to  be  two
         complaints here.  The first relates to the  judge's  evaluation  at
         page 7 of her decision, which concerns the appellant's  ability  to
         return to his home town of Kirkuk.  It is arguable, in my judgment,
         that the judge failed to take material  matters  (as  described  in
         SMO) into account in reaching the conclusions that she did in  this
         respect.  In particular, it is arguable that  she  failed  to  take
         into account the matters required by the sliding scale described in
         that country guidance decision.  It is less strongly arguable  that
         the judge erred in the second respect  contended  in  this  ground,
         which relates to the appellant's ability to obtain his  own,  or  a
         replacement CSID.  On analysis, it might ultimately be thought that
         it was open to the judge to conclude - as she did at  [32]  -  that
         the appellant has his own CSID or that he would be able to obtain a
         replacement.  The point is nevertheless just arguable, and I  grant
         permission on ground five as a whole."


 9. At the oral hearing, Mr Ahmad relied on the written grounds  of  appeal
    and proceeded to make submissions on what should happen  next  in  this
    appeal on the assumption that there was a material error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I indicated to Mr Ahmad that  the
    error of law issue needed to be dealt with first and sought clarity  as
    to the precise nature of the ground pursued.

10. Mr Ahmad submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
    relation to whether the Appellant had or would  be  able  to  obtain  a
    CSID, with support in the Respondent's Country Policy  and  Information
    Note that he would be unlikely to be able to obtain one from the  Iraqi
    Embassy in the United Kingdom.   Mr  Ahmad  said  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision  did  not  indicate  clearly  how  it  thought  the
    Appellant would be able to obtain a replacement CSID.

11. In relation to internal relocation, Mr Ahmad submitted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal's consideration and reasoning  on  this  was  inadequate,
    with a failure to apply the sliding  scale.   The  Appellant  would  be
    returned to Baghdad but in paragraphs 36 and 37 of  the  decision,  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeared  to  be  unclear  on  this  or  where  the
    Appellant was from.  The Appellant's oral evidence was that he was from
    Kirkuk (there was no written or documentary evidence as  to  this)  and
    that he had moved to  Baghdad  with  his  family  in  2002.   Mr  Ahmad
    submitted that despite living in Baghdad for approximately 7 years, his
    return there would still be a matter of internal relocation because  it
    is not the Appellant's original home area.   The  Appellant  relied  on
    objective evidence about ISIL  relevant  to  a  return  to  Baghdad  or
    Kirkuk.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Isherwood opposed  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that there was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and emphasised that permission had not been granted
    on any of the matters on which the First-tier Tribunal had rejected the
    core of the Appellant's claim or against any of the adverse credibility
    findings made.

13. On the basis that the Appellant had lived in Baghdad for  a  number  of
    years prior to leaving Iraq, Ms Isherwood questioned whether  this  was
    really a case where the sliding scale as to internal relocation  really
    applied and noted that there is nothing to suggest the  Appellant  ever
    put his  case  on  this  basis  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In
    paragraph 36 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal notes that  there
    is a lack of information and evidence as to where the Appellant is from
    in Iraq and in relation to return to Baghdad, paragraph  37  notes  the
    lack of evidence about the Appellant's likely circumstances  on  return
    there.  The First-tier Tribunal found that there was no reason why  the
    Appellant could not return to Kirkuk and there was no evidence  of  any
    ongoing  ISIL  involvement  there;  nor  did  the  Appellant  have  any
    association with ISIL.

14. Overall, Ms Isherwood submitted that the burden of  proof  was  on  the
    Appellant and even to the lower standard, there was simply  a  lack  of
    evidence supporting his claim before the First-tier Tribunal.

Findings and reasons

 1. There is some degree of confusion in the first part of the  Appellant's
    ground of appeal upon which permission was granted, which Mr Ahmad  was
    unable to properly clarify  at  the  hearing.   It  is  said  that  the
    Appellant is from Kirkuk but the complaint in  the  grounds  refers  to
    internal relocation to Kirkuk.  However, on the Appellant's case,  this
    would be a return to his home  area  and  not  internal  relocation  as
    understood in the context of a protection claim, which  could  only  be
    applicable to Baghdad or elsewhere (such as the IKR on the basis of the
    Appellant's Kurdish ethnicity).

 2. The grounds and the grant of permission however refer  to  the  sliding
    scale and factors identified in SMO that may be relevant when assessing
    whether an individual can safely return  to  a  former  contested  area
    within the context of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  and
    refer, at least in part to Kirkuk as opposed to  Baghdad;  as  well  as
    general matters which may be relevant to either location.

 3. The case as put to the First-tier Tribunal appears to have been equally
    unclear, referring, for example, in the skeleton argument  to  internal
    relocation,  application  of  SMO  and  other  generic  factors  as  to
    relocation without clearly identifying where the Appellant was from (it
    being accepted there was no documentary or  written  evidence  of  this
    before the First-tier Tribunal) or where it was proposed  he  would  be
    returned to.

 4. The Respondent's reasons for refusal letter includes,  in  relation  to
    Article 15(c) that the Appellant is not at risk on  return  because  of
    the general country situation (save  for  the  small  mountainous  area
    north of Baiji in Salah  al-Din)  nor  because  he  has  an  actual  or
    perceived association with ISIL nor any personal association with local
    or national government or security apparatus, nor  any  association  to
    western organisations or security forces, nor because he has spent time
    in the west (matters which would be relevant to a return  to  a  former
    contested area).  Further, consideration was given to  the  Appellant's
    return to Baghdad, noting that  the  Appellant  had  lived  there  with
    immediate family members who could support him  and  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh to return to Baghdad, nor would there be any problems with
    feasibility of returning there due to a lack of CSID.

 5. The previous First-tier Tribunal decision of Judge  Baird,  promulgated
    on 3 July 2009 records the Appellant's evidence that he lived in Kirkuk
    as a child and moved to Baghdad in 2002; however there were no findings
    in that decision as to  where  his  home  area  was  nor  any  specific
    reference as to where he would be returned to.  The overall  conclusion
    in dismissing the appeal was simply on the basis that the Appellant had
    not established his credibility or the truthfulness of his  claim  such
    that he would not be at risk on return.

 6. Against this backdrop, the First-tier Tribunal found as follows:

         "36. I cannot say whether the Appellant comes from Baghdad,  Kirkuk
         or elsewhere in Iraq.  This has not been addressed in the documents
         that I have before me.  All I am able  to  say  is  what  has  been
         accepted by  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  is  of  Kurdish
         ethnicity and is a citizen of Iraq.


         37.  If the Appellant is from Baghdad he will be returned there.  I
         note that he claims to have lived next door to a maternal uncle but
         he adduces no evidence as to  what  might  have  happened  to  this
         uncle.  It may be that on return the  Appellant  can  make  contact
         with him.


         38.  If the Appellant is from Kirkuk there is no reason why  he  is
         unable to return there, given I am satisfied for the reasons that I
         give above he will be able to obtain the appropriate  documentation
         to allow him to  travel.   I  have  been  referred  to  no  country
         information to show that ISIL  have  ongoing  activity  there.   In
         fact, I was referred  to  none  of  the  country  information  that
         appears in the Appellant's Bundle."


 7. Whilst it is clear on the face  of  the  decision  that  there  was  no
    specific finding as to where  the  Appellant  was  from  in  Iraq,  the
    reasons for that are also clear in paragraph 36 and the  Appellant  has
    not been able to identify any evidence that was before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  as  to  where  he  was  from,  save  for  his  representative
    submitting that in oral evidence he stated he came from  Kirkuk  (which
    is not referred to in the decision and is not supported by  the  record
    of proceedings).  On the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, there
    is no error in law in failing to make a specific finding  as  to  where
    the Appellant was from in Iraq, he had  simply  failed  to  submit  any
    evidence on this or establish his case.

 8. In these circumstances, it was appropriate for the First-tier  Tribunal
    to assess the  different  possibilities  for  the  Appellant's  return,
    either to Kirkuk or Baghdad, and later in the decision the IKR is  also
    considered  as  a  possible  option.   In  the  first   instance,   the
    Appellant's appeal in relation to the First-tier Tribunal's  assessment
    of return to Kirkuk could not be a material  error  of  law  given  the
    unchallenged finding in paragraph 37 that he could  return  to  Baghdad
    (the Respondent's proposed place  of  return),  a  city  where  he  has
    previously lived with family  members  and  in  the  context  of  wider
    findings about the Appellant having contact with them and that  he  has
    or would be able to obtain a replacement CSID (which  for  the  reasons
    set out below was not an error of law either).

 9. In any event, I find no error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of the Appellant's return to Kirkuk  when  the  decision  is
    read as a whole.  In the Appellant's grounds  of  appeal  a  number  of
    specific factors are relied upon by reference to the factors set out in
    SMO but all have  essentially  been  considered  within  the  decision.
    First, the Appellant refers to ongoing ISIL activity in Kirkuk, but  as
    recorded in paragraph 38, there was simply no evidence of  this  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (and  none  identified  before  me  either).
    Secondly, the Appellant's claimed association with ISIL  was  expressly
    considered and rejected by the First-tier Tribunal, see paragraphs  22,
    23, 33 and 34  of  the  decision  together  with  the  earlier  adverse
    credibility findings of Judge  Baird  in  2009  on  this  part  of  the
    Appellant's claim.   Thirdly,  the  Appellant's  Kurdish  ethnicity  is
    expressly considered in paragraph 35 of the decision, with a  reference
    to the lack of evidence of any risk of being targeted for this  reason.
    Fourthly, the Appellant  was  found  in  2009  and  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  more  recently  not  have  any  associations   with   Western
    organisations or security forces.  Finally, the factors referred to  in
    SMO are specific to women and children without  family  support  rather
    than the availability of family support per se, but in any event  there
    are clear findings in paragraph 31 in  particular  that  the  Appellant
    does have contact details for his family and in paragraph 30 that he is
    in contact with a paternal uncle  in  Germany.   Overall,  the  factors
    relied upon in the grounds of appeal were all considered and  expressly
    rejected by the First-tier Tribunal and as such, applying  the  sliding
    scale in SMO, it was  entirely  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    conclude that there was no reason why the Appellant is unable to return
    to Kirkuk.

10. As to the second part of the ground of appeal, the grounds appear to be
    more of a reassertion of the Appellant's claim rather than  identifying
    any error in the First-tier Tribunal's decision; shown by not least  by
    being in essence a copy and paste of the skeleton  argument  previously
    submitted.  The Appellant's case before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    that he did not have a CSID card and could  not  obtain  a  replacement
    because he does not know where his family are.  The only  new  evidence
    as to his family was in relation to the Appellant's approach to the Red
    Cross and his attendance at the Iraqi Embassy; both of which have  been
    dealt with expressly in the decision in paragraphs 24, 26 and 28 to  31
    and the Appellant has not been  granted  permission  to  challenge  the
    assessment of this evidence or the finding that he did  and  does  have
    contact details for his family.

11. In circumstances where the Appellant has been  found  to  have  contact
    details for his family and is in contact with  a  male  member  of  his
    family, in accordance with the guidance in SMO and in combination  with
    the findings as to the Appellant's  claimed  attendance  at  the  Iraqi
    Embassy; it was entirely open to the First-tier Tribunal to  find  that
    would be able to obtain a replacement CSID if he did not  already  have
    one.  The Appellant has simply failed to establish that he has made any
    reasonable efforts to obtain his CSID or a replacement; nor  identified
    any specific reason for him being unable to do so given  the  rejection
    of  his  claim  not  to  know  the  whereabouts  of  his  family.   For
    completeness, given the nature of the findings in the present  decision
    about family contact, the conclusions are unaffected by the remittal of
    SMO to the Upper Tribunal by the Court of Appeal on the specific  point
    about whether an individual would be able to recall  details  of  their
    own family book entry.

12. For these reasons there is no error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   G Jackson                           Date         14th April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

