
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00389/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2018                            |On 21 November 2018           |
|                                                |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                    [E K]
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Farrell, Solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Zimbabwe  born  in  1981.   He  appeals
    against a decision of the respondent made on 6 December 2017 to  refuse
    his claim for asylum and on human rights grounds.

 2. The basis of his claim is that he fears persecution  because  he  is  a
    deserter from the Zimbabwean Army and because he is homosexual.  He has
    been  diagnosed  as  HIV  positive  and  is  receiving  anti-retroviral
    medication in the UK which would not be available in  Zimbabwe.   As  a
    result his life expectancy might be reduced.

 3. The basis of the refusal is that his claim to have been in the army was
    not believed.  His claim to be gay was "vague and lacking in detail".

 4. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Glasgow on 12 February 2018, Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Kempton dismissed the appeal on asylum and  human  rights
    grounds.

 6. She noted at paragraph [5]  that  the  appellant  did  not  attend  the
    hearing, nor did a representative.  She proceeded to hear a "very brief
    submission" from the Presenting Officer who, as well as relying on  the
    refusal letter, said that the appellant did not  attend  for  his  last
    reporting session on 20 December 2017 when he was due to be served  the
    refusal decision.

 7. In going on to consider the merits of the case the judge began:

           "20.  The appellant failed to attend his hearing.  There  is  no
                 suggestion that the decision  sent  to  him  has  not  been
                 received by him.  No letters have been returned by the Post
                 Office from his address.


           21.   The appellant has simply failed to fully engage  with  the
                 asylum process.  He did not attend for reporting.   He  has
                 not instructed a representative on his behalf.  He did  not
                 attend court for this hearing or submit  any  statement  of
                 evidence  or  other  evidence  on  his  behalf.   The  only
                 information which I have from the appellant is contained in
                 his grounds of appeal, which  does  not  really  assist  in
                 assessing his overall credibility.  The appeal was in  fact
                 listed as a paper appeal."


 8. The judge found that the appellant has the HIV virus for  which  he  is
    being treated.  There was a lack of evidence as to the availability  of
    his current or of alternative medication in Zimbabwe.

 9. She went on at [24]:

           "While the appellant may fear return to Zimbabwe for a number of
           reasons, he has  not  presented  himself  either  to  be  cross-
           examined or with a written statement of evidence setting out his
           full position in response to the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.
           His grounds of appeal are inadequate to form a claim for asylum.
            He refers to losing his social situation and economic situation
           in Zimbabwe but there is no reason for that  to  affect  him  in
           relation to  the  Refugee  Convention.   There  is  no  external
           evidence to back up his claim to be gay."


10. Further,  at  [25]  she  found  that  while  he  claimed  to  be  in  a
    relationship no witness statement had been provided  or  details  given
    "so his evidence cannot be tested either".  Having  HIV  "may  indicate
    that he is gay, but it is not definitive."

11. She concluded "... his sexuality has  not  been  proved  to  the  lower
    standard on the basis of the scant evidence before me."

12. He sought permission to appeal which was refused.  It was granted on 22
    May 2018 on renewal to the Upper Tribunal.

    Error of law hearing

13. The appellant attended before us.

14. The crux of the grounds, reiterated before us by Mrs Farrell, was  that
    the appellant, who had sought the matter be dealt with "on papers", did
    not receive the notice dated 25 January 2018 directing him to  lodge  a
    statement and submissions by 9 February 2018.  The address  the  notice
    was sent to is that  of  Waverley  Care  in  Edinburgh  which  provides
    accommodation for vulnerable and destitute persons such as him.  He did
    not stay there and  the  arrangement  he  had  with  them  to  pass  on
    correspondence did not happen.  His claimed "failure to engage with the
    process" was not his fault.

15. Mr Govan did not oppose the submission that the decision to proceed  by
    the judge showed procedural unfairness such that the case must be heard
    again.

16. We agreed.

17. It is clear that despite the respondent's claim that the appellant  did
    not receive the refusal decision because he  failed  to  report  on  20
    December 2017 he nonetheless received  it  at  some  point  because  he
    lodged an appeal against it.

18. The administrative history thereafter shows  unfortunate  mistakes.  On
    the appeal form he intimated that he wished the matter to be dealt with
    "on papers", that is, without an  oral  hearing.   Whether  or  not  an
    appeal may be dealt with or without an oral  hearing  is  a  matter  of
    discretion for the Tribunal. It was noted that as the appellant's claim
    involved asylum and the respondent wished to be heard the  case  should
    be listed for oral hearing.  However, the notice that was sent  to  the
    appellant on 25 January 2018 was the wrong notice. It should have  been
    a "Notice of Hearing" which goes on to state the date and time  of  the
    hearing and the address  of  the  hearing  centre.  It  adds  that  the
    appellant should arrive 15 minutes prior to the hearing.

19. Instead, the notice sent on 25 January 2018 states "You have  indicated
    that you want the appeal to be decided without a hearing." It  goes  on
    "The Tribunal may determine the appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  appeal
    documents together with any further written evidence or submissions you
    may wish to make." It continues by stating  that  any  further  written
    evidence or submissions that he may wish to make must  be  received  by
    the hearing centre by 9 February 2018. It concludes  "If  you  have  no
    further evidence or submissions, no action  from  you  is  required...A
    copy of the Tribunal's decision on the appeal will be sent  to  you  in
    due course."

20. The appellant claims that he did  not  receive  that  notice  dated  25
    January 2018.  Mr Govan did not dispute that the address  to  which  it
    was sent is that of Waverley Care, a postal address for a charity whose
    work includes accommodation for the homeless.  Nor did he  dispute  the
    appellant's claim that at that time he was not residing there and  that
    the notice was not forwarded to him.

21. Even if he had received it, as indicated it was not a notice to  attend
    for the hearing of his appeal but a direction for him, if he wished, to
    lodge further evidence or submissions by  9  February  2018,  with  the
    appeal to be determined at some date thereafter on the papers without a
    hearing.  In other words, no intimation was given to the appellant that
    an oral hearing was to be heard.

22. The error of the judge was in failing to note that no  notice  of  oral
    hearing had been sent to the appellant.  There was no  lawful  service.
    That such was a material error is  because  she  received  submissions,
    albeit brief, from the Presenting Officer, and the appellant through no
    fault of his own was deprived of the opportunity of attending to  speak
    on his own behalf.

23. In summary, the judge committed a procedural  irregularity  capable  of
    making a material difference to the outcome or fairness of proceedings.

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of
    this case is such that it is appropriate under  section  12(2)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2
    to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh  hearing.  No
    findings stand. The member(s) of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  chosen  to
    consider the case are not to include Judge Kempton.


Signed                                             Date 16 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
