
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00925/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th July 2019                    |On 19th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by [HA] against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hussain to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse her Protection Claim arising from a  claimed  risk
    of serious at the hand of her husband should she return to Pakistan.

 2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's current Protection Claim on 10th
    January 2019.  She had  previously  made  a  Protection  Claim  on  6th
    September 2013, based essentially on the same grounds  as  her  current
    claim.  Her previous claim had been refused on 6th  February  2014  and
    her appeal against that decision was dismissed by Judge O'Garro on  9th
    April 2014.  The claim made on 10th January 2019  was  partially  based
    upon fresh evidence.  An important part of that fresh  evidence  was  a
    medical report. The author of that report concluded that the  Appellant
    was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). It is  common
    ground before me that this fact meant that the Tribunal was required to
    treat the Appellant as a 'vulnerable witness'.

 3. I deal firstly with the decision of Judge Hussain.  Quite  rightly,  he
    took as his starting point the earlier findings of Judge O'Garro.  What
    Judge Hussain said about those earlier  findings  is  contained  within
    paragraphs 34 to 36 of his decision:-

         "34. In between paragraphs 8 to 16 [of Judge  O  Garro's  decision]
             the judge in admirable clarity  sets  out  the  basis  of  the
             Appellant's claim which is the  same  as  before  the  present
             Tribunal, save of course for the evidence that was not  before
             that judge.  Inbetween paragraphs 7 to 24, she  sets  out  the
             case for the Respondent.  In paragraph 27, the  judge  records
             that the Appellant adopted her statement of 13th March 2014 as
             her evidence-in-chief.

         35.  In paragraph 44 the judge records that she  accepts  that  the
             Appellant had an arranged marriage.  However, she rejected the
             Appellant's claim that she was the victim of violence  in  the
             hands of her husband, firstly because, as recorded by  her  in
             paragraph 47 of the determination, the notice  issued  by  the
             Islamic Sharia Council to  the  Appellant's  husband  made  no
             mention of the abuse she now claimed to  have  suffered.   The
             judge  also  in  paragraph  48  commented  adversely  on   the
             inconsistency on the  evidence  relating  to  the  Appellant's
             brother being shot.  In paragraph 52, the  judge  comes  to  a
             clear finding that she is not satisfied that the Appellant has
             proven that her husband  is  violent  and  that  he  has  been
             violent towards her when she lived in Pakistan.  In  paragraph
             53, the judge noted the Appellant's claim that since coming to
             this country she has received  threats  from  her  husband  on
             Facebook and e-mail but she has not provided any  evidence  of
             that.

         36.  In paragraph 54, the judge records the Appellant's claim  that
             her husband has threatened to kill her mother if she  did  not
             give him the details of the Appellant's whereabouts but  there
             is no evidence that he has harmed her  mother  to  date.   The
             judge noted that her mother has written a short  statement  in
             support of the Appellant's appeal where she made no mention of
             being threatened by her son-in-law or of the  Appellant  being
             harmed by him  or  her  son  being  shot  by  the  Appellant's
             husband.   The  judge  makes  an  interesting  observation  in
             paragraph 58, which was that the Appellant not being  divorced
             from her husband, will be returning  there  as  his  wife  and
             therefore there would be no loss of honour on  his  part.   In
             any event, she will be returning to an urban part of  Pakistan
             where there should be no fear of an honour killing."

 4. Before moving on to Judge Hussain's  own  reasons  for  dismissing  the
    appeal, it is necessary to refer to the first ground of appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. This is that the judge erred in law in failing to treat
    the Appellant before him as a vulnerable witness in accordance with the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.  I  confess  that  I  at
    first considered there to be little merit in this ground.   The  reason
    for this was, that whilst the judge undoubtedly failed to state that he
    was treating  the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness,  it  was  not
    immediately apparent to me how or why this had affected the  safety  of
    Judge Hussain's ultimate decision.  This in turn was  because  it  does
    not appear from Judge Hussain's decision that the Appellant  gave  very
    much by way of oral evidence before him, rather, she principally relied
    on a fresh  written  statement  from  her  mother  in  Pakistan  and  a
    psychiatric report concerning her own mental  illness.   Indeed,  Judge
    Hussain does not appear to have made any adverse  credibility  findings
    based on the  oral  testimony  that  the  appellant  gave  before  him.
    Indeed, when I first asked Mr Ahmed what the relevance of the Appellant
    being a vulnerable witness was to Judge Hussain's decision,  he  simply
    referred to the Practice Direction and said that there was no  evidence
    that Judge Hussain had  taken  any  of  the  suggested  steps  that  it
    contains.

 5. However, having reflected on the matter, I am satisfied that whilst the
    vulnerability  of  the  Appellant  was  probably  irrelevant  to  Judge
    Hussain's assessment of the evidence that she gave before him,  it  was
    highly relevant to the adverse credibility findings that Judge  O'Garro
    had made.  This is illustrated by the following.  Firstly, it is  clear
    that Judge O'Garro had placed considerable weight in her findings  upon
    the inconsistencies in the evidence that the appellant had given at the
    hearing before her. By way of example, having highlighted a  particular
    inconsistency about the date of a significant event in the  Appellant's
    narrative, Judge O'Garro continued as follows:-

         "50. In fact I do not find the  Appellant's  explanation  for  this
             inconsistency about the dates credible because I would  expect
             the Appellant to recall the date the incident occurred because
             a close family member was seriously injured by her husband  on
             that date, if the incident did in  fact  occur.   I  find  the
             Appellant's failure to recall the correct date undermines  her
             credibility and has cast doubt on her claim."

 6. The Appellant was given the opportunity before Judge Hussain to explain
    the  inconsistencies  in  her  evidence  before  Judge  O'Garro.   That
    opportunity was afforded to her in cross-examination by the  Presenting
    Officer, and her response to the questions put to her  is  recorded  at
    paragraph 15 of Judge Hussain's decision:-

         "15. In cross-examination, the  Appellant  was  told  that  at  the
             previous hearing she was represented by Mr Burrett.  She  said
             that she did not even know that he was going to represent her.
              Her solicitor was not there.  She had  prepared  a  statement
             before her interview at the Home Office.  She did not  provide
             another for the hearing.  She cannot  remember  what  she  was
             asked.  She  was  frightened  and  panicked.   She  had  never
             appeared before a judge.  Her mental  and  physical  condition
             was bad.  She is much better today.  Then she  was  a  wreck."
             [Emphasis added]

 7. There are two significant things that arise from  the  above.  Firstly,
    and least importantly, is the fact that the Appellant was  stating  she
    felt much better on the day of the hearing before Judge Hussain.  Thus,
    whilst  it  was  accepted  by  Mr  Walker  that   the   appellant   was
    appropriately characterised as a 'vulnerable witness', it may  well  be
    that she was not as vulnerable as she had been  before  Judge  O'Garro.
    However, the principle point is that the Appellant was clearly  seeking
    to explain the inconsistencies in her evidence before Judge O'Garro  by
    reference to her vulnerability at that time.  Indeed, she went  so  far
    as to describe herself as, "a wreck".  In fairness to Judge O'Garro, it
    may be that she was unaware of the Appellant's mental condition at  the
    time she made her adverse credibility findings. However,  it  is  clear
    that Judge Hussain was aware of the situation by the time he heard  the
    appeal before him. Accordingly, even if the  Appellant's  vulnerability
    was not particularly relevant to the credibility of the testimony  that
    she gave before him, it was plainly relevant  in  deciding  the  weight
    attaching to the adverse credibility findings made  by  Judge  O'Garro.
    Moreover, it is clear from the passages I cited at paragraph 3  (above)
    that  Judge  Hussain  placed  considerable  weight  upon  the   adverse
    credibility findings made by Judge O'Garro.  The error of law thus lies
    in Judge Hussain's uncritical acceptance  of  Judge  O'Garro's  adverse
    findings without having  factored  into  his  assessment  of  them  the
    vulnerability of the Appellant at  the  time  when  she  gave  evidence
    before Judge O' Garro.

 8. There are other relatively  minor  errors  in  the  decision  of  Judge
    Hussain. I will deal with  them  briefly  given  that  they  would  not
    individually have led to me exercising  discretion  to  set  aside  his
    decision.  These essentially arise from the judge's assessment  of  the
    credibility of the contents of a written statement by  the  Appellant's
    mother on the basis his  own  supposed  knowledge  of  the  social  and
    cultural norms of Pakistan.  It is not always clear whether  the  judge
    is referring to his own personal experience or to evidence he has heard
    in other appeals.  In either case, it is an error of law to  take  such
    matters into account.  Subject  to  an  exception  concerning  reported
    Country Guidance Cases, decisions must be based solely and  exclusively
    upon the evidence heard in the proceedings to which they relate.

 9. The first example of the judge falling into error in this  way  can  be
    found at paragraph 40.  The judge had earlier referred to what appeared
    to be a notice, dated 2nd January 2018, in which the Appellant's mother
    purportedly wrote to a police station alleging  that,  on  1st  January
    2018, the Appellant's husband came  with  three  gangster  friends  and
    tried to enter the house forcefully.  At paragraph 40, the  judge  made
    the following comment about that letter:-

         "Having read this letter the conclusion is inescapable that it is a
         self-serving document.  Firstly it does not have any of the markers
         that one has become accustomed to  seeing  in  terms  of  documents
         placed before the police as a first complaint.  Such  documents  in
         Pakistan are typically known as FIRs and this  particular  document
         does not have any of the bearings of such a document."

10. It is far from clear on what evidential basis Judge Hussain found  that
    complaints in Pakistan are typically  known  as  'FIRs',  or  that  the
    document in question did not have  any  of  the  "markers"  of  such  a
    document, given that he does not refer to any evidence that was  before
    him in order to support that finding. On the contrary,  he  appears  to
    base  his  finding  upon  that  to  which  he  says  he  has,   "become
    accustomed".

11. The other lesser example relates to  the  'fatwa'  that  the  appellant
    claimed had been issued against her.  The judge did not find the  fatwa
    to be a credible document.  One of the reasons that he gave appears  at
    paragraph 45:-

         "What makes this evidence incredible is the fact that although  the
         punishment referred to is sanctioned by Islamic law, it has  to  be
         executed by the state which is not  done  in  Pakistan."  [Emphasis
         added]

    What the judge says in the passage that I have emphasised  may  or  may
    not be right. However, any such finding must ultimately be  based  upon
    the evidence, and the judge fails to refer to  any  evidence  that  was
    before him in order to support such a finding.

12. For all the above reasons, taken cumulatively, I  have  concluded  that
    this decision should be set aside and that none of the findings of  the
    First-tier Tribunal should be preserved.   That  being  the  case,  the
    matter will  have  to  be  heard  afresh  by  another  judge.   I  have
    considered whether it  would  be  appropriate  for  me  to  remake  the
    decision in the Upper Tribunal. However, given  that  this  appeal  now
    requires to be determined afresh - subject only to  appropriate  weight
    being placed upon the extant findings of Judge O'Garro - it seems to me
    appropriate to remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard
    by any judge other than Judge Hussain.

Notice of Decision

13. The appeal is allowed.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  is  set
    aside.

15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  afresh
    before any Judge other Judge Hussain.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 15th July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
