

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/00545/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 12 October 2016                       |on 19 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     L L
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Price, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clough, dismissing her appeal  against  refusal  of  recognition  as  a
    refugee from China.

 2. The appellant's grounds are as follows.

      A. Error in application of the general rules to the particular factual
      situations that define  the  frontiers  of  the  legal  rule  and  its
      practical scope.

      The judge states at paragraph 10 that she does  not  accept  that  the
      appellant was  a  Roman  Catholic  as  the  appellant  had  a  sketchy
      knowledge of the faith. The judge was provided with  UNHCR  guidelines
      ... and Zhang v Canada ... Both the UNHCR guidelines and Zhang make it
      clear that extensive knowledge or testing of knowledge of religion  is
      not necessary  or  useful  in  assessing  whether  or  not  person  is
      religious... The judge has failed to apply the .. guidance  ...   when
      assessing the credibility of the  appellant,  and  instead  based  her
      negative decision on credibility on lack of knowledge.

      The judge also  applies  ...  QH  China  CG  [2014]  UKUT  86  ...  at
      paragraphs 11 and 12 ... and finds that  even  if  the  appellant  has
      credible she is not in danger in China...  The  judge  has  failed  to
      assess  or  consider  the  additional  risk  factors...  outlined   at
      paragraphs 134 (links to international groups, i.e. the Roman Catholic
      Church based in Rome,  Italy,  Europe)  and  135  (socio-economic  and
      educational profile, in particular her original immigration status  in
      the UK as a student) of the relevant country guidance.  If  the  judge
      has considered and applied this, then there is no reference at all  as
      to the findings made no reasons are given as to why to said that there
      is no danger to the appellant in light of the enhanced risk categories
      in play...

      B. Error where a tribunal makes  a  finding  for  which  there  is  no
      evidence or which is inconsistent with the evidence and  contradictory
      of it.

      At paragraph 14 the judge makes a finding that the appellant will face
      civil penalties in China. However, at paragraph 18  the  judge  states
      that there are no obstacles to the appellant's integration into  China
      with her family. These are contradictory findings in  fact  that  have
      not been reconciled. That are civil penalties that the appellant  must
      face then clearly the obstacles  to  her  re-establishing  a  life  in
      China.

 3. In a written response under rule 24 the respondent argues as follows.

      The  respondent  provided  a  number  of  reasons  for  rejecting  the
      appellant's claim to have converted to Roman  Catholicism...  outlined
      at paragraph 7 of the determination and,  in  any  event,  matters  of
      which  the  appellant  was  fully  aware.  It  is   clear   from   the
      determination  at  paragraph  10  that  the  judge  has  reviewed  the
      respondent's reasoning and has adopted it.

      This was an approach open to  the  judge...  judges  are  required  to
      provide brief and clear reasons to explain to  the  parties  why  they
      have won or lost. This is what the judge has done

      It was ... open  to  the  judge  to  reject  the  credibility  of  the
      appellant's conversion. The judge  considered  the  appellant  in  the
      alternative that she was a convert but rejected  her  contention  that
      she would behave in such a way as to bring itself into conflict  [with
      the authorities] for the reasons given paragraph 12.

      The judge has found that the appellant's problems as a result  of  the
      birth of her child would be a civil matter and has followed  AX  China
      CG [2012] UKUT 97 which on examination does not indicate a  real  risk
      to the appellant.

      There is no contradiction between a person [facing] civil penalties in
      China and  the  being  no  problem  to  integration.  There  is  no...
      evidence... that failure to comply  with  civil  law  [is]  a  bar  to
      reintegration.

      The  grounds  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  clear   well-reasoned
      findings.

 4. The appellant replies in writing under rule 25 along the lines that the
    appellant's limited knowledge is the only reason  given  for  rejecting
    her conversion, which does not explain why the decision went the way it
    did, and is  an  error  of  law;  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    additional risk factors in terms of QH and the facts of this case;  and
    that civil penalties are obstacles  to  reintegration,  such  that  the
    judge's findings are self-contradictory.

 5. Mr Bryce submitted along the same lines as the written  pleadings.  The
    judge's only reasons for finding  the  appellant  not  to  be  a  Roman
    Catholic were at paragraph 10. That amounted to the limitations of  her
    religious knowledge, and adoption of the reasoning of the Secretary  of
    State, summarised at paragraph 7. The respondent's decision in turn was
    based only on lack of knowledge.  It is well established  that  limited
    knowledge of religion is not  a  good  guide  to  rejecting  a  claimed
    conversion. The decision was reached on  an  unsound  basis.  Ground  A
    showed secondly that the  judge  failed  to  consider  additional  risk
    factors. Ground B identified contradictory findings.  The  judge  might
    have said that the civil penalty was  not  a  significant  obstacle  to
    reintegration, but it was not open to her to find that it would  be  no
    obstacle. The test to be addressed was "significant obstacles". Success
    on either grounds of appeal should lead to a remit  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 6.  Mr  Mullen  submitted  that  the  judge's  reasons  were  brief,   but
    nevertheless sufficient. There were clear guidelines on the  danger  of
    using knowledge of religion as a criterion, but these were  only  rules
    of thumb. They were not rules that the degree of knowledge was entirely
    irrelevant; in this case, near to complete ignorance.  It  was  not  an
    error to adopt the reasoning of one party to a case, if that  reasoning
    was self-sufficient. The appellant had provided very little evidence of
    her claim to be a Roman Catholic.  There had been no  attendance  by  a
    church member to support her case. The judge correctly took account  of
    adverse findings made by another judge dealing with the appeal  of  the
    appellant's husband. The appellant was to be removed  only  in  family,
    and had no realistic case on any grounds. The  judge  was  entitled  to
    find no significant obstacle  to  her  reintegration  into  China.  The
    decision should stand.

 7. Mr Price in reply said that although  there  had  been  no  witness  in
    attendance,  several  supporting  statements  were  among  the  written
    evidence. The decision by another judge was admittedly not  irrelevant,
    but it did not affect the need to assess whether there were significant
    obstacles to the reintegration of the appellant.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9. The case should be looked at sensibly in the round.

10. The general risk to professing Christians in China is, as Judge  Clough
    said  at  paragraph  11,  "statistically  negligible".   The  appellant
    professed no activity or intended activity which carried any  realistic
    chance of bringing upon her persecution by the Chinese government.  She
    knew little about  her  religion.   Generous  application  of  relevant
    guidelines, the international status of the Church, and the appellant's
    presence in the UK as a student, could not come near to qualifying  the
    appellant for protection as a refugee on religious grounds.

11. The potential imposition of  a  civil  penalty  does  not  qualify  the
    appellant for protection  on  the  basis  of  Chinese  family  planning
    policy.  It is plainly not a barrier to  reintegration  qualifying  her
    for leave to remain in the UK.

12. The grounds do not amount to more than further insistence on a case  of
    no real underlying substance.  They do not show that the judge erred on
    any point of law, so as to require the decision to be set aside.

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. An anonymity direction  was  made  in  the  FtT.   The  issue  was  not
    addressed in the UT, so that order remains in force, and the  appellant
    is referred to only by initials.


            [pic]


            18 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
