
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00431/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2016                               |On 19 May 2016                |



                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     hr
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  [  ]  1990.   He
    arrived in this country on 7 May 2015 and applied for asylum on 13  May
    2015.  The application was refused on  26  June  2015.   The  appellant
    appealed and his appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 29  July
    2015.  The judge records that the respondent's representative  took  no
    issue with the appellant's employment and work history  and  makes  the
    following findings:

         "13. The appellant is a civil  engineer.   This  is  a  subject  he
             studied at University and undertook practical work  experience
             with Nabil  Faisal  (a  small/medium  sized  company  building
             schools etc.) before working with Road and  Roof  Construction
             Company in Afghanistan as a  trainee  civil  engineer,  having
             been recommended by his university because he was excelling in
             his studies.  The appellant along with many former  university
             students had undertaken work with this company.   They  had  a
             massive contract in building the Gamberi Camp and this is  how
             he originally got his assignment.  His ultimate  ambition  was
             to obtain a job within  the  government  working  as  a  civil
             engineer but to  do  this  he  had  to  obtain  the  necessary
             experience.  In due course he left Road and Roof  Construction
             Company and worked in  the  Finance  Ministry  of  the  Afghan
             government  based  in  Kabul  but  was  required   to   travel
             extensively throughout Afghanistan in relation to his duties.


         14.  The Gamberi project involved a building  of  massive  military
             base and camp for NATO and American  forces.   Obviously  this
             was  against  the  wishes  of  the  Taliban  as   there   were
             significant consequences for  them  and  their  activities  by
             reason  of  the  construction  of  this  camp.   This   cannot
             therefore be described as  any  ordinary  or  normal  type  of
             project.  He undertook this work from within a restricted camp
             secured by barbed wire and there was high security including a
             large balloon in the sky with cameras to check the region  for
             up to 15 kilometres.  Many people were threatened  with  death
             by reason of their involvement in this project; including  the
             appellant.  As a result many, again including  the  appellant,
             left the job.  The appellant was particularly vulnerable as he
             was not housed on the site and he made efforts to help  locals
             get employment on  the  project,  thus  drawing  attention  to
             himself.


         15.  It was known to the Taliban that the appellant was a supporter
             of the government, Americans and NATO forces  in  Afghanistan.
             By working in Laghman Province  the  appellant  was  taking  a
             personal risk because the area is dominated by the  insurgents
             Taliban and other extremists.  He wanted to work and serve his
             people wanted  his  province  one  day  to  become  safer  and
             prosperous he would encourage local people  to  stand  up  and
             fight against violence take part in  rebuilding  the  country.
             He knew the risks and risked his own life as long as he called
             and by reason of his efforts in people to come and work at the
             Camp.


         16.  The Taliban were aware of his employment at Gamberi and he was
             sent a warning letter on 30 January 2013 ordering him to cease
             working  or  face  the  consequences.   A  colleague  of   the
             appellant who had been  trained  by  him  was  killed  by  the
             Taliban and this further encouraged the  appellant  to  leave.
             He was able to get employment thereafter at  the  Ministry  of
             Finance based in Kabul.


         17.   His  duties  with  the  Ministry  meant  he  has  to   travel
             extensively supervising  many  projects  most  of  which  were
             financed by NGOS or directly by NATO or the Americans and this
             further attracted the attention of  the  Taliban  who  sent  a
             further warning letter on 8 April 2014 ordering him  to  sever
             his relationship  with  the  Afghan  government  or  face  the
             consequences.


         18.  The appellant's circumstances whilst working for the  Ministry
             were further aggravated by what he describes as  "the  Mafia".
             These comprised of former warlords who have become part of and
             worked with the Afghani government but who were corrupt in the
             extreme.  The appellant was appointed to a commission  dealing
             with the implementation of a decree made by the  president  of
             Afghanistan which required all unregistered land belonging  to
             ministries to be registered and brought under the  control  of
             the government.  He was required to travel to particular areas
             to find out on the size of the land in question and  in  doing
             so he discovered that some of the land  had  been  annexed  by
             these Mafia people and sold on to others;  it  was  corruption
             which he disapproved of however he was warned, in no uncertain
             terms, that there would be severe consequences for him  if  he
             involved himself in this and that he should  forget  about  it
             altogether as it was something that was well above him.  These
             people operated in Kabul with impunity under General Jurat and
             are very powerful.


         19.  On 2 February 2015, the appellant was sent a further letter by
             the Taliban.  The note stated that he had  not  desisted  from
             working for the government, despite earlier warnings  and  his
             participation in the construction work of border  and  customs
             facilities, funded by the Americans and English was  of  great
             help to them.  The notice concluded "This is our  last  notice
             to you.   Select  your  own  destiny."   Notwithstanding  this
             further threat, the appellant continued with his employment at
             the Ministry.


         20.  On 22 February 2015, whilst driving home from work,  a  Toyota
             vehicle attempted to intercept the appellant.   The  appellant
             noticed it was  being  driven  by  a  man,  accompanied  by  a
             passenger, both of whom were clearly Taliban;  this  could  be
             seen by their attire and full beards.  The appellant attempted
             to get away but they opened fire on his vehicle causing him to
             crash into a ditch.  Fortunately he  was  able  to  get  away.
             Where his mother learned this attack upon him by the  Taliban,
             she succumbed to a heart attack and died.


         21.  The following day, the appellant went to  the  police  seeking
             protection.  His application was supported by the Ministry  of
             Interior  who  wrote  to  the  police  asking  them  to   give
             "appropriate  assistance  and  safety  and  security  of   the
             petitioner and his family."  The police response is set out in
             the appellant's bundle at page 136:


                  "In  general  safety  and  security  of  citizens   is   a
                  fundamental duty of  this  office.   With  regard  to  the
                  multiple security threats to  the  governmental  and  non-
                  governmental  establishments,  key  political  and   high-
                  ranking officials, on  one  hand  and  the  limitation  of
                  resources and equipment on the other  hand,  privation  of
                  police to  you  and  your  family  on  an  individual  and
                  exceptional  basis  is  not  feasible  under  the  current
                  conditions."


         22.  At  this  point  the  appellant  decided  it  was  simply  too
             dangerous to remain  in  Afghanistan  and,  with  funding  and
             assistance from his father, an agent was found who was able to
             take him from Afghanistan using a passport in the  name  Hasib
             Khan.  He was initially flown from Afghanistan to  Turkey  and
             thereafter left Turkey by ship to an unknown country.  In  due
             course he was taken from that country in the rear of a  lorry,
             arriving clandestinely in  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  same
             vehicle.


         23.  The appellant is a professional man who  intends  to  continue
             his profession as a civil engineer.  In Afghanistan  the  only
             employers  he  could  find  relating  to  the  work  that   he
             undertakes are either the  Afghanistan  government  itself  or
             foreign funded NGOS."


2.   Having resolved disputed factual issues the judge observed as follows:

         "30. It is quite clear that the appellant  has  held  high  profile
             appointments both with Road and Roof Construction Company  and
             the Afghani government itself.  It is more than probable  that
             the appellant would have come to the adverse attention of  the
             Taliban in both of these  roles.   His  employment  intimately
             connected him with forces inimical to the  Taliban  who  would
             doubtless regard him as cooperating with 'the enemy' and  what
             they regard as a 'puppet state'.


         31.  When I look at the evidence in the  round,  taking  particular
             account of the overwhelming documentary evidence  relating  to
             the appellant's former employment, the oral  evidence  of  the
             appellant himself and his brother; both of whom I found to  be
             credible witnesses, and applying the appropriate  standard  of
             proof, I accept the account given by the appellant in relation
             to his reasons for leaving  Afghanistan.   For  reasons  given
             below, I find the appellant's credibility is unaffected by any
             statutory requirement."


     The judge was referring to Section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act, 2004.

3.   The judge went on to consider the representations  of  the  parties  on
    the risks on return as follows:

         "33. The respondent's representative referred  me  to  H  and  B  v
             United  Kingdom  70073/10  and  44539/11  and  in   particular
             paragraphs 97 and 98 and submitted that the appellant was  not
             at risk as he would be regarded as a  low  level  collaborator
             and that those who have stopped working for the  international
             community as requested are not targeted.


         34.  At paragraph 55 of H and B, the attitude  of  parties  to  the
             conflict towards civilians is  considered  and  the  "Landinfo
             Report" is quoted:


                  'The Taliban also forbid any kind  of  collaboration  with
                  the  government  and  particularly  with  foreign  troops,
                  including of an economic nature.   Since  contracting  for
                  ISAF or for western  aid  agencies  is  one  of  the  main
                  sources of employment in Afghanistan, the Bangladesh has a
                  major impact  on  the  ability  of  household  to  earn  a
                  livelihood.  Unsurprisingly, most Afghans  ignore  it,  at
                  their risk and peril.  Executions of contractors do occur.
                   Usually the Taliban follow a  procedure,  which  includes
                  warning the collaborationists that they are  going  to  be
                  punished if they persist'.


         35.  Paragraph 99 of H and B  quotes  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  which
             state that persons associated with, or perceived as supportive
             of, the Government and the international community and forces:


                  '...may, depending on the individual circumstances of  the
                  case, be at risk on account of their  (imputed)  political
                  opinion, particularly in areas where armed anti-Government
                  groups are operating or have control'.


         36.  The appellant's representative  submitted  that  this  was  of
             particular application so far as this appellant is  concerned.
             His job takes him out  of  Kabul  and  into  areas  where  the
             Taliban are operating freely.  As  the  appellant  intends  to
             resume his job as a civil engineer, he will be employed by the
             Afghani Government and/or international  NGOs  and  in  either
             instance he would be perceived as a collaborator and indeed as
             a relatively high profile collaborator at that.


         37.  Looking at the evidence in the round, my  conclusion  is  that
             the appellant, if he returned to Afghanistan  would  be  faced
             with a stark choice.  Either he does not resume his occupation
             as civil engineer employed by the Government or NGOs in  which
             instance he would remain in the relative safety of  Kabul  not
             attracting the attention of the  Taliban  or  he  resumes  his
             occupation  and  undertakes  assignments  the   Taliban   have
             expressly  forbade   him   from   undertaking   and   spending
             significant time in areas of Afghanistan recognised as  unsafe
             and under  the  control  of  the  insurgent  forces  facing  a
             significantly heightened degree of risk.


         38.  The appellant's representative referred me to the decision  of
             the President in MSM  v  SSHD  Appeal  No.  AA/00387/2014  and
             submitted that in the light of this decision and the expressed
             determination of the appellant to resume  his  occupation  the
             appellant would be exposed to a real risk of  persecution  and
             that he should not be denied refugee status on the ground that
             it would be open to him to seek to engage in other employment.


         39.  If I was to accept this argument then the appellant  would  be
             entitled to refugee status however I  find  myself  unable  to
             acquiesce to that submission.


         40.  It is settled law that the Refugee Convention does not protect
             a right to pursue a profession of one's  choice;  acknowledged
             in MSM at paragraph 50.  The issue in MSM was  the  nature  of
             the appellant's profession as a journalist  and  it  being  an
             occupation intrinsically entwined with  a  fundamental  right,
             namely; freedom of expression.  In this instance, I  am  sorry
             to say, that there are  no  protected  rights  that  would  be
             violated by the appellant having to desist from his practising
             his profession.


         41.  I find it is open to the appellant to  return  to  Afghanistan
             and to continue living in Kabul with his family  and  that  he
             would avoid coming to the further attention of the Taliban  by
             desisting from  practising  his  profession.   Similarly,  any
             adverse attention he has attracted from the mafia in the  past
             would not occur if he no longer practises his profession."


4.   The judge found that the appellant had not made out his case on  asylum
    or humanitarian protection grounds and there were no  submissions  that
    removal would breach his rights under Article 8.

5.   There was an application for permission  to  appeal  from  the  judge's
    decision and permission to appeal was granted on 1 February 2016 by the
    First-tier Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  judge
    had erred in law in that  he  had  misinterpreted  and  misapplied  the
    principles in MSM.

6.   Mr Chelvan relied on the grounds of appeal and  pointed  out  that  the
    judge had found the appellant to be an entirely credible  witness.   He
    referred to the appellant's statement submitted before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 22 July 2015.  In that statement the appellant had  said
    among other things that he had opposing views to the Taliban and was in
    favour of helping the current government to re-establish  the  country.
    He wanted to support the country's growth and development and he wanted
    it to be successful.  This was why he was working for the government to
    help them and he even helped during the elections for this purpose.  He
    was against all forms of  corruption  and  bribery  and  in  favour  of
    eradicating such practices.  He stated, "for my political views and  my
    employment and work I fear to return to Afghanistan."  The  appellant's
    case in a nutshell had been  summarised  by  the  First-tier  Judge  at
    paragraph 15 of the determination.  The appellant was a businessman and
    his case could be distinguished from the circumstances in MSM.

7.   Mr Bramble referred to  paragraphs  30  and  31  of  the  decision  and
    submitted that the question was clearly focused  around  the  issue  of
    political opinion.  Mr Bramble acknowledged that the case was  not  one
    of imputed but actual political opinion.  The judge had failed to  deal
    with the matters he had set out in paragraph 15 of the decision.

8.   As there was no dispute over the facts the determination could  be  re-
    made without the need for an adjournment.

9.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the judge's decision if  it  was  materially
    flawed in law.  This has helpfully been accepted by Mr Bramble.  It  is
    quite clear from what the judge himself summarised at paragraph 15 that
    it was the appellant's case that there was a political dimension to his
    work.  Mr Chelvan referred  me  to  further  examples  in  his  witness
    statement.  This is a case not of imputed opinion but  actual  opinion.
    Indeed it was known, as the judge observes  in  paragraph  15,  to  the
    Taliban that the appellant was a supporter of the government, Americans
    and NATO forces in Afghanistan.   Counsel  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    refers to paragraph 50 of MSM:

         "We acknowledge at this point the  Secretary  of  State's  argument
         that the Refugee Convention does not protect a right  to  pursue  a
         profession of one's choice.  This is a case of risk arising out  of
         imputed political opinion.  We consider  that  the  fact  that  the
         imputation of the political opinion arises in the  context  of  the
         appellant's chosen profession is immaterial and  incidental.   Thus
         we consider this argument to have no merit."


10.  Mr  Chelvan  submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  misapplied  this
    guidance in paragraph 40  of  the  decision  and  made  the  additional
    submission that this was not a case of imputed political opinion.  This
    was a case of an actual political opinion held  by  the  appellant  and
    following the case of MSM and HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 he could not  be
    subject to "forced modification" of his activities.

11.  Given that the central  argument  that  the  appellant  had  an  actual
    political opinion and that the First-tier Judge had erred  in  the  way
    that he  had  dealt  with  this  important  point  I  can  set  out  my
    conclusions shortly.

12.  This appellant's evidence was accepted in its entirety.   There  was  a
    clear political basis to  the  appellant's  approach  to  the  work  he
    undertook as is accepted by Mr Bramble.  It will not be every appellant
    who can make out an asylum claim as a businessman.  In this case it  is
    clear that he had an actual political opinion  and  the  judge  was  in
    error in finding that there were no  protected  rights  that  would  be
    violated  by  the  appellant  having  to  desist  from  practising  his
    profession.

13.  I was referred to the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal in the case of MSM where it was accepted in paragraph 5
    of the grounds

         "That an applicant cannot be required -  as  a  means  of  avoiding
         persecution - to  modify  his  behaviour  in  the  case  of  actual
         political opinion, the same does not follow where the  modification
         of behaviour is merely to  avoid  the  imputation  of  a  political
         opinion."


14.  As is clear from what I have said and what has been  accepted  in  this
    case the appellant entertains an actual political opinion.

15.  For the reasons I have given the appeal is re-made as follows:

16.  Appeal allowed on asylum grounds.

17.  Appeal dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.

18.  Appeal allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3).

Anonymity Order

19.  The First-tier Judge made an  anonymity  order  in  this  matter.   The
    anonymity order is confirmed and continues.


FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal  any  fee  paid  by  the  appellant  should  be
returned to him.




Signed                                  Date 13 April 2016


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

