
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00741/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 22nd July 2019 On 29th August 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MR S A P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                         SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Murphy, Counsel, instructed by City Heights,
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born in August 1980. He
      came to the United Kingdom on 20 June 2009 on a working holiday Visa.
      This was valid until 2 June 2011. He overstayed and was encountered by
      the respondent's staff on 13 December 2013. He was served with an
      IS151A advising him that he was liable to removal. He remained in the
      United Kingdom and on 6 September 2018 made a claim for protection.

   2. The basis of his claim is that he is at risk if returned because he is
      Gay. He said he became aware of his sexuality in his late teens when
      he had relations with his cousin.

   3. The respondent did not accept his claim was true and had not
      established he was Gay. Reliance was placed upon section 8 of the
      Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004 and the fact
      the appellant did not make his claim until after he was encountered
      and when preparations were being made for his return.

The First tier Tribunal.

   4. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn at Hatton
      Cross on 18 April 2019. The appeal was dismissed.

   5. The judge heard from the appellant and two other witnesses. The judge
      does not set out in any detail the evidence. The judge concluded he
      could live in Bangladesh as he had done before.

   6. The appellant had claimed his uncle was an MP and was in a position to
      cause him difficulties. The judge referred to the absence of evidence
      to confirm this claim and rejected it.

   7. The judge did not find the appellant to be a reliable witness and
      relied upon section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
      Claimants) Act 2004. The judge rejected the appellant's claim that he
      was unaware he could claim protection earlier.

   8. The judge then went on to find the appellant had not established he
      was Gay. In the alternative, by hiding his sexuality he would not be
      at risk in Bangladesh.

The Upper Tribunal

   9. Permission to appeal was granted on a number of grounds, the strongest
      of which was considered to be the failure to apply the principles in
      HJ Iran and the absence of a clear findings as to whether it was
      accepted the appellant was Gay.

  10. At hearing, Ms Cunha accepted there were material errors of law in the
      decision and that it needed to be remade. She referred to the absence
      of clear reasoned findings as to the appellant's sexuality.
      Furthermore, there was no proper consideration of the principles set
      out in HJ Iran.

  11. In light of this concession I did not need to hear further argument
      from Mr Murphy.

  12. I agree with Ms Cunha that the decision cannot stand. There is a lack
      of clear and reasoned findings. The judge rejects the appellant's
      claim to be Gay but there is no real analysis of the claim. Whilst a
      decision need not set out the evidence in any detail it should have a
      basic structure giving details of the claim made and the evidence
      produced so as to follow the assessment of same. Whilst the judge
      rejects the appellant's claim to be Gay there are no reasoned
      findings. The emphasis is upon the circumstances and delay in claiming
      protection. The judge applies a blanket notion that if the appellant
      did not reveal his sexuality he could be returned. There is no
      analysis as to why the appellant might not reveal his sexuality. The
      decision does not indicate an appreciation of the reasoning set out in
      HJ Iran. There is also no clear findings about the appellant's life in
      the United Kingdom and in particular in relation to Mr O'Connor.



Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn materially errs in law and
is set aside. The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a
rehearing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.   Date 27 August 2019



Directions

   1.     Relist for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor
   House excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn.

   2.     A Bengali/Sylhet interpreter is required, as advised by the
   appellant's representative.

   3.     The hearing should not last more than two and a half hours. The
   appellant's representative anticipated the appellant and one witness
   would give evidence.

   Mr Murphy, Counsel, appeared for the appellant at the original hearing
   and is anxious if possible to attend the relisted hearing. He asked
   listing to check with his Chambers [~] to see if this can be facilitated.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.   Date 27 August 2019

