
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/00547/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Video                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2020                           |On 22 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     AD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Saad of Aman Solicitors Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 29 April 2020 of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Labasci which refused the  appellant's  asylum  and
    human rights appeals brought against a decision of the respondent dated
    6 January 2020.

 2. The appellant is a Palestinian resident in Lebanon.   He  was  born  in
    2000.  The appellant came to the UK  on  30  August  2017  and  claimed
    asylum.  As above, the respondent refused that claim on 6 January 2020.
     The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Labasci  on  6  March
    2020 and was dismissed on 29 April 2020.  On 28 May 2020 the First-tier
    Tribunal granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant's asylum claim maintained that he was born and grew up in
    the Al-Rashidya refugee camp in Lebanon. He  stated  that  in  2017  he
    joined the Ansarullah organisation in his refugee camp as he understood
    from friends that he could earn approximately $300 a month for carrying
    out work for the organisation within  the  camp.  Unbeknownst  to  him,
    Ansarullah were affiliated  to  Hezbollah  and  were  looking  to  send
    recruits to train and fight on the frontline in Syria.   The  appellant
    underwent initial training during  which  there  was  no  reference  to
    military service and initially only undertook some guard duties for the
    organisation.  After approximately a month, however,  he  was  told  to
    report to a military training camp at the beginning of August 2017  and
    told that he would then be deployed to fight in Syria.   The  appellant
    realised he had made a mistake, discussed the matter  with  his  family
    and went into hiding in July 2017 with a  maternal  aunt.   His  father
    made arrangements for him  to  leave  the  country.   In  the  meantime
    Ansarullah raided his family home on 30 July 2017 and  1  August  2017,
    looking for him to take him away by force.  The appellant  claims  that
    he left Lebanon on 3 August 2017, arriving in the UK on 30 August  2017
    and claiming asylum the same day.

 4. In support of his claim, the appellant provided two  reports  from  the
    Popular Committee of the Palestinian Liberation Organisation  (PLO)  in
    the Al-Rashidya camp.  He maintained that these documents supported his
    account of his  being  wanted  by  Ansarullah.   He  also  submitted  a
    statement from his father corroborating his claim.  The appellant  also
    relied on country evidence relating to the manner in which  Palestinian
    refugee camps in Lebanon are administered, relying in particular on the
    respondent's Country Policy and  Information  Note  entitled  "Lebanon:
    Palestinians" issued in June 2018.  He also relied on a  document  from
    the  Danish  Immigration  Service  and  Landinfo  entitled   "Stateless
    Palestinian Refugees in Lebanon" issued on 3 November 2014.

 5. The  First-tier  Tribunal  said  this  regarding  these  parts  of  the
    appellant's evidence in paragraphs 38 to 42 of the decision:

         "38. The Appellant explains, in his statement, that in  preparation
             for his asylum claim he tried to obtain evidence and  this  is
             why  his  father  went  to  the  Popular  Committees  of   the
             Palestinian  Liberation  Organisation  at   his   camp.    The
             Appellant claims they already had records of the events  which
             had taken place because they obtained  this  information  from
             members throughout the camp.  He says these members report any
             incidents that take place, these events are  then  documented.
             Although the letters are dated for when  the  information  was
             formally requested by the Appellant/his father this is because
             reports are not provided automatically.   A  request  must  be
             made and then the committees  confirm/check  the  events  took
             place with their record and members, only after this will they
             provide the report/letters.

         39.  I only  have  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  support  of  his
             contention that the  Popular  Committees  of  the  Palestinian
             Liberation Organisation in his  camp  have  a  record  of  any
             incident which takes place  on  the  camp.   Contrary  to  the
             Appellant's evidence, I do not find  it  credible,  given  the
             size of the camp, that every event would be reported and  then
             recorded by the PLO.

         40.  The Appellant relies on a statement, dated  13  November  2017
             (the same day as the PLO reports), from his  father  in  which
             his father states that Ansarullah raided his home on  30  July
             and 1 August 2017 looking for the Appellant.   This  statement
             refers to a warning given by the leader of the group but  does
             not mention the repeated harassments referred to in one of the
             PLO reports.  Furthermore, there is no mention in the father's
             statement of an incident which occurred on 28/10/2017 which is
             the date  referred  to  in  the  PLO  report.   The  fact  the
             Appellant's father's statement  is  dated  after  the  alleged
             incidents is not a reason, on  its  own,  for  placing  little
             weight on the evidence.  This is a  feature  of  many  witness
             statements in the Tribunals and courts.  However, clearly  the
             Appellant's father is not an impartial witness.

         41.  Whether or  not  the  PLO  reports  and  Appellant's  father's
             statement were written by the PLO and the Appellant's father I
             find, for the reasons stated above, that I  can  place  little
             weight on them given the circumstances of this case.

         42.   I  accept  that  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  account   are
             consistent with the objective evidence  which  he  has  relied
             upon and I  have  taken  this  into  account  in  reaching  my
             conclusions.  However, having regard to all  the  evidence  in
             this case and in particular to the  findings  I  have  already
             made, I find the Appellant's credibility has been damaged  and
             I do not accept he has given a truthful account of his reasons
             for leaving Lebanon.  I find the Appellant wanted to join  his
             brother and uncle in the UK and this is what motivated him  to
             leave and travel to the UK.  I conclude  the  Appellant  would
             not be at risk of harm by Ansarullah if he returned to the Al-
             Rashidya Refugee Camp in Lebanon".

 6. The appellant's ground of challenge to the Upper  Tribunal  is  narrow.
    It focuses on paragraph 39 of the decision where  the  judge  concludes
    that it is only the appellant's uncorroborated  evidence  that  reports
    from the PLO Popular Committee such as those  he  relied  on  would  be
    available.  The appellant maintains that that finding was erroneous  as
    it failed to take into account country evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  in  the  CPIN  and  the  Danish  Immigration  Service  Report
    specifically on the role of  the  authorities  within  the  Palestinian
    refugee camps in Lebanon.

 7. The appellant relied in particular on paragraph 8.2.1 and 8.2.2 of  the
    CPIN which reads as follows:

         "The Popular Committees act to create  and  enforce  the  paralegal
         system that exists in each camp and co-operate with UNRWA and other
         aid agencies in administering and servicing the camp.  They are not
         democratic - members represent their faction (and  their  factions'
         interests),  not  those  of  their   constituents.    The   Popular
         Committees are a means with which to resolve  problems  that  arise
         between individuals belonging to different factions.   The  Popular
         Committees are also  the  chief  contact  point  for  the  Lebanese
         Government".

    Paragraph 8.2.2 states:

         "'When a fugitive believed to be located in a  camp  is  wanted  by
         Lebanese security forces, the latter sometimes negotiate  with  the
         camp's Popular Committees to have them  handed  over.   This  is  a
         complicated and not-always-successful  process,  which  is  largely
         dependent on the fugitive's factional connections within  the  camp
         and how strong that faction is".

 8. The Danish Immigration Service  Report  in  paragraph  1.1.31  provides
    similar information about how the camps are administered.  It states:

         "Regarding the popular committees, Mahmoud M. Abbas (CYC) explained
         that by the Cairo Agreement of 1969, each camp was made responsible
         for administration and governance within the camps. Hereby the  PLO
         establish Popular Committees which were  tasked  to  take  care  of
         daily life in  the  camps  including  administration  of  finances,
         security and social services".

    The report goes on in the same paragraph:

         "The source added that the popular committees still have a role  to
         play in the camps, however they are now divided since the Hamas and
         Fatah division (in 2007).  In reality, there  are  several  popular
         committees and they are often weak, with little funds and no  legal
         basis.   Although  the  popular  committees  are  not  capable   of
         providing protection or run services for the  Palestinians  in  the
         camps, Mahmoud M Abbas (CYC) considered that the  committees  still
         do play a role".

    The report goes on to state that the committees "may also try to settle
    conflicts within the camps but have no real  authority  to  govern  and
    make decisions".

 9. The appellant maintains that this evidence  was  capable  of  providing
    objective  support  for  his  account  of  the  PLO  Popular  Committee
    providing a report corroborating his account of his difficulties in the
    Al-Rashidya Camp and the threat to him from  Ansarullah.  He  maintains
    that this  failure  to  consider  this  potentially  material  evidence
    undermined the finding on his credibility. He also maintains  that  the
    judge's comments on  the  reliability  of  his  father's  statement  in
    paragraph 41 are  undermined  where  weight  was  not  placed  on  this
    document  "for the reasons stated above", that is,   the  judge's  view
    that there was nothing to show that the Popular Committee could provide
    the reports provided by the appellant,

10. The respondent  defended  the  appellant's  grounds,  maintaining  that
    although the judge did appear to have overlooked the  country  material
    supporting the appellant's account of how the refugee camp was run  and
    the ability of the PLO Popular Committee to provide the kind of  report
    on which he sought to  rely,  within  the  findings  as  a  whole  this
    omission was not material.  The respondent  sought  to  argue  that  in
    paragraph 39 the Judge did not state that there was no evidence on  the
    kind of administration in the camps claimed by the appellant  but  that
    he found that there was no evidence that the  Popular  Committee  would
    not have records to the level of detail alleged by the appellant.   The
    respondent's representative also referred to the findings in  paragraph
    36 of the decision which concern findings that the appellant's  account
    of the basis of his claim when given to the Border Force in Paris on 27
    August 2017 was significantly different from the  claim  he  later  put
    forward in the UK.  Further, in paragraph 37 the judge had  noted  that
    the appellant had travelled through  a  number  of  European  countries
    before claiming asylum in the UK and found  that  this  undermined  his
    credibility.

11. It is my conclusion that the country material on the role  of  the  PLO
    Popular Committee in refugee camp in Lebanon was not taken into account
    by the judge when he reached his finding in paragraph 39 and that  this
    was a material error.  The country evidence on the  Popular  Committees
    set out above is capable of supporting the appellant's claim  that  the
    Committee in his camp knew of, recorded  and  was  able  to  produce  a
    report of the incidents he maintains occurred after he went into hiding
    from Ansarullah. It was not open to the Judge to find that there was no
    objective evidence on the role of the Committees in the camps  or  that
    there was no evidence of the Committees having a detailed knowledge  of
    the kind of incident set out in the appellant's claim. Had  the  First-
    tier Tribunal addressed the supporting evidence  on  the  role  of  the
    Popular Committees, it is possible that he would have  found  that  the
    reports from the PLO supported the appellant's claim.  That,  in  turn,
    could have led to a different finding on credibility overall.  That  is
    my view regardless of the fact  that  there  are  other  parts  of  the
    appellant's claim that the Judge  was  entitled  to  find  reduced  his
    credibility,  for  example,  the   appellant's   statements   when   he
    encountered the Border Force in Paris in 2017 and his failure to  claim
    asylum  in  safe  countries  whilst  travelling  through  Europe.   The
    assessment of  credibility  is  a  holistic  exercise,  and  the  final
    assessment of the strengths and  weaknesses  of  the  appellant's  case
    could have been different if the reports from the Popular Committee had
    been assessed in the light of the evidence on the way  such  Committees
    operate.

12. For these reasons, I find that the appellant's grounds  have  merit.  I
    find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on
    a point of law and must be set  aside  to  be  re-made  de  novo.   The
    parties were in agreement that the matter should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal where the credibility findings had to  be  made  de
    novo and I concluded that this was in line with paragraph 7 of  Part  3
    of the Senior President's Practice Statement.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material error on a
    point of law and is set aside to be re-made de novo in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Signed S Pitt                                    Date 8 December 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
