
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal Number: PA/00319/2020 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2020                           |On 12 January 2021            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     YG

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant: Mr H Saddique, Adam Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Iran with  date  of  birth  given  as
   11.9.87, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  27.3.20  (Judge  Fox),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 11.12.19, to refuse her further representations
   made on 29.10.19 in support of a claim to international protection on the
   basis of being a convert from Islam to Christianity.

2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 28.4.20. However, when the application  was  renewed  to  the
   Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission on  8.8.20,
   considering that Judge Fox failed to take into account more  recent  case
   law on Dorodian witnesses and "failed to explore the reasons given by the
   appellant for previously attending Roman Catholic and Mormon services. In
   addition, he failed to adopt a holistic approach to the  evidence  relied
   upon by the appellant and placed undue weight  on  the  status  of  those
   officiating at her present church. As as consequence, there were material
   errors of law in First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fox's  decision  and  it  is
   appropriate to grant permission to appeal."

3. With respect to Judge Finch, the question whether  there  is  a  material
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is a  matter  for
   me to determine and the grant of permission should have  confined  itself
   to consideration as to whether there was an 'arguable' error  of  law  in
   the making of the decision.

4. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5. At the outset of the hearing I disclosed to the  representatives  that  I
   am very familiar with one of the three faiths with  which  the  appellant
   claims to have been involved, namely,  The  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
   Latter-day Saints, colloquially known as the Mormons.  No  objection  was
   taken to my continuing to determine the appeal.

6. The relevant background can  be  summarised  as  follows.  The  appellant
   previously claimed asylum in The Netherlands in 2005. However, the  claim
   was refused and she was returned to Iran in 2006. Some 8 years later, the
   appellant arrived in the UK on 18.9.14, accompanied by  her  husband  and
   their two children. With the appellant and their children as  dependents,
   he immediately made  a  protection  claim,  based  on  alleged  Christian
   conversion to The Church of Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  which
   claim was rejected by the respondent on 27.2.15.  His  subsequent  appeal
   was also dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 12.12.16.

7. The appellant then made her own claim  for  international  protection  on
   17.8.15, with her husband and their children as her  dependents,  relying
   on the same grounds of religion and membership of  The  Church  of  Jesus
   Christ of  Latter-day  Saints.  The  respondent  refused  this  claim  on
   26.6.17. Her subsequent appeal was also dismissed in the decision of  the
   First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 22.9.17 (Judge Malik). On 28.3.18, the
   Upper Tribunal dismissed her appeal against Judge  Malik's  decision.  It
   follows that there has been no successful challenge to the  finding  that
   the appellant was not a genuine Christian convert.

8. Pursuant to the Devaseelan (Second Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-territorial
   Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKAIT 00702 principle, Judge Fox considered  the
   confirmed findings  of  this  previous  decision  (Judge  Malik)  as  the
   starting point for assessment of the appellant's most recent claim on the
   same grounds of religion, lodged  on  30.10.19.  On  this  occasion,  the
   appellant claimed to have converted to  the  Evangelical  Faith  in  July
   2017. It is the refusal on 11.12.19  of  this  renewed  protection  claim
   based on this change of faith, that is the subject matter of the impugned
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's appeal.

9. I am satisfied that there was no error on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal in relying on Devaseelan and the previous  negative  credibility
   findings as the starting point. Judge  Malik  noted  that  the  appellant
   claimed to have attended the Catholic Church and  to  have  converted  to
   Christianity within 2 months of arriving in the UK in September 2014, but
   failed to provide any supporting evidence of such attendance. In February
   2015 she claimed to have met Mormon missionaries and  was  baptised  into
   that faith on 28.3.15. Judge Malik found the timing  of  the  appellant's
   claim undermining of credibility, only applying after her husband's claim
   was refused. Finding the appellant ignorant of the  Mormon  faith,  Judge
   Malik comprehensively rejected the Christian conversion claim.  Mr  Bates
   pointed out  that  the  appellant  has  adduce  no  further  evidence  to
   undermine the findings of Judge Malik. There was, therefore, no basis for
   Judge Fox to depart from those findings. What had to  be  considered  was
   whether, in the light of those adverse  findings,  the  appellant's  most
   recent claim to have converted to yet another faith was credible.

10. In summary, although she did not pursue any organised religion in  Iran,
   and had no interest in Christianity, at various stages since arriving  in
   the UK the appellant has claimed to be a Roman Catholic, a member of  the
   Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and, more  recently,  shortly
   after failing to persuade the Tribunal that she  was  a  convert  to  the
   Mormon faith, began to attend and now claims conversion to and baptism in
   the Evangelical faith (the Gorton Evangelical Church). All three are very
   different and distinct branches of the  Christian  faith  with  different
   doctrine and no  satisfactory  explanation  for  the  change  or  of  any
   understanding  of  the  different  doctrines  has  been  provided.  I  am
   satisfied that the judge was entitled to consider this history as  itself
   undermining of the credibility. Further undermining  of  credibility  was
   the timing of her claims and the fact  that  whilst  pursuing  an  appeal
   heard on 4.9.17, based on claimed adherence to The Church of Jesus Christ
   of Latter-day Saints, she now claims that she had in fact by  that  stage
   already left that faith and had been attending the  Gorton  Church  since
   July 2017. She did not disclose this fact to the First-tier  Tribunal  in
   2017 and effectively was dishonest in her evidence before  the  Tribunal.
   Judge Fox was  entitled  to  regard  this  also  as  undermining  of  the
   appellant's credibility.

11. Between [42]  and  [57]  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  assessed  the
   evidence of conversion to Christianity relied on by  the  appellant.  The
   judge found the witnesses in support, including  the  appellant  herself,
   and the other evidence relied on unpersuasive to the  lower  standard  of
   proof and deserving of little weight. In the circumstances the appeal was
   dismissed, the judge noting at [58] that article 8 was not relied on.

12. The grounds assert that the appellant's evidence was 'dismissed' on  the
   single basis that she knew little about Lent despite the  fact  that  the
   church leader attending court confirmed that Lent was  not  practised  in
   the Evangelical Church. Criticism is also made that the  judge  erred  by
   relying on the fact that the Gorton church (Evangelical  faith)  did  not
   have an ordained minister. It is asserted that  a  church  leader  (Julia
   Knight) did attend and give evidence and her evidence  should  have  been
   regarded as expert evidence.

13. The grounds are misguided in  asserting  that  the  evidence  of  a  lay
   witness from the appellant's claimed faith should be  accorded  the  same
   weight as expert evidence. The fact is that  even  if  ordained,  such  a
   witness is not an expert and is not deserving of any particularly greater
   weight than any other witness. In MH (review: slip rules; church witness)
   Iran [2020] UKUT 00125 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held that  "Written  and
   oral evidence given by 'church witnesses' is potentially significant  in
   cases of Christian conversion (see TF & MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58).  Such
   evidence is not  aptly  characterised  as  expert  evidence,  nor  is  it
   necessarily deserving of particular weight, and the weight to be attached
   to such evidence is for the judicial fact-finder."

14. At [41] of that decision, the Upper Tribunal  panel  stated,  "There  is
   no recognised methodology by which the genuineness of  an  individual's
   conversion from one faith to  another  can  be  measured,  nor  can  that
   question properly be categorised as belonging to a field of knowledge  or
   science.  A witness such  as  Dr  MN  believes  that  an  individual  has
   converted  to  Christianity and  they  can  provide  reasons  for  that
   belief but there is no established methodology by which they reach that
   conclusion.  Their evidence on this issue (described by Lord Glennie as
   "Category 3" evidence) should not, in our judgment, be described either
   as expert evidence or even as "a species of  expert  evidence",  as  was
   submitted by leading counsel for the appellants in TF & MA: [41] refers.
    To   describe   such    evidence    as    expert    evidence    risks
   elevating the significance of that evidence unduly. TF held that, active
   participation in a Christian church was not conclusive  evidence  of  the
   genuineness of a claimed conversion, but it was  'likely  to  be  a  very
   powerful consideration, to  be  assessed  alongside  any  other  evidence
   pointing to the sincerity or  otherwise  of  the  claimed  conversion  to
   Christianity'."

     a. At [58]  of  TF,  the  Court  disapproved  the  suggestion  of  the
        Immigration Appeal Tribunal in Dorodian v Secretary  of  State  for
        the Home Department, 01/TH/01537, 23 August 2001, at [8(b)], that a
        Christian conversion must be supported by evidence from a  minister
        of a relevant church. Because different churches followed different
        traditions, it was wrong to say that the evidence had to come  from
        someone at a particular level in the  hierarchy  (if  any)  of  the
        church. What mattered was that the evidence came  from  individuals
        with

        "sufficient knowledge of the practices of the church of which  they
        are a member; sufficient experience of  observing  and  interacting
        with those seeking to become  members  of  the  church;  sufficient
        knowledge and experience of others who have  gone  through  similar
        processes of  engagement  in  church  activities  with  a  view  to
        becoming members of the  church;  and,  in  cases  such  as  these,
        sufficient knowledge of the individuals concerned and of the manner
        in which they have thrown themselves into church activities."

15. To his credit, Mr Saddique did not pursue the argument  in  the  grounds
   that Ms Knight's evidence should be regarded as expert evidence. However,
   he relied on that witness' two letters and what he said was  Ms  Knight's
   oral evidence based on his own notes. I pointed out to Mr Saddique that I
   could not take evidence from him as a witness as to what was  said  by  a
   witness at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing, unless  he  wished  to
   adjourn and relinquish  representation  in  order  to  become  a  witness
   himself. He did not wish to do  that.  In  the  absence  of  Mr  Saddique
   becoming a witness and in the absence of any  ground  of  appeal  on  the
   basis that the judge had inaccurately recorded the witness'  evidence,  I
   can only proceed on the basis of what the judge  has  summarised  in  the
   decision of the witness's evidence. I have, however, looked  at  the  two
   letters referred to, dated 6.10.19 and 6.2.20. As I  pointed  out  to  Mr
   Saddique, whilst Ms Knight speaks favourably of  the  appellant,  neither
   letter demonstrates that any critical assessment has  been  made  of  the
   appellant's claimed conversion.  Neither  letter  provides  the  sort  of
   evidence one expects from a 'Dorodian' witness.

16. Although she gave evidence, Ms Knight is not an  ordained  minister  and
   explained in evidence that the Gorton Church has had no ordained minister
   for some 7 years. In her letter, Ms Knight  described  herself  as  being
   responsible for the music and leading the worship  on  Sundays,  which  I
   understand to be leading the singing and worship in church, whilst it  is
   her husband who is a member of the "leadership team". Her precise role is
   rather vague and there is no evidence that she is involved  in  assessing
   conversion of those seeking to become members of the faith, or  that  any
   assessment or criteria is applied before membership  is  granted.  Whilst
   her letter speaks glowingly of the appellant's qualities,  it  failed  to
   provide any real assessment of the genuineness of her conversion  and  it
   is not clear in what way this witness would  be  qualified  to  speak  of
   that.  The judge's assessment of this witness at [48] of the decision was
   that she was not credible, "a layperson  with  no  apparent  features  to
   distinguish  her  as  an  appropriate  theologian  qualified  to  receive
   individuals into any religion," may be couched in rather strong terms but
   the point remains that it is not clear  that  Ms  Knight  has  sufficient
   knowledge  and  experience  of  others  who  have  gone  through  similar
   processes of engagement in church activities  with  a  view  to  becoming
   members to be able to speak  as  to  whether  the  appellant's  professed
   conversion is genuine. That conclusion is supported by  [49],  where  the
   judge records that Ms Knight was unperturbed that the appellant began  to
   attend her church shortly after failing to persuade the  respondent  that
   she followed the Mormon faith, even though she pursued an appeal on  this
   same basis whilst simultaneously purporting  to  follow  the  Evangelical
   faith. Similar assessments were made of the  other  supporting  witnesses
   and letters in support, with reasons provided.

17. Whilst the grant of permission referred to R (SA) (Iran) v SSHD  [2012]
   EWHC 2575 (Admin), a decision frequently cited by appellants,  the  Upper
   Tribunal panel in MH pointed out at  [48]  that  the  comments  by  Judge
   Gilbert, sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge, were obiter, adding "We do
   not understand Gilbart J to have suggested that it is impermissible as a
   matter of law for a  judge who  is  tasked  with  assessing  a  claimed
   religious  conversion  to consider  anything  other than  whether  the
   individual is an active participant in the church...  Insofar  as  this
   paragraph (the one frequently cited by  appellants)  is  relied  upon  by
   representatives in support of a submission that active participation in
   church activities suffices, without more, to demonstrate the truthfulness
   of a conversion, we do not consider that to  be  the  position.   On  the
   contrary, it is entirely permissible for a judge in a case of this nature
   to turn his mind to a whole range of additional considerations, including
   not least the timing of the conversion, the individual's knowledge of the
   faith, and the opinions of other members of the congregation as  to  the
   genuineness of the conversion."  Those were in  fact  the  considerations
   made by  Judge  Fox.  Even  though  she  is  not  an  ordained  minister,
   considering the role of Ms Knight and the  letters  she  has  written  in
   support, "Incredible" might be too strong a condemnation of the  witness,
   but I am satisfied the judge was entitled to conclude that she was not in
   a position to speak authoritatively to the genuineness of the appellant's
   conversion and, therefore, her evidence  was  deserving  of  but  limited
   weight.

18. I am satisfied that the judge provided cogent reasons  for  finding  the
   evidence  in  support  of  the  appellant's  claimed  adherence  to   the
   Evangelical faith inadequate and insufficient. For  example,  the  pastor
   presiding over the appellant's baptism  declined  to  attend  the  appeal
   hearing in her support, saying only that he would pray for her. The judge
   concluded that there had been no meaningful effort to support the appeal.

19. In relation to the judge's assessment of the  appellant's  knowledge  of
   her most  recent  faith,  criticism  is  made  of  the  reliance  on  the
   appellant's ignorance of Lent. Ms Knight had confirmed in  evidence  that
   Lent had been discussed at church but  that  she  had  made  a  conscious
   (personal) decision not to observe it. The judge noted that the appellant
   had no awareness of Lent, despite her claims to the contrary. The grounds
   have not challenged the judge's record that Lent  was  discussed  at  the
   Gorton Church but that Ms Knight made a personal decision not to  observe
   it. It remains unclear what role Lent has in the Gorton Church.  However,
   at [55] of the decision, the judge considered it was reasonable to expect
   the appellant to at least know of its existence, given the evidence of Ms
   Knight that it had been discussed at church. The  judge  considered  that
   Easter, to which Lent relates,  "is  the  most  important  event  in  the
   Christian calendar regardless of the denomination followed." Again, there
   has been no challenge in the grounds to that statement.

20. The judge did not stated that ignorance of Lent was the sole reason  for
   finding the claimed conversion not credible. Read as a whole, it is clear
   that the judge took into account  all  of  the  evidence,  including  the
   history of rejected claims, the timing of the claims, the inadequate  and
   limited  supporting  evidence,  and  the  appellant's  own  knowledge  of
   Christianity. Whilst a different  judge  may  have  reached  a  different
   conclusion, I do not accept that the  findings  of  Judge  Fox  could  be
   regarded irrational or perverse but were open  to  the  Tribunal  on  the
   somewhat unsatisfactory evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant.

21. Mr Saddique also submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
   consideration to the  appellant's  "own  journey  away  from  Islam  into
   Christianity", including some two and a half years attendance  at  church
   and involvement in Bible study and more latterly in the  "worship  team."
   However, as Mr Bates pointed out,  that  so-called  journey  begins  with
   findings of her claim to be a Catholic and then converted to  The  Church
   of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to be not credible and not  genuine.
   The journey began with a false claim, continued  with  dishonesty  before
   Judge Malik - professing one faith whilst allegedly having abandoned that
   faith and attending an entirely different faith, and  continues  with  no
   evidence sufficient to disturb those  previous  findings.  Her  statement
   describes how she decided to change from Mormon to Evangelical  in  faith
   but in the light of the undisturbed findings of Judge Malik, no  credence
   could be given to that account of her journey. As Mr Bates put it in  his
   submissions,  "the  witness  statement  details  a  move  from  something
   previously found not genuine." In the premises, there is no error in  the
   First-tier Tribunal failing to consider the appellant's 'journey' in  any
   greater depth.

22. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       17 December 2020





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       17 December 2020





