
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: pa/00555/2016
     pa/00524/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th October 2016                       |On 17th October 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    F B T
                                    Y E T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala
For the Respondents:   Ms M Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any members of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants are brothers and are nationals of Turkey. They  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against the decisions of  the  Secretary  of
    State refusing their  applications  for  asylum.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M J Gillespie allowed the Appellants' appeals and  the  Secretary
    of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellants claim  that  their
    father was a political activist and a supporter of Kurdish  Nationalist
    Parties active in Turkey in the 1990s and that he left Turkey  in  2000
    and claimed asylum in the UK.  The father's asylum appeal was  rejected
    but he remained in the UK entering into a relationship with  a  British
    woman and he was granted leave to remain in the UK  which  was  renewed
    and expires  in  November  2017.   The  Appellants  and  their  brother
    supported Kurdish political parties in Turkey first BDP and  then  HDP.
    The Appellants claim that from about 2010 they were  low  level  active
    supporters of one or other of these parties.  They  claim  that  around
    2012 their elder brother left Turkey and claimed asylum in Italy.   The
    father sponsored applications by the Appellants to enter the UK as  his
    dependents but those applications were refused and appeals against them
    dismissed.

 4. It is the first Appellant's case that he came to the adverse  attention
    of the authorities in Turkey twice, the  first  occasion  was  on  15th
    November 2014 when he had taken part in a  demonstration  organised  by
    HDP.  The  police  disrupted  the  demonstration.   The  Appellant  was
    detained, fingerprinted, photographed and questioned.  He was held  and
    interrogated under torture for two days before being  released  without
    charge.  The Appellants claim that on 22nd  May  2015  they  were  both
    arrested when manning a party election stand in their town.  The police
    arrived when a crowd of  people  attacked  the  stand  and  the  police
    detained the Appellants and their two companions.  The Appellants  were
    photographed and fingerprinted.  They were  interrogated  and  tortured
    facing accusations of complicity with the PKK.    The  first  Appellant
    was told  to  prove  his  loyalty  by  turning  informer.   The  second
    Appellant claims that he was questioned  about  the  movements  of  his
    elder brother who had left for Italy and who was  suspected  of  having
    joined the PKK.  They both claim that they were released on 24th May on
    condition of reporting to the police on 31st May.  On their return home
    they learned that their home had been  searched  and  property  seized.
    They did not report as requested and left Turkey on 19th June 2015.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  the  oral  evidence  of  both
    Appellants as well as the documentary evidence and the submissions  and
    concluded at paragraph 28;

         "The cumulative effect of the evidence is such that I remain of the
         view that the  accounts  of  the  Appellants  are  both  plausible,
         against the background evidence; internally consistent;  harmonious
         with each other; and each  individually  given  with  a  favourable
         degree of particularity. I form the impression of each  individual,
         young as they may be, that there is weight to be attached  even  to
         their unsupported account.  I find  that  there  is  no  reason  to
         reject any part of their evidence.  I hold that the lower  standard
         of proof has been discharged."

    The judge went on to say that he found that  the  Appellants  had  each
    proven the central core of  their  cases  to  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood.  The judge considered the case of IK (Turkey) [2004]  UKIAT
    00312.  He accepted that the Appellants are  low  level  supporters  of
    HDP.  The judge also considered the Home Office Country Information and
    Guidance on Turkey on HDP (Peoples' Democratic Party)  of  March  2016.
    He noted that the Appellants had come to the adverse attention  of  the
    authorities.  At paragraph 29 he said;

         "... I recognise that the  Appellants,  as  indeed  the  Respondent
         accepted, are no more than low level supports of HDP.   I  bear  in
         mind the guidance of the Respondent (see 2.3.9 of  CIG)  that  when
         ordinary members (or supporters) of HDP have come to the  attention
         of the authorities, this has generally been whilst participating in
         demonstrations and rallies.  I accept that a  low  level  supporter
         would  not  otherwise  generally  attract  adverse  attention.  The
         Appellants have now, however, come to the adverse attention of  the
         authorities.  They would  return  to  Turkey  as  persons  who  are
         undocumented and would be likely to face questioning.   I  consider
         that the  Appellants  each  demonstrates  substantial  indiciae  of
         likely risk on return.  They are Kurdish; they  are  from  a  known
         area of Kurdish  agitation;  they  each  have  past  experience  of
         detention and abuse on suspicion of PKK sympathy or from conflation
         of HDP activism with PKK alignment; they  have  family  connections
         with persons  who  have  previously  attracted  adverse  attention,
         albeit at a  low  level.   Their  identities  and  particulars  are
         recorded by police and their family  background  is  known  to  the
         authorities in Turkey.  They have failed to honour the  requirement
         to report which was a condition of past release.  I hold that there
         is at least a reasonable degree of likelihood that on  return  each
         of the Appellants will be identified as a suspected  separatist  at
         the airport on return to his home area.  Since the feared agents of
         persecution by the authorities no question of  internal  relocation
         or sufficiency of protection arises."

 6. The Secretary of State relied on two Grounds of Appeal.  The  first  is
    that the judge erred in his application of the country guidance case of
    IK (Turkey) in relation to the prospect of  internal  relocation.   The
    second ground contends that at the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the Presenting Officer handed up the Appellant's father's determination
    from a previous immigration hearing which indicate that the father  had
    returned to Turkey five times since 2012. It is contended that this was
    materially relevant to the family's profile as relied on by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge as well as the overall credibility of a risk of ill-
    treatment in other parts of Turkey.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was  arguable  as
    set out in Ground 1 that the judge erred in  not  taking  account  that
    party of the country guidance by IK (Turkey) to  the  effect  that  the
    fact that an Appellant may be at risk in his  home  area  does  not  of
    itself mean that he will also be at risk from the  authorities  outside
    his home area.  The judge granting permission  did  not  consider  that
    Ground 2 adds anything to Ground 1 given that the judge  had  concluded
    that, despite all the arguments made by the Respondent,  he  found  the
    Appellants' accounts were credible and gave clear reasons for doing so.



 8. At the hearing before me Ms Fijiwala submitted that paragraphs 6 and  7
    of the decision set out the circumstances leading  to  the  arrest  and
    detention of the Appellants and that the  first  arrest  of  the  first
    Appellant was  at  a  demonstration  and  the  second  arrest  of  both
    Appellants was at an  election  campaign.   She  submitted  that  these
    findings of fact were not disputed but were relevant  to  the  internal
    relocation issue. She referred to paragraph 90 and paragraph 111 of  IK
    (Turkey).  She submitted that paragraph 111 distinguishes between those
    people who have been rounded up as part of a  general  roundup  as  had
    been the case in these Appellants and those who had been  "specifically
    and individually targeted and detained  for  reasons  inherent  in  his
    personal  history  and  seriously  ill-treated  over  more   protracted
    periods".  She submitted  that  this  clear  difference  had  not  been
    considered by the judge.  She referred to paragraphs 116, 118  and  119
    of IK  (Turkey)  and  submitted  that  internal  relocation  was  still
    possible even where someone had been subject to  previous  arrest.   Ms
    Fijiwala accepted that the Home Office Country Information and Guidance
    on Turkey stated at 2.5.1 "if the person is at risk of  persecution  or
    serious harm by the state, they will not be able to relocate to  escape
    that risk".  However she submitted that this does not alter what is  in
    IK (Turkey) and submitted that the judge did  not  adequately  consider
    the issue of relocation in the context of the guidance in IK  (Turkey).



 9. Ms Fijiwala submitted that Ground 2 was linked to the issue of internal
    relocation in the context of the judge's assertion that the  Appellants
    would be at risk because of the family connection.

10. Ms Nnamani submitted that the  sole  issue  was  whether  there  was  a
    material error in relation to the  judge's  consideration  of  internal
    relocation.  She submitted there was no error at all.  She referred  to
    paragraph 2.5.1 of the  Country  Information  and  Guidance  which  she
    submitted was clear in relation to  fear  from  the  authorities.   She
    submitted that it was also clear from the  country  reports  on  Turkey
    that the situation has worsened for Kurdish people  since  IK  (Turkey)
    was decided.  In any event she submitted that paragraph  29  the  judge
    went through the risk factors set out at paragraphs 14 and  133  of  IK
    (Turkey).    She submitted that the judge had noted that the Appellants
    had come to the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities,  that  their
    detention had been recorded and they had been  fingerprinted  and  that
    the first Appellant had been asked to become an informer and the  judge
    concluded  that  on  return  they  would  be  identified  as  suspected
    separatists at the airport or in their home area.

11. Ms Fijiwala  further  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  properly  to
    consider the issue put to him by the Presenting Officer in relation  to
    the father's return to Italy and that this would  be  relevant  to  the
    conclusion in relation to family connections.

Error of Law

12. The relevant guidance in IK (Turkey) for the purposes of this appeal is
    as follows:

         "111.  ...  Thus,  not  all  "detentions"  will  be  of  comparable
         significance in assessing risk. For example, in the  light  of  the
         positive developments in Turkey in recent years,  described  above,
         there could be a  considerable  difference  between  the  potential
         significance when evaluating present risk to a person who  say  was
         rounded up with  many  others  in  the  course  of  Kurdish  Nevroz
         celebrations and  held  overnight  before  being  released  without
         charge, and a person who was ill-treated along with others  in  his
         village  in  implementation  of  the  clearance  programme  in  the
         Southeast on the one hand, and a person who  was  specifically  and
         individually targeted and detained  for  reasons  inherent  in  his
         personal history and seriously ill treated over a  more  protracted
         period on the  other  hand.  This  comparison  illustrates  why  we
         caution against a too simplistic approach to "headline" factors."


         "115. We can see that  a  young,  fit,  unmarried  person,  seeking
         unofficial employment in a big city,  may  not  feel  the  need  to
         register  with  his  local  Mukhtar,  at  least  at   the   outset.
         Nevertheless, given the range  of  basic  activities  for  which  a
         certificate of residence is needed, we conclude that  it  would  in
         most normal circumstances be unduly harsh to  expect  a  person  to
         live without appropriate registration for any material  time  as  a
         requirement for avoiding persecution. We stress however  that  this
         finding does not necessarily preclude  the  viability  of  internal
         relocation, for the reasons described below.


         Is there an internal relocation option for a person who is at  real
         risk of persecution by the authorities in his or her home area?


         116. We have already  touched  upon  this  issue  in  some  of  our
         previous observations. We have indicated that the proper course  in
         assessing risk on return is normally to  decide  first  whether  an
         individual has a well founded fear of persecution in his home  area
         based upon a case sensitive assessment of the facts in the  context
         of an analysis of the risk factors described in A (Turkey). It  is
         however implicit in our conclusions so  far  that  the  risk  to  a
         specific individual in most circumstances will be at its highest in
         his home area for a variety of reasons, and particularly if  it  is
         located in the areas of conflict in the south and east  of  Turkey.
         Conversely the differential nature of the risk  outside  that  area
         may be sufficient to mean that the individual would not be at  real
         risk of persecution by the  state  or  its  agencies  elsewhere  in
         Turkey, even  if  they  were  made  aware  of  the  thrust  of  the
         information maintained in his home area by telephone or fax enquiry
         from the airport police station or elsewhere, or by a  transfer  of
         at least some of the information to a new home area on registration
         with the local Mukhtar there.


         117. Some information about an individual is not reasonably  likely
         to be apparent to anyone other than a few individuals in  his  home
         area. For example, a specific gendarme might  have  it  in  for  an
         individual whom he considers to  be  a  local  "ne'er-do-well"  but
         against  whom  there  is  no  specific  information.  Also  it   is
         implausible, in the current climate of zero tolerance  for  torture
         that an official would wish to record or transfer information  that
         could potentially lead to his prosecution for a criminal offence.


         118. In general terms however we consider that one should  proceed,
         when assessing the viability of internal relocation, on  the  basis
         that an individual's material history will in  broad  terms  become
         known to the authorities at the airport and in his new area when he
         settles, either through registration with the local Mukhtar  or  if
         he comes to the attention for any reason of the police  there.  The
         issue is whether that record would be reasonably likely to lead  to
         persecution outside his home area.


         119. We have already identified some examples of the  circumstances
         in which a person may have experienced serious ill-treatment in the
         past in areas of Turkey where the PKK was or  now  is  active,  but
         would  not  necessarily  be  at  similar  risk  of  such  treatment
         elsewhere in Turkey where it is not, and where a different view  of
         his history could  be  taken.  They  include  examples  of  general
         intimidation by  the  authorities  of  the  Kurdish  population  to
         discourage support for the PKK, or to  clear  whole  villages.  The
         evidence is that anything between some  hundreds  of  thousands  to
         some millions (depending on whose figures one uses) may  have  been
         displaced within Turkey as a consequence of this.  However  outside
         the areas of PKK activity there will not be the same perceived need
         to undertake such intimidation or clearances  and  the  authorities
         within the receiving areas will be aware of the tactics that led to
         this mass migration, and will be able  to  assess  an  individual's
         record in the light of it. Similarly, a person who was included  on
         Mr Dil's list of local "ne'er-do-wells", against whom there was  no
         evidence of PKK involvement, but who ran the risk of being detained
         for questioning whenever an PKK incident occurred in his  vicinity,
         would not be at a similar risk in another area where  the  PKK  was
         not active and where such incidents were much less likely to occur.
         These are just some examples of why differential risk can arise  in
         different areas of Turkey.


         120. In saying this, we have full regard, as invited by Mr Grieves,
         to the current guidance of UNHCR, which, so far  as  we  have  been
         informed, does not appear to have changed since the publication  of
         its last official general report in May 2001. Nothing we have  said
         is in our view in any material contradiction to this  guidance.  It
         states


             "Kurds and members of Christian minorities from the  southeast
             Turkey do have an  internal  flight  alternative  outside  the
             region. unless the case in question is of a  prominent  nature
             or is perceived by the authorities to  have  real  or  alleged
             linked with the PKK  or  other  main  Kurdish  parties.  UNHCR
             considers  that  the  group  most  likely  to  be  exposed  to
             harassment/prosecution/persecution  are  Kurds  suspected   of
             being connected with or sympathisers of the PKK.
             In the context of internal flight "it is essential to find out
             if Turkish asylum seekers if returned would  be  suspected  of
             connection to or sympathy with the  PKK.  In  this  case  they
             should  not  be  considered  as  having  been  able  to  avail
             themselves of an internal flight alternative" in  the  UNHCR's
             perspective, if persecution emanates  from  state  authorities
             then there is no internal flight  alternative  or  relocation.
             The situation may look different with regard to village guards
             or people persecuted by non-state agents.""


13. I have considered the judge's findings at paragraph 29 in  the  context
    of the guidance  given  by  IK  (Turkey)  where  the  Tribunal  drew  a
    distinction between those Kurdish people who had  been  rounded  up  as
    part of a general exercise and those who had been specifically targeted
    because of their profile and personal history.  It is clear to me  that
    this is exactly what the judge did at paragraph 29 where he highlighted
    aspects of the Appellants' own experiences. He  referred  to  the  fact
    that  the  Appellants  had  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of   the
    authorities as a result of suspicion of PKK sympathy, they have  family
    connections to persons who  have  attracted  adverse  attention,  their
    identities and particulars were recorded by the  police,  their  family
    backgrounds are known to the Turkish authorities and they  have  failed
    to honour a requirement to report. In my view it was open to the  judge
    to conclude that these were all factors individual to these Appellants.

14. Further, the judge  considered  the  Home  Office  Country  Information
    Guidance at 2.3.9 which states:

         "Those at particular risk of adverse attention by  the  authorities
         include senior members of the HDP  and  HDP  members  suspected  of
         involvement with the PKK were suspected of supporting autonomy  for
         Kurdish people.  When ordinary members of the HDP have come to  the
         adverse attention of  the  authorities,  this  has  generally  been
         whilst participating in demonstrations  and  rallies;  an  ordinary
         member would not otherwise generally attract the adverse  attention
         of the authorities on account of their political beliefs."


    It is clear that this does reflect the guidance given  in  IK  (Turkey)
    and that this was very much in the judge's mind where he concluded that
    the Appellants were not ordinary members who had come to the  attention
    of the authorities whilst participating in demonstrations  and  rallies
    but in fact they had come to the adverse attention of  the  authorities
    as the result of their personal profile.

15. I further note that the last sentence of  the  paragraph  29  is  taken
    straight from the Home Office Country Information  and  Guidance  which
    states at 2.5.1 that if the person is at risk of persecution or serious
    harm by the state, they will not be able to  relocate  to  escape  that
    risk.  The judge cannot be criticised for quoting from the Home  Office
    own guidance which is consistent with the decision in IK (Turkey).

16. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge failed to consider the  fact  that
    the Appellant's father returned to Turkey and that this was relevant to
    the judge's conclusion that the Appellants' family background is  known
    to the authorities in Turkey.  However on reading the  decision  it  is
    clear that the judge has accepted the evidence from the first Appellant
    that when he was first arrested he was "questioned as to his own  links
    with the HDP and taxed with the accusation that his elder  brother  had
    left his home to join the PKK" [6].   It  was  the  second  Appellant's
    evidence that when he was detained he was required to account  for  the
    movements of his elder brother, the one who had fled to Italy, who  was
    suspected of having joined the PKK [8].  The judge's findings that  the
    Appellants' accounts are both credible have not been challenged. In  my
    view it is clear that the judge had in mind the findings in relation to
    the interrogations about the elder brother  when  he  referred  to  the
    family background being known to the authorities in Turkey.   There  is
    no evidence that either Appellant was asked about  the  role  of  their
    father while they were in Turkey.  At  this  point  they  were  clearly
    asked about their brother and it is reasonable that the judge took this
    into consideration when assessing  the  risk  to  the  Appellants  upon
    return.

17. The challenge in this case is to the judge's findings  in  relation  to
    internal relocation. However, in light of his findings of fact  and  as
    to the Appellants' credibility in light of the guidance in IK  (Turkey)
    and the Home Office Country Information and Guidance,  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge reached a conclusion open to him  on  the  evidence  and
    made no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain any error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed                              Date: 17 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 17 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


