
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/00606/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25th September 2017                    |   On 17th October 2017           |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     HMa
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Hashmi of Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DETERMINATION AND REASONS.


                             THE RESUMED HEARING


 1. This  matter  first  came  before  Judge  Bagral.  In  a  comprehensive
    determination, she concluded that there was no merit in the appellant's
    challenge to the  credibility  findings  of  the  original  Immigration
    Judge, Judge Walker. Those findings therefore stand.

 2. Judge Bagral concluded however that he had erred in  his  consideration
    of whether the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Eritrea
    irrespective of whether the story of his escape from  there  was  true.
    Her determination is appended to this.

 3. It was transferred to be heard by a judge other than Judge  Bagral  and
    hence came before me on 25th September 2017.

 4. At the commencement of the hearing it transpired that the Tribunal  had
    booked the wrong interpreter.  The  appellant  had  requested  a  Tigre
    interpreter but a Tigrinya interpreter was booked instead. He confirmed
    however that Arabic was his second tongue and that he was happy to give
    his evidence.  I noted that his original interview had  been  conducted
    in Arabic and ensured that the appellant and the interpreter understood
    each other at all times.

 5. The sole issue before me therefore is the risk on return of an Eritrean
    national of draft age.

 6. The appellant produced a supplementary statement for this hearing.   He
    confirmed that he did not attend school in Eritrea but learned to  read
    and write at the local mosque.   He helped to take care of the  animals
    on his parents' farm.

 7. He left Eritrea in 2007 when he was 18 years old after his brother  had
    been called up into national service.   He  went  to  the  border  with
    Sudan, first by walking and then on a donkey to a place  called  Alafa,
    and from there to Golsa in Sudan.  Under cross-examination he confirmed
    that he did not go through any  border  post  and  walked  through  the
    border through a rural area which was unfenced.

 8. The appellant returned to Eritrea in February 2014.  In  his  statement
    he said that it was because his mother missed him and she  had  a  girl
    that the families wanted him to marry.  Under cross-examination he said
    that he returned because his  mother  was  unwell.   He  described  the
    marriage ceremony as being very basic with only  close  family  members
    and no official record taken.  His father-in-law read the Koran.

 9. Mr Diwncyz asked him whether he was aware of any call-up  papers  being
    sent to him  during  his  seven  year  absence  from  Eritrea  and  the
    appellant said that he was not sure.  He said that after his return  in
    February 2014 the authorities came  looking  for  him  because  he  had
    previously exited Eritrea illegally.

Findings and Conclusions

10. The appellant comes to the Tribunal with a record of  having  not  told
    the truth about the authorities' interest in him in  Eritrea.   Further
    discrepancies emerged during his evidence today,  in  relation  to  his
    mother.

11. I conclude that the appellant returned to Eritrea for the reasons which
    he set out in his statement, namely that life was very hard for him  in
    the Sudan and he wanted to return to visit his mother and to marry  the
    girl of her choice.

12. Illegal exit cannot be assumed in this case, because the appellant  has
    not been found to be credible.  Mr Diwncyz asked me to consider whether
    it was reasonably likely that the appellant could  have  walked  across
    the border into Sudan on three occasions and whether it really  was  as
    porous as the appellant claimed.  However, it is quite clear that  very
    many asylum seekers from Eritrea do cross this border and there  is  no
    real basis to doubt the appellant's claim that he was able to do so.

13. In MO (illegal exit - risk on return)  Eritrea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00190
    (IAC) the Tribunal reaffirmed the position set out in MA and held  that
    in fact there were a number of indications  that  it  has  become  more
    difficult for Eritreans  to  obtain  lawful  exit  from  Eritrea.   The
    potential categories of lawful exit are narrowly drawn to  two  medical
    categories and those who are either highly trusted Government officials
    or their families, or who are members of ministerial staff  recommended
    by the Department to attend studies abroad.

14. The Tribunal held that whilst illegal exit cannot be assumed it may  be
    that inferences can be drawn from an appellant's level of education  or
    skills profile as to whether legal exit was feasible.

15. I accept that this appellant has a low-level of educational attainment.
     It is most unlikely  that  he  could  ever  have  been  in  Government
    service.  His account of working on the family farm in Eritrea and then
    working in the  Sudan  in  farming  looking  after  animals  is  wholly
    consistent with everything that  is  known  about  him.   There  is  no
    reasonable degree of likelihood that the  appellant  falls  within  the
    limited category of Eritreans who could be issued with an exit visa.

16. The appellant would therefore be returning to Eritrea as a  person  who
    would be perceived to be a draft evader and  therefore  facing  a  real
    risk of persecution as well as treatment contrary to Article 3  of  the
    ECHR.

Notice of Decision

17. The original judge erred in law.  His decision has been set aside.   It
    is remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            Taylor.
           Date 16 October 2017
