
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00461/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 February 2016                  |On 1 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                    J S M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjain of Counsel instructed by AB
                    McKenzie Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, a national of Uganda,  brings  a  challenge  to  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kanagaratnam) sent on  3
         October 2015 dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
         respondent dated 29 June 2015 refusing to grant him asylum. It  was
         not in dispute that if the appellant was able to show that he was a
         homosexual he would be at risk on return for a  Refugee  Convention
         ground because of the oppressive approach adopted  by  the  current
         regime in Uganda towards homosexuals. The Respondent did not accept
         that the appellant was a homosexual and on appeal the  FtT  was  of
         the same view.

      2. The appellant mounts two challenges to that adverse decision. First
         it is argued that the FtT erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider
         material Asylum Policy Instructions (APIs) relating to  a  person's
         realisation as to sexual identity. I am  bound  to  say  I  do  not
         consider this ground made out. At [7]  the  judge  noted  that  the
         documents before him included the respondent's APIs.  At  [18]  the
         judge said that in considering  the  claim  of  this  appellant  he
         "shall first consider [his] account of how he began to  realise  he
         was a gay person". Further, the judge was confronted with an appeal
         in which the appellant was responding to  a  detailed  reasons  for
         refusal letter. Whilst that  decision  letter  does  not  expressly
         refer to the APIs relating to assessment of credibility in the case
         of homosexual/gay persons, it demonstrates  a  close  adherence  to
         these  instructions.  Thus  at  [19]  there  is  a  heading   "Your
         sexuality"  in  which  the  following  four  paragraphs  deal  with
         development of sexual identity.

      3. The appellant's second main ground of  appeal  is  that  the  judge
         failed to make adequate findings on the evidence, in particular the
         evidence of the appellant's witnesses. This ground, by contrast, is
         made out.

      4. There are a number of respects in which the  judge's  treatment  of
         the evidence of the witnesses is vitiated by legal error. First  of
         all, he does not (except in relation to  two  witnesses)  make  any
         specific findings on their credibility even though it is  logically
         implied by his findings that he considered them to  lack  credence.
         As regards the two witnesses about whom he does make  some  adverse
         comment (the appellant's sister and [S]),  these  adverse  comments
         were confined to the matter of whether the  sister  had  been  told
         about the appellant's immigration status and whether  it  reflected
         well on [S] that he had stated that he had encouraged the appellant
         to apply for refugee status. Neither of these comments extended  to
         assessment of the sister's or [S]'s evidence that they  had  direct
         knowledge of the appellant's homosexual lifestyle (I  shall  return
         to the matter of his sister's evidence in a moment).

      5. Second, the judge does not appear to have given another witness who
         gave evidence an opportunity to respond  to  the  adverse  comments
         made about her evidence  by  the  respondent  in  the  reasons  for
         refusal letter.  I refer to the evidence that he heard  from  [JO].
         The latter's evidence had been queried in one respect  at  [31]  of
         the reasons for refusal letter. There is nothing to  indicate  that
         this query was put to [JO]  so  that  she  had  an  opportunity  to
         respond.

      6. Third, the judge appeared to treat as decisive the  fact  that  the
         appellant  had  not  produced  any   "direct   evidence"   of   his
         homosexuality: at [21] he stated that "none of his gay partners are
         present to provide direct evidence" At [19] he stated that:
             "None of the other witnesses [apart from the sister] who  gave
             evidence before me were able to directly testify as to  having
             met Kenneth" [Kenneth being a person the appellant claimed  to
             have had a gay  relationship  with  between  2007-2010].  Once
             again the appellant does not present independent  evidence  as
             to his gay relationships"

      7. However, that still left the fact that the sister had given  direct
         evidence of having met Kenneth: see [10]  and,  as  already  noted,
         this aspect of the sister's evidence was not  the  subject  of  any
         adverse comment from the judge.

      8. Fourth, in the asylum  jurisdiction,  admissible  evidence  is  not
         confined to direct evidence in person and the judge had before  him
         a number of witness statements, several of which had been commented
         on by the respondent in the reasons for refusal. The judge made  no
         findings on them.

      9. Fifth, related to the last point,  the  evidence  of  [S]  included
         direct  evidence  of  having  seen  the  appellant  in   situations
         demonstrative of a homosexual lifestyle (gay clubs etc).

     10. Mr Wilding was candid  enough  to  say  at  the  beginning  of  his
         submissions that he "struggled" to find  argument  to  support  the
         judge's treatment of the witness evidence and I am sure it was  the
         above matters, or most of them, that he took cognisance of.

     11. I would add that the judge's decision contains at ([22]) a  summary
         that gives every appearance of recounting the  immigration  history
         of an entirely  different  appellant.  Had  the  remainder  of  the
         decision being sound, this may not have  been  fatal,  but  in  the
         light of the  judge's  errors  in  his  treatment  of  the  witness
         evidence, this adds to the overall picture of a most unsatisfactory
         determination.

     12. Both parties were in agreement with me that the  proper  course  in
         this case was to set aside the judge's decision and  remit  to  the
         First tier Tribunal.

     13. It should go without  saying  that  nothing  said  by  me  in  this
         decision is to be taken as implying a view, one way or  the  other,
         on whether the appellant has established his homosexuality. That is
         entirely a matter for the First tier Tribunal on remittal.

     14. For the above reasons:

         The FtT judge materially erred in law  and  his  decisions  is  set
         aside.

         The case is remitted to be heard by the First-tier  Tribunal  other
         than Judge Kanagaratnam.




                               Signed
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
