
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00410/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 16th November 2016                 |On: 30th November 2016              |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Hussain, Lei Dat Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Libya born in 1985.    He  appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Evans)
    dated 30th March 2016 to dismiss  his  appeal  against  a  decision  to
    refuse to grant protection.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  July  2014  with  valid
    leave to enter as a student. On the 17th April 2015 he claimed asylum.


 4. The basis of the Appellant's claim  for  international  protection  was
    that he was being pressured into joining a local militia  in  his  home
    town of Al-Rojban. Since  he  did  not  wish  to  fight  he  was  being
    perceived as  an  opponent  of  this  militia,  and  by  extension  the
    government in Tobruk with whom they are  aligned.   He  feared  serious
    harm as a result. This claim was disbelieved by the Respondent  and  so
    too by  Judge  Evans,  who  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had
    discharged the burden of proof,  even  to  the  lower  standard.    The
    Appellant had obtained permission to appeal against  the  reasoning  in
    the determination but before me Mr Hussain withdrew reliance  on  those
    grounds. The findings of Judge Evans  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim are therefore undisturbed.

 5. The sole remaining issue is whether  or  not  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in its approach to Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.
    The appeal took place in March 2016, some time after the Upper Tribunal
    had taken the evidence in the country guidance of AT &  Others  (Libya)
    CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC). Although the Appellant was unrepresented  and
    did not himself provide any country background material he did ask that
    the Judge take account of the changed situation  in  Libya.  The  Judge
    declined to do so, applying and following instead the guidance in AT  &
    Others.   Before me Mr Hussain placed reliance on the  decision  in  FA
    (Libya: Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 00413 (IAC) to  the  effect
    that until further country guidance is issued,  decision-makers  should
    determine the matter on the basis of the individual's case. AT & Others
    is no longer to be followed. Before me Mr  Harrison  pointed  out  that
    Judge Evans can hardly have known about FA  since  it  came  out  three
    months after the decision  in  the  instant  case,  but  conceded  that
    consideration should have been given to whether or not there had been a
    material change in circumstances in Libya at the  time.    The  parties
    were therefore in agreement that the First-tier Tribunal had materially
    erred in its approach to Article 15(c) and that the  decision,  insofar
    as it related to humanitarian protection, needed to be remade.



    The Re-Made Decision

    Legal Framework


 6. Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  (read  with  Article  18)
    provides that member states must grant subsidiary protection  where  it
    is established that there is a "serious  and  individual  threat  to  a
    civilian's life or person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    situations of international or internal armed conflict.


 7. In Elgafaji (C-465/07) the European Union Court of  Justice  considered
    the meaning of the term "individual" in Article 15(c). It held that  it
    did  not  require  a  specific  (ie  targeted)  threat  to  the  person
    concerned, but rather to a general threat to that  civilian's  life  or
    person. The Article will be engaged where the degree of  indiscriminate
    violence characterising the armed conflict taking place reaches such  a
    high level that substantial grounds are shown for  believing  that  the
    individual claimant, returned to the relevant country or region, would,
    solely on account of his presence on the territory of that  country  or
    region, face a real risk of being subject to the serious  threat.   The
    greater the vulnerability of the individual concerned,  the  lower  the
    level of indiscriminate violence will need to be; conversely  the  more
    robust the individual, the greater the conflict.   The  starting  point
    for any evaluation of Article 15(c)  must  therefore  be  the  personal
    characteristics of the individual in question.


    Appellants' Circumstances

 8. It is not in issue that the Appellant is from Rojban. This is  a  small
    town close to Zintan, approximately 80 km south east of Tripoli and  60
    km from the Tunisian border.  He is a member of the al-Rujban tribe, is
    of Arab ethnicity and is a Sunni Muslim. He is today aged 31 and has no
    known health complaints. He is single.  He previously  held  employment
    as an office administrator  with  the  Libyan  government.   He  speaks
    fluent Arabic  and  some  English.    He  has  completed  his  military
    service.  He still has family members in Rojban.


    Country Conditions

 9. The Respondent's current position on the situation in Libya is set  out
    in the  June  2016  Country  Information  and  Guidance  report  Libya:
    Security and Humanitarian Situation. This  guidance  expressly  accepts
    that the situation has deteriorated since the decision  in  AT  &  Ors:
    [2.3.14].   There is consensus  amongst  reporting  agencies  including
    UNHCR,  the  United  States'  State  Department,   the   FCO,   Amnesty
    International, UNOCHA and  Human  Rights  Watch  (HRW)  that  there  is
    widespread violence across the country. A flavour of that  evidence  is
    found at 9.1.1 where the 2016 HRW report is cited:


         'Amid tenuous United Nations-led peace talks, Libya's political and
         security crisis deepened as two rival governments competed for
         legitimacy, control of vital institutions, and international
         support. Despite some factions signing a political deal in
         December, there was no end in sight to the crisis. As armed clashes
         continued, the country edged towards a humanitarian crisis, with
         almost 400,000 people internally displaced and increasing
         disruption to basic services, such as power and fuel supplies.


         'Forces engaged in the conflict continued with impunity to
         arbitrarily detain, torture, unlawfully kill, indiscriminately
         attack, abduct and disappear, and forcefully displace people from
         their homes. The domestic criminal justice system collapsed in most
         parts of the country, exacerbating the human rights crisis. Armed
         groups that pledged allegiance to the extremist group Islamic State
         (also known as ISIS) continued to commit serious human rights
         abuses, including unlawful killings and summary executions, and
         succeeded in expanding and gaining control over towns in the centre
         of the country, including Sirte.

10. And at 7.1.2:
         A report published in September 2015 by the United Nations Office
         for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) also noted
         the fragmented nature of the conflict:
         'The two main Libyan political factions that emerged post-
         revolution, the GNC and the HoR, are often described as "Islamists"
         and "liberals" respectively. The former is largely represented
         today by the so-called Tripoli Government, based in the west of the
         country, while the latter is largely represented by the
         internationally recognized Tobruk Government led by the HoR, based
         in the east. The conflict is mainly between two fighting blocs: the
         GNC-aligned Libya Dawn and the HoR-aligned Dignity. However, much
         of the conflict, and Libya itself, is fragmented into localized
         battles and power dynamics, driven by loyalties along often-
         overlapping ideological, regional, local, tribal and ethnic lines.
         'An estimated 1,700 armed groups and militias are active in  Libya,
         some of which were formed as brigades  during  the  2011  uprising,
         while others were formed in the later stages or  aftermath  of  the
         2011 conflict. This fragmentation challenges  the  formation  of  a
         national consensus or shared vision among Libyans on how to address
         the legacy of their history, manage the transition or  share  power
         thereafter. Chaos across the  country  has  also  provided  fertile
         ground for the development of the Islamic State  in  Iraq  and  the
         Levant (ISIL) and affiliated groups. ISIL's  territorial  influence
         has grown considerably in 2015.'


11. The US State Department and FCO concur that all travel to Libya  should
    be avoided. The State Department warns  that  the  "security  situation
    remains unpredictable and unstable...the government lacks control  over
    much of the country"; it notes further that  the  police  and  security
    services have limited to no  capacity  to  respond  to  emergencies  or
    requests  for  assistance".  The  FCO  travel  advice  cited   in   the
    Appellant's skeleton is:


         "The situation in the country remains dangerous and  unpredictable.
         Fighting continues in  many  parts  of  Libya  and  can  break  out
         anywhere without warning. There is a high risk of being  caught  in
         indiscriminate gun fire or shelling, including air strikes, in  all
         areas where fighting has spread quickly putting those in  the  area
         of risk"

12. The same guidance describes the threat of terrorism and  kidnapping  as
    "high". An FCO report dated 21st April 2016 [Chapter IV:  Human  Rights
    Priority Countries - Libya] states that the judicial system has  broken
    down across the country and endorses the view of various  human  rights
    agencies that "armed groups on  all  sides  disregarded  civilians  and
    committed violations and abuses of human rights, including  abductions,
    extra-judicial executions, unlawful killings, torture  and  other  ill-
    treatment".


13. In respect of freedom of movement the June 2016 CIG reports:
         2.4.1 Travel within Libya is restricted by violence and conflict
         between various armed militias and pro-government troops in most of
         the populated parts of the country. This is further compounded by
         road blocks and control points manned by conflicting militias,
         including Islamic State/Daesh and other terrorist groups. The south
         of the country is subject to checkpoints and roadblocks operated by
         the Government and by militias. Large parts of the country are
         primarily desert areas with few towns or inhabitants. There is a
         lack of infrastructure and supplies, including fuel and transport.
         Most airports are closed, or in the control of armed militias.
         There is a risk of landmines and unexploded ordinance in many
         areas.

         2.4.2 Return to an area that is not the person's home may be
         reasonable in some cases. Decision makers must give careful
         consideration to the relevance and reasonableness of internal
         relocation on a case-by-case basis taking full account of the
         individual circumstances of the particular person, including where
         they originate from in Libya and where they will be returning to,
         and the latest available country information.


14. The danger of travel, in which civilians are required to  pass  through
    roadblocks operated by armed factions is also  highlighted  by  the  US
    State Department: "various  militias  have  supplanted  the  police  in
    maintaining internal  security.  Militia  members  operate  checkpoints
    within and  between  major  cities.  Militia  groups  sometimes  detain
    travellers for arbitrary or unclear reasons".


15. As to the  humanitarian  situation,  particularly  for  the  internally
    displaced, the June 2016 CIG urges caution. Whilst some  parts  of  the
    country remain relatively quiet  for  now  (the  east  is  particularly
    violent, Tripoli "less so") [2.3.17], the impact of past fighting,  and
    the spectre of future instability, has had a clear impact on the  lives
    of the civilian population:

         2.3.5 Humanitarian conditions in Libya have deteriorated since the
         fall of former president Gaddafi. There has been extensive damage
         to civilian homes and public infrastructures, including health,
         education, roads and administrative facilities, disrupting basic
         services.

         2.3.6 Conflict has impacted all the major towns and cities, with
         the majority of the population affected to some degree by lack of
         essential resources, including medical care. The healthcare system
         has deteriorated, leading to an increase in serious illness and
         disease. 1.9 million people in Libya require humanitarian aid to
         meet their basic healthcare needs, with particular concern in
         Benghazi, Tripoli, Derna, Sirte, Al Jifarah, Al Kufra,Wadi Al Hayat
         and Ghat (see Humanitarian situation).

         2.3.7 There are approximately 435,000 internally displaced people
         in Libya. Living conditions for many internally displaced persons
         (IDPs) families remained poor and in some instances unsafe. Members
         of particular IDP communities remain vulnerable to abductions and
         torture on account of their origin, perceived allegiances during
         the 2011 conflict, and the current political divide (see
         Humanitarian situation).

         2.3.8 There are estimated to be 1.28 million people at risk of food
         insecurity, of which 210,000 are in immediate need of food
         assistance. The most severe cases are reported in Benghazi and in
         the south. Almost half the population (which is approximately six
         and a half million) are in need of humanitarian assistance. In
         January 2016 an estimated 21% of Libyan children aged between 6 and
         59 months were suffering from chronic malnutrition (see
         Humanitarian situation).

         2.3.9 Vulnerable groups include the displaced (particularly
         children, the elderly, women and those with low economic means)
         female headed households, persons with disabilities and the
         chronically ill. The most severe needs in terms of geographic areas
         are those in the east and south of the country.

         2.3.10 In general conditions across the country are not so poor
         that removal would be a breach of Article 2 or 3, however, the
         situation in parts of the country, including Benghazi and some
         areas in the east and south are likely to do so, particularly for
         members of vulnerable groups. Decision makers should consider the
         individual personal circumstances of each person, taking into
         account the latest country information (see Humanitarian
         situation).



16. The Respondent was unable to furnish me  with  any  evidence  that  the
    situation had improved since the CIG was published.  The  Appellant  by
    contrast supplied up to date evidence that the  situation  had  further
    destabilised, with an attempted coup against the Tripoli government  in
    mid-October.  Articles from the Libyan press  (the  Libyan  Herald  and
    Libya Prospect) confirmed that there were civilian  casualties  in  the
    fighting that took place in the weeks following the failed coup attempt
    on the 14th October 2016.


    My Findings

17. I am grateful to the Appellant's solicitors  for  the  provision  of  a
    succinct  bundle  of country background material but for ease  I  place
    my greatest reliance on the material in the CIG. The conclusions to  be
    drawn from that document are as follows:


    a) the humanitarian and security situation  has  demonstrably  worsened
       since AT & Ors;


    b) the country is politically divided by two warring factions, but that
       on the ground those two broad coalitions -  the  Islamist  GNC/Libya
       Dawn and the 'liberal' HoR/Dignity - splinter into as many  as  1700
       armed groups all vying for territory, resources and influence;

    c) civilians across the country have borne the brunt of  the  fighting,
       with  indiscriminate  bombing,   abductions,   killings,   arbitrary
       detention and torture widely reported;

    d) the ability of the  state  to  protect  its  civilians  is  severely
       compromised by the collapse of the judicial system, the  lack  of  a
       functioning police service and the fact that the  'government'  have
       now withdrawn to Tobruk where they retain nominal control over  only
       a very small part of the country;

    e) at present half  of  the  population  is  in  need  of  humanitarian
       assistance and over 20% of children are suffering from malnutrition;

    f) the ability for civilians to move  around  the  country  (on  indeed
       their  neighbourhoods)  is dependent on their ability to safely pass
       through  regular  checkpoints  which  are  manned  by  various   and
       competing armed militias (including 'Islamic' State)  and  to  avoid
       the many areas which are compromised by land  mines  and  unexploded
       ordinance.


18. This Appellant is not the most vulnerable of returnees.  He  is  not  a
    woman, has no children with him  and  is  not  suffering  from  serious
    illness. He has a significant advantage in that he has  family  members
    remaining in his home town of Rojban who would be able  to  assist  him
    should he return there. It is his ability to do so that gives cause for
    concern.



19. It is abundantly clear from the country material that  internal  travel
    is fraught with significant dangers,  including  but  not  limited  to:
    unexploded mines/ordinance, criminality in the context of a substantial
    breakdown  in  law  and  order,  being  caught  in  the  crossfire   of
    fighting/bombing, and having to navigate  through  regular  roadblocks.
    In respect of the latter the land  from  the  border  with  Tunisia  to
    approximately the mid-line extended  south  from  Siirte  is  presently
    controlled by a multitude of  Islamist  militias  operating  under  the
    umbrella of  'Libya  Dawn',  ostensibly  under  the  direction  of  the
    Islamist GNC 'government' operating in Tripoli.  The evidence  suggests
    that all of these groups operate regular roadblocks and checkpoints.  I
    am not satisfied  that  it  would  be  practicable  or  safe  for  this
    Appellant to  make  his  way  through  this  political  landscape.  The
    Appellant has spent two and half  years  out  of  Libya  and  does  not
    therefore have a good understanding of the shifting alliances  'on  the
    ground'. I cannot imagine that he would therefore be in the position to
    give the 'right' answers to questions about his loyalties. An admission
    that he is a recent returnee from Europe would exacerbate the  risk  of
    robbery, kidnap or violence. I am satisfied that there are  substantial
    grounds to believe that this Appellant would in these circumstances  be
    at risk of harm from indiscriminate violence.

20. Overall I am satisfied that the Appellant has established  that  he  is
    presently in need of humanitarian protection.




      Decisions


21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    in respect of its reasoning  on  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive and that part of the determination it is set aside.


22. The decision is remade as follows:


    "The appeal is dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.


    The appeal is allowed on humanitarian grounds.


23. There is an order for anonymity.











                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            17th November
                                    2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on the 17th
May 2016

