
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00624/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 13 November 2018                  |On: 21 November 2018                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     VV
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, instructed by York Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 16 July  1981.  He  arrived
in the United  Kingdom  on  3  September  2015  and  claimed  asylum  on  21
September 2015. He attended a screening interview on 22 September  2015  and
a substantive interview on 4 January  2016.  His  claim  was  refused  on  4
October 2016. He appealed against that decision and  his  appeal  was  heard
before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  was  dismissed  in  a  determination
promulgated on 15 August 2018. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
was granted on 24 September 2018.

The appellant claims to have been forcibly recruited by  the  LTTE  in  June
2008 to work as a spy. He  was  arrested  by  the  Sri  Lankan  army  on  18
December 2008 whilst out on patrol and was  held  in  a  camp  for  a  month
before being taken to a police station where he was  beaten  and  questioned
by the Criminal Investigation Department (CID). He was taken  to  court  and
convicted. On 13 February 2009 he was taken to  prison  and  remained  there
until 11 March 2009 when he was taken to a  rehabilitation  centre.  He  was
released on 24 January 2010 in the presence of the International Red  Cross.
The appellant claims to have been re-arrested in April 2014 whilst  at  home
because the army believed that he was seeking to revive  the  LTTE.  He  was
detained for one month during which time he was beaten and tortured. He  was
released upon payment of a bribe and then left Sri Lanka in  December  2014.
The Sri Lankan army had been questioning his wife about his whereabouts.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not  accept  that  he
was a member of the LTTE and did not accept his account  of  being  arrested
and detained in December 2008 and in April 2014. The  respondent  considered
that the appellant would not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell on  20  July  2018.  Judge  Buckwell  had
before him various documents  including  a  psychiatric  report  from  Dr  S
Dhumad, a  medico-legal  report  from  Dr  A  Martin  and  evidence  of  the
appellant's involvement with the Transnational  Government  of  Tamil  Eelam
(TGTE) together with photographs of him attending demonstrations in the  UK.
The judge heard evidence from the appellant.  He  accepted  the  appellant's
account of his arrest and the period of detention from December  2008  until
January 2010 and accepted that he was likely to have suffered  ill-treatment
in detention at that time. However the judge did not accept the  appellant's
account of the second period of detention, noting that he had  not  referred
to it in his screening interview. The judge did not find that the  appellant
fell within any of the risk categories in  GJ  (post-civil  war:  returnees)
Sri Lanka CG (Rev 1) [2013] UKUT 319 on the basis of  his  first  period  of
detention or on the basis  of  his  sur  place  activities  in  the  UK.  He
considered that the  appellant  was  an  economic  migrant  who  had  become
involved with the TGTE in part to bolster his claim and that he  was  at  no
risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  He  dismissed  the  appeal   on   asylum,
humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on three grounds:  firstly,
the judge had erred by materially overlooking the medical evidence  and  the
background country  information  in  assessing  credibility;  secondly,  the
judge  had  failed  to  take  account  of  relevant  country  evidence  when
assessing sur place activities; and thirdly the judge had failed  adequately
to assess the risk of detention and ill-treatment on return to Sri Lanka.

Permission was granted on ground 1 only in relation to the judge's  approach
to the medical evidence.



Appeal hearing and submissions

Mr Lewis sought permission to argue  all  grounds  on  the  basis  that  the
challenge to the judge's approach to the medical  evidence  was  intertwined
with  the  challenges  to  his  credibility  findings  and  could   not   be
artificially separated. In so far as that  ground  was  interlinked  to  the
credibility issues, I permitted the grounds to be  expanded,  but  otherwise
did not permit all grounds to be argued given the  limit  to  the  grant  of
permission and the absence of any renewed challenge to the Upper Tribunal.

Mr Lewis submitted that the judge's rejection of the appellant's account  of
the second period of detention was solely on the basis  of  his  failure  to
mention it at the screening interview. However the purpose of the  screening
interview was to establish the appellant's identity and  route  and  not  to
examine the basis for his claim and the nature of the questions put  to  him
did not provide him with any opportunity  to  mention  a  second  period  of
detention. The appellant's account was consistent with the  medical  reports
from two experienced consultants  and  was  consistent  with  the  objective
evidence and country guidance. GJ in  2013  clearly  identified  an  ongoing
risk to  those  perceived  to  have  a  role  in  LTTE  activities  and  the
appellant's  account  of  his  arrest  in  2014  was  consistent  with  that
guidance. The judge's approach to  the  medical  evidence,  discounting  the
conclusions as being based on the appellant's own account, was  contrary  to
the principles in AM, R (on the application of) v  Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 521. The medical  evidence  corroborated
the appellant's account and the judge  therefore  materially  erred  in  his
credibility assessment.

Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that only the  ground  upon  which  permission
had been granted could be argued. In any event, the judge  was  entitled  to
make the  findings  that  he  did.  The  screening  interview  provided  the
appellant with an opportunity  to  mention  the  second  detention  and  the
judge's findings in that regard could not be said to be  unsustainable.  The
judge had regard to the medical evidence in the round and  was  entitled  to
give it the weight that he did. Ms Willocks-Briscoe relied  upon  the  cases
of FS (Treatment of Expert evidence) Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00004 and SS  (Sri
Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  155  in
that regard. The judge was entitled to find the appellant  would  be  of  no
interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.

Mr Lewis, in response, reiterated the submissions previously made.

Discussion

In granting permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge Page considered that  much
of the application for  permission  was  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
conclusions on the evidence.  Permission  was  granted  only  on  the  first
ground in relation to the judge's approach to the medical  evidence  and  as
such, and in the absence of any attempt to  renew  the  application  in  the
Upper Tribunal, the grounds before me are limited. However I agreed with  Mr
Lewis that the ground ought not to be artificially limited and that,  in  so
far as the judge's approach to the medical  evidence  interlinked  with  his
overall credibility findings, a wider approach to the grounds before me  was
appropriate.

Having said that, I am not  in  agreement  with  Mr  Lewis  that  the  judge
materially erred in his approach to the medical evidence. The impact of  the
medical evidence on the appellant's evidence as a whole  was  introduced  at
an early stage in the proceedings  by  the  appellant's  representative,  as
recorded by the judge at [25]. At [33] and  [34]  the  appellant  was  asked
about his appointments with the medical experts. The  medical  evidence  was
referred to by the parties in submissions, as the  judge  recorded  at  [54]
and [58] of his decision, and clearly that was  something  he  had  in  mind
throughout his decision, up until he made his findings on the impact of  the
medical reports on the assessment of the appellant's evidence, at [77].  The
appellant's grounds at [10] assert that the judge materially overlooked  the
medical evidence, in particular the scarring report,  but  that  is  plainly
not the case. The judge clearly had full  regard  to  the  medical  evidence
when assessing the appellant's evidence.

In so far as the grounds  seek  to  challenge  the  weight  that  the  judge
accorded to the reports, that was a matter for the judge, provided  that  he
approached that evidence "with appropriate care" and gave "good reasons  for
his decision" (SS Sri Lanka at [21]), which in my view he did. This was  not
a case, like AM, where there was  very  specific  and  significantly  strong
corroborative medical evidence. It is relevant to note  the  conclusions  of
Dr Martin at [6.2] of his report, that the scars, although  consistent  with
the appellant's account of torture, were "not fully specific  although  they
did not show any inconsistencies with  the  description  of  events  by  the
appellant". The report therefore went no further than  concluding  that  the
scars were not inconsistent with the appellant's account  of  ill-treatment,
but beyond that added little support for his claim that they  resulted  from
a period of detention in 2014. Therefore, whilst it may  have  been  helpful
if the judge had set out his findings  at  [77]  on  the  medical  evidence,
particularly the scarring report, in a little more detail,  the  end  result
would plainly have been the same.

Turning to the particular reasons given  by  the  judge  for  rejecting  the
appellant's account of the second period of detention,  I  am  in  agreement
with Ms Willocks-Briscoe's submission that his  findings  on  the  screening
interview cannot be said to be unsustainable. Whilst I agree with  Mr  Lewis
that the nature of question 7, with its  reference  to  "conviction",  would
quite reasonably and understandably have led the appellant  to  mention  his
initial detention in 2008 to 2010,  where  he  was  convicted  and  sent  to
prison, I do not  agree  that  there  was  no  opportunity  to  mention  the
subsequent period of detention. Even though the  purpose  of  the  screening
interview was not to set out a detailed account  of  the  asylum  claim,  it
seems to me the judge was perfectly entitled  to  draw  adverse  conclusions
from the lack of any mention by the appellant of a  more  recent  period  of
detention involving what he claims to have been  significant  ill-treatment.
It is also relevant to note that, contrary  to  the  submissions  made,  the
screening interview was not the only basis upon which  the  judge  made  his
adverse credibility findings. It is clear from [74] that the judge also  had
regard to inconsistencies in the  appellant's  account  of  his  involvement
with the TGTE, in that he claimed to have been a member since 2015  but  had
given contrary evidence in his interview in January 2016  at  questions  405
and 407. On the basis of such concerns it seems to me  that  the  judge  was
perfectly entitled to conclude that the medical evidence  added  nothing  to
the appellant's claim and was entitled to accord the weight that he  did  to
the medical reports.

Accordingly I find no merit in the assertion that the judge's  consideration
of the  appellant's  claim  failed  to  include  a  holistic  assessment  of
credibility. The judge's credibility  assessment  plainly  involved  a  full
consideration of all relevant matters, including the medical  evidence,  the
background country information and the country guidance. The judge  provided
cogent  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account  of  the   second
detention and for rejecting his claim to have been involved  with  the  TGTE
to any extent that would have brought  him,  or  would  bring  him,  to  the
adverse attention of the Sri Lankan authorities.  The  judge  was  perfectly
entitled to conclude that the appellant's past and  current  activities  did
not put him into any of the risk categories in GJ and that he  would  be  at
no risk on return to Sri Lanka.

For all of these reasons I find no errors of law in  the  judge's  decision.
The judge's findings and conclusions were reached upon  a  full  and  proper
assessment of all the evidence taken in the round and were entirely open  to
him on the evidence before him.

DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for  anonymity.  I  continue  the
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.







Signed   [pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 13
November 2018
