
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00871/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 26th July 2016                         |On 15th August 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [x w]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate; Maguire Solicitors (Scotland)
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mathews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China, born on [ ] 1982.

 2. The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  for  reasons
    explained in a letter dated 12th August 2015.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mrs Debra H Clapham dismissed the appellant's
    appeal for reasons explained in her determination promulgated  on  17th
    May 2016.

 4. The first ground on which the appellant sought permission to appeal was
    that the judge erred in finding that she was not to be  believed  about
    being held in detention because  during  the  same  time  she  provided
    fingerprints with her application for a visa to come to  the  UK.   The
    judge who granted permission observed that this ground was little  more
    than a disagreement and that the finding was properly open to the judge
    on the evidence available.  Mr Winter, rightly, did not seek to  pursue
    this ground.   The  judge's  finding  is  plainly  sensible.   She  was
    entitled to take it that the appellant would  have  been  fingerprinted
    for her visa application, without any further  specific  evidence  from
    the respondent.

 5. The grounds of appeal continue:
         The judge erred in law at paragraph 94 by  assuming  that  children
         born abroad have a different position in terms of  registration  on
         the hukou system.  There are no references to support this finding.
          The judge has ignored the appellant's submission at  paragraph  84
         [that the first born child, who  has  returned  to  China,  is  not
         registered on the hukou system] and the supporting evidence in  the
         bundle ... The judge has not considered this matter under Article 8
         of the ECHR.

 6. Mr Winter said that the essence  of  the  grounds  is  error  regarding
    registration  for  hukou  of  overseas  born  children.   The  relevant
    authority is AX (family planning scheme) China CG  [2012]  UKUT  00097.
    The FtT Judge at paragraph 94 records that the appellant claims to have
    submitted evidence that the first born child  in  China  is  unable  to
    obtain hukou.  The judge cannot understand why this would be  so  given
    AX, which states that family planning officials  are  not  entitled  to
    refuse to register unauthorised children.  The judge continues, "... in
    any event this child was born outside China  so  the  position  may  be
    different and furthermore she was able to obtain a passport or at least
    a travel document  for  this  child  from  the  Chinese  Embassy".   At
    paragraph 96, the judge further applies AX and finds that it  does  not
    assist the appellant.

 7. Mr Winter submitted that the hukou  document  had  been  produced.   It
    showed that the child was not included.  The child lives with  paternal
    grandparents in China.

 8. The copy document and translation are to be found at pages 23 to 36  of
    the appellant's  Inventory  of  Productions  in  the  FtT.   They  show
    registration of  a  mother,  father,  two  daughters,  one  son  and  a
    grandparent as members of one household.  No minor child is included.

 9. Mr Winter said the document established that the child who was sent  to
    China has not been registered.  The judge's decision  at  paragraph  94
    lacked a finding on whether the hukou was authentic, or on  the  weight
    which it carried. If the first child had not  been  registered  on  the
    hukou, there would  be  good  reason  to  have  concerns  over  further
    children of the family.  AX at paragraphs 186 to 187  stated  that  the
    attitude of birth control authorities to foreign born children remained
    unclear, and varied from province to province.  AX was  not  conclusive
    on this issue, and the appellant's evidence was that in this case there
    had simply been a point blank  refusal  to  register.   The  issue  was
    material, as registration was the key to free medical  treatment,  free
    education and  other  social  advantages.   If  these  points  did  not
    establish an asylum risk, they were relevant to the assessment  of  the
    best  interests  of  the   child   and   to   proportionality.    Those
    disadvantages apply to non-registered children (AX at paragraph 213).

10. Mr Matthews pointed out that the appellant's evidence had been entirely
    disbelieved, and that no error was suggested in that  conclusion.   Her
    partner, the father of the children, had elected not to give  evidence.
    The rejection of the appellant's evidence  included  rejection  of  her
    indirect assertion that the first child had been refused  registration.
    The hukou document produced was issued  on  13th  September  2005.   It
    could show only who had been registered  on  that  date.   Notably,  it
    included three of  the  four  siblings  in  a  family,  despite  family
    planning policy (the fourth sibling being abroad).  It had  no  bearing
    on whether the appellant and her partner might obtain registration  for
    their children  if  they  were  to  establish  a  household  in  China.
    Production of the hukou added nothing to  the  appellant's  case.   The
    outcome had been reached in light of her lack  of  credibility  and  by
    applying AX, which established that there was no real risk  of  refusal
    to register a child  -  head  note  8.   The  grounds  did  not  fairly
    represent  the  judge's  application  at  paragraph  94  of  AX.    The
    determination should stand.

11. Mr Winter in response drew attention to the note on  the  hukou  to  be
    found at page 23 of  the  Inventory  of  Productions:  "Any  change  of
    circumstances including the number of household members ...  should  be
    reported to the household  registration  authority  in  order  for  the
    household register to be updated".

12. I reserved my decision.

13. The note on the registration document does not show that it is any more
    than what it bears to be: a record of the members of the  household  on
    13th September 2005, before the child was born.

14. The only evidence about  non-registration  was  the  assertion  of  the
    appellant, based on what she  was  allegedly  told  by  relatives  from
    China.  The appellant was not believed.  Further, her evidence  on  the
    point runs counter to country guidance and to background information.

15. The judge  who  granted  permission  identified  a  possible  error  at
    paragraph 97, where the judge says that the Immigration Rules are to be
    viewed "as a complete code", which is not correct in the present  case.
    However, there is no reason to think that the  children  on  return  to
    China with their parents  would  be  at  any  significant  disadvantage
    compared with the average family in China.  There is no realistic scope
    on which the appeal might have succeeded under Article 8 of  the  ECHR,
    outside the Immigration Rules.

16. The decision of the FtT has not been shown to err in point of law,  and
    it shall stand.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

                           [pic]


                           15 August 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
