
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00934/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 March 2021                     |On 9 April 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |



                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE




                                   Between

                                     BS
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Smith
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Iran. At the initial hearing in  the
    Upper Tribunal, the representatives of both parties told me  that  they
    were agreed that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  as  regards
    its analysis of the issue of the appellant's sur  place  activities  in
    the United Kingdom. The findings of the Tribunal at [8-14] and  [18-19]
    that the appellant's account of involvement with the Workers  Communist
    Party (WCP) have not been challenged.

 2. I agree that the First-tier Tribunal's decision is legally  flawed  for
    the reason  agreed  by  the  parties.  Accordingly,  I  set  aside  the
    decision. The Tribunal's findings as regards  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account of past events in Iran and his claimed  involvement
    with the WCP shall stand. The only issue remaining to be determined  by
    the newly constituted First-tier Tribunal (to which the appeal  is  now
    returned) is that of sur place activity and  the  risk  to  which  that
    activity may expose the appellant if returned to Iran.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision following a hearing. The  Tribunal's  findings  regarding  the
    credibility of the appellant's account of past events in Iran  and  his
    claimed involvement with the WCP shall stand. The only issue  remaining
    to be determined by the newly constituted First-tier Tribunal (to which
    the appeal is now returned) is that of sur place activity and the  risk
    to which it may expose the appellant if returned to Iran.  The  parties
    may rely upon new evidence provided copies of any documentary  evidence
    (including witness statements) are sent to the other party and  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal no less than 10 days prior to the next hearing.

    Listing instructions: List for  hearing  in  First-tier  Tribunal;  Not
    before Judge Shergill; Manchester;  first  available  date;  First-tier
    Tribunal to determine whether remote or face to face  hearing;  Kurdish
    Sorani interpreter; Listing to liaise with Ms Smith's clerk (tel:  [~])
    when fixing hearing date.


Signed                                                  Date 31 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
