
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/00182/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7th December 2017                     |On 10th January 2018                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                    mr SV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik instructed by Ansah Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Liberia,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the  Respondent  on  14th  December
    2016 to refuse the Appellant's application  for  asylum  and  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his private and family life in the UK.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  claims  that  his
    family home was attacked in Monrovia in September 1990 and  his  family
    fled.  The Appellant claims that he was subsequently found  by  Charles
    Taylor rebels and was taken along with  five  other  men  and  forcibly
    recruited and that he remained with the rebels  for  eight  years.   He
    says that he ran away to the port where he obtained a job working as  a
    porter loading and unloading goods from boats.  He claims that he met a
    Greek sailor who promised to help him and in June 1997 the  sailor  hid
    him in his cabin for weeks until the ship arrived in  the  UK  on  10th
    August 1997.  The Appellant claims that he slept rough before meeting a
    Ghanaian woman and her husband who provided him with support in  return
    for him undertaking household chores.  He claims that he was  asked  to
    leave there and then move to London and lived rough  for  a  period  of
    time.  He claims that he became ill and underwent an operation for  his
    liver.  It is the Appellant's case  that  in  2014  he  began  a  brief
    relationship with a Ghanaian woman resulting in the birth of his son on
    10th November 2015.  He claims that he is no longer in  a  relationship
    with the woman but sees the child every day.   On  24th  May  2011  the
    Appellant lodged an application for leave to remain  under  Article  8.
    That application was refused in July  2011.   An  application  for  the
    reconsideration of that application was also rejected.   In  June  2016
    the Appellant made an application for asylum.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant.
    The judge noted a number of matters which went against the  Appellant's
    credibility at paragraphs 15 to 22  of  the  decision.   These  include
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account as to how  he  travelled  to
    the UK, how long he claims that he  fought  for  the  rebels,  when  he
    travelled to the port and  how  long  he  worked  there,  how  far  his
    location with the rebels was from the port and when  he  left  Liberia.
    The judge also took into account the delay of nineteen years before the
    Appellant claimed asylum.

 4. The judge went on to find that the Appellant is not at risk if returned
    to Liberia finding that he could not accept any part of the Appellant's
    claim.  The judge considered the human  rights  claim  looking  at  the
    Appellant's claimed relationship with his 15 month old child [24].  The
    judge noted that the Appellant had not submitted any evidence from  the
    child's mother or any evidence that he  sees  the  child,  nor  had  he
    submitted any photographs or documentary  evidence.   The  judge  noted
    that the Appellant had said in oral evidence that he took the child  to
    the library but the judge found it implausible that the Appellant would
    take his 15 month old child to the library.  The judge found  that  the
    Appellant has no contact with his child and there is no family life and
    that in these circumstances  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under
    Article 8 [25].

Error of law

 5. The Grounds of Appeal raise a number  of  issues  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claim.  There are five grounds.  The first ground  contends
    that the judge failed to make clear credibility findings.

 6. It is asserted that the credibility  findings  are  undermined  by  the
    significant delay between the hearing and the judge's  promulgation  of
    the decision, said to be a period of almost four months and  that  this
    was contrary to guidance in case law and in particular the case in SSHD
    v RK Algeria [2007] EWCA Civ 868 and in the Presidential Guidance  Note
    No.1 of 2014.  At paragraph 20 in the case of RK the  Court  of  Appeal
    highlighted and cited from the Tribunal decision of Mario [1998] Imm AR
    281 which indicated that in an asylum appeal the Tribunal would usually
    remit a case to another judge where the period between the hearing  and
    the dictation of the determination is more than three  months.   In  my
    view this ground has not been made out  because  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal indicates that the hearing was on 6th February 2017
    and that the  decision  was  signed  on  5th  May  2017.   It  was  not
    promulgated until 1st June 2017.  Whilst this does indicate that  there
    was a delay between the hearing and the signing of the  decision,  this
    delay is just at the end of the three month period  considered  by  the
    Supreme Court. There is no separate submission that the judge failed to
    take into account any factors in assessing credibility and in  my  view
    the delay in signing  the  decision  does  not  in  itself  disclose  a
    material error in this case.

 7. The Appellant contends in the second Ground of Appeal  that  the  judge
    failed to deal with paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Immigration  Rules.
    At the hearing before me Mr  Malik  relied  on  the  skeleton  argument
    placed before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  highlighted  that  the
    Appellant's length of residence  was  a  factor  to  be  considered  in
    relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). Mr Malik accepted that there was a
    lack of evidence going to the Appellant's length of residence in the UK
    but relied on the decision in ZH (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  8
    to support the contention that in the circumstances  in  which  he  was
    residing in the UK the Appellant may not have a lot of documentation to
    show residence throughout that period.   He  also  submitted  that  the
    judge failed to deal with the Appellant's medical  condition.   In  the
    First-tier Tribunal skeleton argument it is asserted that the Appellant
    has been suffering from a number of medical problems.  At page 2 of his
    witness statement before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant  said
    that he had undergone an appendix and liver operation and was currently
    under the care of King's College Hospital.  Mr Malik also  referred  to
    documents at pages 41 and 42 of the  Appellant's  bundle  which  showed
    appointments for the Appellant for an ultra  sound  and  at  the  liver
    outpatient clinic at King's College Hospital.  He  accepted  that  this
    was not enough evidence in relation to this matter but  submitted  that
    it was an error on the part of the judge to fail to engage with that.

 8. I note that in terms of his private life in his witness  statement  the
    Appellant said at page 3 "I have established a strong private  life  in
    the UK".  The Appellant referred to having been law abiding and had  no
    known criminal record in the UK.  He also referred to his  time  living
    on the streets in London and his  medical  issues  arising  from  that.
    However there is no detail in the Appellant's statement  and  no  other
    evidence as to the nature and extent of the Appellant's claimed private
    life in the UK.  As acknowledged by  Mr  Malik  there  is  very  little
    evidence about the Appellant's claimed  medical  conditions  and  their
    relevance to his stay in the UK or elsewhere.  I accept that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did not specifically engage  with  the  Appellant's
    private life as a separate matter under his assessment  of  Article  8.
    Had he done so he  would  have  been  required  to  look  at  paragraph
    276ADE(1) (vi) in the first instance which provides:



         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:

             ...

             (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,
             has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to leave
             the UK."

 9. In my view  there  was  insufficient  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to show that there would be very  significant  obstacles
    to the Appellant's integration into  Liberia.   In  terms  of  a  wider
    ranging  assessment  of  private  life  under  Article   8   there   is
    insufficient evidence to show the nature and extent of any private life
    developed in the UK.  Apart from  the  length  of  time  the  Appellant
    claims to have been in the UK there is no further evidence in  relation
    to his private life.  There is insufficient evidence for the  judge  to
    have made any conclusions in relation to the Appellant's  private  life
    which could have added  anything  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights carried out in  paragraph  24.   Therefore
    this Ground of Appeal discloses no material error.

10. It is contended in the fourth Ground of Appeal that the judge failed to
    attach weight to the considerations in Section 117B of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  However it does not appear that there
    was any evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge to establish that
    the Appellant was financially independent.  Whilst it may be  that  the
    Appellant can speak English this in itself may at  most  be  a  neutral
    factor in terms of assessing proportionality.  There is little evidence
    of the Appellant's integration  into  society  in  the  UK.   In  these
    circumstances there is no material error  in  the  judge's  failure  to
    specifically consider Section 117B.

11. At the hearing before me Mr Malik asserted that the judge had failed to
    undertake an assessment in terms of the risk to the Appellant on return
    to  Liberia.   However  the  judge  undertook  an  assessment  of   the
    Appellant's evidence and found that  the  evidence  was  not  credible,
    accordingly it is clear from the conclusion at paragraph  23  that  the
    judge found that the Appellant had not established that he was at  risk
    on return to Liberia.  Mr Malik contended that the judge failed to take
    into account the Appellant's explanation  for  his  delay  in  claiming
    asylum as set out in his witness statement where he said  that  he  was
    let down by his previous advisors, made the wrong application and  knew
    nothing about asylum.  However it  is  unclear  how  this  evidence  is
    sufficient to show good reasons  for  a  delay  of  nineteen  years  in
    claiming asylum.  On the basis of this evidence the judge's  conclusion
    that the Appellant's solicitors did not make an  asylum  claim  earlier
    for the Appellant because he had not told them about  it  was  open  to
    him. This ground has not been made out.

12. It is contended on the fourth Ground of Appeal that the judge erred  in
    his assessment of the Appellant's family life in  the  UK  because,  if
    there was an error  in  his  credibility  assessment  this  would  have
    affected  his  assessment  of  the  evidence  as  to  the  child,   the
    Appellant's family life and relationship with  his  child.   The  judge
    concluded at paragraph 24 that there was no evidence from  the  child's
    mother and no other evidence that the Appellant sees  the  child  every
    day as claimed.  In light of  the  adverse  credibility  findings  made
    against the Appellant the judge concluded that  his  oral  evidence  on
    this matter was not sufficient.  In his witness  statement  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge the Appellant  said  very  little  about  his
    claimed relationship with  his  child.   Accordingly  the  findings  at
    paragraph 24 were open to the judge on the basis of the evidence before
    him.

13. At the hearing Mr Malik further asserted that the judge's assessment of
    the human rights appeal was inadequate because the judge had failed  to
    undertake an assessment of the best interests of the child based on the
    Appellant's oral evidence.  In relation to the best  interests  of  the
    child it is difficult to see how the judge could  have  undertaken  any
    assessment of the best interests of the child in  the  absence  of  any
    other evidence as to the child.  In these circumstances the conclusions
    of the judge at paragraph 24 were open to him on  the  evidence  before
    him.

14. For all of the reasons above in my view it is clear that there  was  no
    material error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 8th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 8th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



