
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00869/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |On 23 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                     zh
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer of Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild
&
     Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iran said to be aged 17.  In a  decision
    promulgated on 26 June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Carroll  dismissed  his
    appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 28  January  2017
    refusing to grant him asylum.

2.   The basis of the appellant's asylum claim he  made  on  13  July  2016,
    several weeks after arrival in the UK,  was  that  he  was  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity.  When his father had been arrested by  the  authorities  for
    involvement with the PJAK he had fled  to  his  paternal  aunt's  house
    where he stayed for a month before departing Iran.  The  appellant  was
    represented by Counsel at the hearing but did not attend.

3.   On  5  June  2017  the  judge  refused  Counsel's  application  for  an
    adjournment.  The circumstances are set out by the judge at  paragraphs
    5 to 8 of his decision.  At paragraph 5 the judge  noted  that  shortly
    after ten o'clock the appellant's Counsel said that his client had  not
    arrived.  He had, therefore, asked  the  interpreter  provided  by  his
    instructing solicitors to telephone the appellant.  The  appellant  had
    said both that he was unwell and that he  was  being  moved  to  a  new
    foster carer on the day of the hearing of the appeal.  The  judge  then
    asked Counsel to seek further information, put the matter back  on  the
    list, and  at  10.30  Counsel  said  that  he  had  been  told  by  the
    interpreter that the appellant had said that he had been depressed  and
    upset  and  had  self-harmed  two  weeks  ago.  Counsel  said  that  he
    understood that the appellant had been admitted to  Croydon  University
    Hospital for nine days and upon release his  foster  carer  refused  to
    accommodate the appellant.  The appellant had therefore been  moved  to
    semi-independent accommodation while a search was made for a new foster
    carer.

4.   The judge then went on to observe that Counsel was  unable  to  provide
    any evidence of the hospital admission  or  any  evidence  from  Social
    Services relating to the claim that the appellant was expecting to move
    to new accommodation on the day of the hearing.  The judge concluded at
    paragraph 8:-

         "In the absence of any  medical  evidence  from  the  appellant  or
         evidence that he was expecting to move to new accommodation on  the
         day of the hearing I refused the application  for  the  adjournment
         and directed that the hearing should proceed in the absence of  the
         appellant.  The hearing  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  submissions
         only."

    On the basis of those submissions the judge proceeded  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

5.   Having heard briefly from the parties I have decided to set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge.  If I confine myself  solely  to  the
    state of the evidence before the  judge,  I  would  not  have  found  a
    material error; but in the nature of a challenge of this  kind  I  must
    have regard to evidence that was  in  existence  prior  to  that  date.
    Whilst the judge cannot be criticised for failing  to  have  regard  to
    evidence not before him, I now have before me  the  evidence  from  the
    Croydon  University  Hospital  in  the  form  of  a  discharge  summary
    demonstrating that the information given  by  the  appellant  over  the
    phone to Counsel on the day via an interpreter had some basis in  fact.
    Even  though  the  chronology  given  by  the  appellant   through   an
    interpreter was not precise, it is now clear that his claim to have had
    medical  problems  sufficient  to  require  his  admission  to  Croydon
    University Hospital on 19 May and for him to remain there until 24  May
    was substantially true.  Although it remains that his  solicitors  have
    not produced any evidence from Social Services, Mr Palmer has been able
    to confirm that communications regarding evidence from this source have
    been in process.

6.   I conclude that it is likely given  the  appellant's  age  that  he  is
    under the care of Social Services and that his further claim  over  the
    phone that he was experiencing difficulties over accommodation with the
    new foster carer was likely also to have some basis in fact.

7.   In considering the matter of whether I can take into  account  evidence
    not before a judge I must take note of the fact that the appellant is a
    minor and that he did attend a previous hearing.  Although he  and  his
    solicitors were duly notified of the hearing date and although  he  was
    represented at the hearing, his was a  case  where  the  issue  of  the
    credibility of his account was highly material to the decision  whether
    he qualified as  a  refugee  or  as  a  beneficiary  for  international
    protection.  The statement from him dated 29 July was relatively  brief
    as regards his claimed experiences in Iran.  The case was one therefore
    where there was a premium on oral testimony being heard if that was  at
    all possible.

8.   For the above reasons, I conclude that there was a procedural error  in
    the conduct of the appeal requiring me to set  aside  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll.  I remit the case to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard by a judge other  than  Judge  Carroll.   I  would
    underline that if for any reason the appellant fails to attend the next
    hearing he must expect that the judge will have to assess his  case  on
    the basis of the written evidence such as it is.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed:                                 Date: 21 January 2018
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

