
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00403/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th May 2019                             |On 20th May 2019              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     KN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ell, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for the
    avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  KN is granted anonymity
    throughout these proceedings.  No report of these proceedings shall
    directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to
    the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
    court.


 2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
    Judge Clarke promulgated on 15th June 2018.  The FtT Judge dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent dated
    21st December 2017, to refuse his claim for international protection.


 3. The appellant is a national of Iran. It appears that he arrived in the
    United Kingdom on or about 12th October 2015 and claimed to be a minor.
    He was interviewed by social workers employed by Derby City Council on
    13th October 2015, and following an age assessment, the appellant's
    date of birth was confirmed to be 5th June 1998.


 4. The respondent accepts that the appellant is a citizen of Iran and that
    he is of Kurdish ethnicity.  The account of events relied upon by the
    appellant leading to the claim for international protection are
    summarised by the FtT Judge at paragraph [19] of the decision.  The
    Judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [21] to [58]
    of the decision.  It is not necessary for me to refer to the particular
    findings made by the FtT Judge in this decision.  It is sufficient to
    say that the Judge rejected the claim made by the appellant.  At
    paragraph [47] of the decision, the Judge states as follows:


         "Even allowing for the fact that the events that brought the
         appellant to the United Kingdom took place when the appellant was
         17 years of age, I am not persuaded even to the low standard of
         proof applicable, that the appellant has given credible evidence as
         to the reasons why he fled Iran. His account of events is
         inconsistent in terms of chronology and detail. He has not
         satisfactorily explained these inconsistencies."


 5. In the preceding paragraphs, the Judge had identified a number of areas
    where the evidence of the appellant given at various stages, appeared
    to be inconsistent. The Judge makes a number of valid criticisms of the
    appellant's evidence particularly where the evidence given by the
    appellant during his asylum interview was inconsistent with the
    evidence set out in the appellant's witness statement and the evidence
    given to the Tribunal.  If the Judge's consideration of the evidence
    had been limited to those inconsistencies, the appellant is unlikely to
    have had any valid cause for complaint. However, in the analysis of the
    evidence, the Judge also had regard to information that the appellant
    had provided to the social workers employed by Derby City Council, who
    carried out the age assessment.  The Judge refers to material
    discrepancies between information given by the appellant during that
    age assessment, and the account of events relied upon by the appellant
    in support of claim for international protection, and at the hearing of
    the appeal. The inconsistencies identified went to the core of the
    claim.


 6. There are a number of grounds of appeal relied upon by the appellant.
    He claims that in reaching the decision, the FtT Judge refers
    throughout, to the Derby City Council age assessment.  It is claimed
    that it is apparent from the age assessment, that the appellant entered
    the UK under conditions of adversity and presented as nervous to the
    assessors. The appellant claims that it is understandable that the
    respondent did not rely upon the information provided as part of that
    age assessment, at all, when deciding the claim for international
    protection. As the content of the age assessment was not referred to in
    the respondent's decision, it was not addressed in the evidence
    provided by the appellant to the Tribunal. The appellant claims that
    during the hearing, neither the Judge nor the respondent asked the
    appellant any questions regarding the content of the age assessment.
    Furthermore, the respondent did not rely upon the content of the age
    assessment in the submissions made to the Tribunal.


 7. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge O'Callaghan on 13th July
    2018.  The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of
    the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to
    remake the decision.


 8. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response dated 13th September 2018
    in which the respondent confirms that the appeal is opposed. The
    respondent submits that the FtT Judge was entitled to consider the
    account given by the appellant in the age assessment.  The age
    assessment formed part of the respondent's bundle and as such, its
    content was known to the appellant prior to the hearing.  The appellant
    was on notice that his account of events, in particular his political
    activities and membership of a political party had not been accepted by
    the respondent, and they were matters that would need to be determined
    by the Tribunal. The appellant should have addressed any
    inconsistencies, between the claims made at various stages, in his
    evidence.


 9. Mr Tan relies upon the respondent's response.  Although there is some
    force to the submissions made by the respondent, I have carefully read
    the respondent's decision dated 21st December 2017.  At paragraph [10]
    of the decision, the respondent lists the material that was considered
    in reaching the decision. The age assessment carried out by Derby
    Social Services is listed. At paragraphs [42] to [55] of the decision,
    the respondent addresses the appellant's claim to have been involved in
    political activity. The respondent does not in any of those paragraphs
    make reference to any inconsistencies between the information provided
    to the social workers, and the claim made to the respondent.


10. Mt Tan confirmed that he was unable to establish from the notes of the
    Presenting Officer that appeared on behalf of the respondent at the
    hearing of the appeal, whether there was any reference to that age
    assessment during the hearing of the appeal. I have carefully checked
    the record of proceedings, and it appears, as the appellant claims in
    the grounds of appeal, that neither the Judge nor the respondent asked
    the appellant any questions regarding the content of the age
    assessment. It also appears that the respondent did not refer to
    anything set out in the age assessment, in the submissions made to the
    Tribunal.


11. I remind myself that in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that where there is a defect or
    impropriety of a procedural nature in the proceedings at first
    instance, this may amount to a material error of law requiring the
    decision of the First-Tier Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside.  The
    authorities referred to by the Upper Tribunal in MM (unfairness; E & R)
    Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) make it clear that upon an appeal such as
    this, the criterion to be applied is fairness and not reasonableness.


12. Having carefully considered the record of proceedings, I am satisfied
    that the appellant was given no opportunity to address the matters that
    might have been of concern to the Tribunal.  I am satisfied that the
    inconsistencies referred to by the Judge between the claims made as
    part of the age assessment, and the claim made to the respondent, had
    not been referred to in the respondent's decision.  The appellant was
    not cross-examined about those inconsistencies during the hearing of
    the appeal. The appellant was not given any opportunity to provide any
    explanation for the material inconsistencies in his account, that go to
    the core of his claim.   In my judgment, the decision of the FtT
    contains a material error of law and should be set aside.


13. I must then consider whether to remit the case to the FtT, or to re-
    make the decision myself.  It is to be noted that there is now more
    recent country guidance set out in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430
    (IAC).  That country guidance post-dated the decision of the FtT Judge
    but is plainly capable of having an impact upon the outcome of the
    appeal.  As the Upper Tribunal did in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan
    [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC), I consider that where a first instance
    decision is set aside on the basis of an error of law involving the
    deprivation of the appellant's right to a fair hearing, the appropriate
    course will be to remit the matter to a newly constituted FtT for a
    fresh hearing.


14. The decision of the FtT has identified what may be significant
    discrepancies in the account of the appellant, particularly when
    considered against the claims that he made shortly after his arrival in
    the UK, during the age assessment.  For the avoidance of doubt, the
    appellant must at any future hearing, be ready to deal with such
    inconsistencies, notwithstanding the lack of reference to any
    inconsistencies in the respondent's decision.


Notice of Decision


15. The appellant's appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Clarke is
    allowed and the decision of the FtT Judge is set aside.


16. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for rehearing afresh with no findings
    preserved.

Signed                                  Date          17th May 2019




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


I have allowed the appeal but as no fee is payable,  there  can  be  no  fee
award.



Signed                                                17th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
