
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00580/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 December 2016                            |On 18 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     AY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzan of Burton & Burton, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Birk)  dismissing  his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision made on 8 January 2016 refusing him asylum.


Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of  Libya  born  on  19  October  1968.   He
    entered the UK in September 2009 as a student and was  granted  further
    leave to remain until 30 March 2016.   He  is  married  and  has  three
    children born on 8 November 2001, 31 December 2003  and  4  April  2007
    respectively.  They joined him in the UK in 2010 and  have  lived  here
    since then. On 11 September 2015 he claimed asylum.

3.   His application was refused for the reasons set  out  in  the  decision
    letter dated 8 January 2016.  The respondent was not satisfied that the
    appellant was entitled to asylum.  In so far as he was at risk  in  his
    home area of Sirte, he would be able to relocate in the area of Tobruk.
     The respondent went on to  consider  article  8  but  found  that  the
    appellant and his family could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules
    and  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  which  might  warrant
    consideration of a grant of  leave  outside  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

4.   The appellant's claim for asylum was based on the fact  that  he  comes
    from Sirte and is from the Ferjani tribe.  In  2011  he  supported  the
    Libyan revolution against Gaddafi from the UK.  He made  donations  and
    held a fund-raising dinner to help IDPs.  In 2014 Sirte was occupied by
    ISIS and there was animosity between the appellant's tribe and ISIS. On
    13 August 2015 the appellant's brother was abducted  and  he  had  been
    told that this was by ISIS and on 11 August 2016 his brother-in-law, an
    influential imam, was killed by ISIS.

5.   The respondent found that  it  had  not  been  substantiated  that  his
    brother-in-law had been killed by ISIS or that  his  brother  had  been
    abducted by them.  There was no  evidence  that  his  support  for  the
    revolution would put him at risk.  It was accepted that he might be  at
    risk on return to Sirte and other coastal cities because of his  tribal
    background but he could relocate to Tobruk which was  under  government
    control.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The judge found that the appellant  had  been  unable  to  produce  any
    evidence that he had been active in the UK in pro-revolution activities
    or sufficient evidence to show that anyone in Libya was likely to  know
    about or act perversely towards him because of any  claimed  sur  place
    activities.  He took into account that the appellant on his own account
    had been prepared to go to Libya in 2013 and if he had thought that his
    life was in real danger, he would not have done so.  He found that  the
    appellant had not established that he was at risk due  to  his  claimed
    active support for the revolution.

7.   However, the judge was satisfied that  the  appellant's  brother-in-law
    had been killed in Libya and that there was  a  good  possibility  that
    this was the work of ISIS.  He did not find that the appellant  himself
    would be targeted because there might be many reasons why his  brother-
    in-law had been killed.  Equally, there might be many reasons  why  his
    brother had been abducted and the judge was not  satisfied  that  there
    was evidence that these were related to the appellant or that he  would
    be identified or be pursued by ISIS.

8.   In the light of the situation in Sirte and other  coastal  cities,  the
    judge proceeded on the basis that because  of  the  appellant's  tribal
    background he would be at risk there.  He then considered  whether  the
    appellant could relocate to Tobruk.   He took into account  the  expert
    report dated 9 August 2016 prepared by Alison Pargeter which said  that
    Tobruk had seen considerably less violence and instability  than  other
    parts of Libya and the guidance provided at paras 19 to 21  in  AT  and
    Others (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG  [2014]  UKUT  318.   He
    concluded that the situation in Tobruk, whilst bringing challenges  and
    difficulties was not such that it would be unsafe or unduly  harsh  for
    the appellant to return there.

9.    He  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    indiscriminate violence within Article 15(c) as there was  no  evidence
    that the situation as considered in AT and Others  had  worsened.   The
    judge took into account s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
    Act 2009 setting out the need to safeguard and promote the  welfare  of
    children but found that in view of  his  findings  that  the  appellant
    could return to Libya and that his family would be returning  with  him
    as a family unit, there were no compelling  circumstances  to  consider
    article 8 outside the Rules.  Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed  on
    all grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

10.  In the grounds it is argued that the judge failed properly to  consider
    the issue of relocation in accordance with Januzi v Secretary of  State
    [2006] UKHL 65.  There was no  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  the
    resources available to support himself and the children and his  family
    circumstances were such it would not be reasonable  to  expect  him  to
    relocate.  The grounds assert that the judge  had  failed  to  consider
    whether it would be in the best interests of the children  to  relocate
    to that part of the country and that the decision lacked any proper  or
    adequate reasoning on material matters.

11.  The grounds also challenge the decision under article 8,  arguing  that
    the judge had failed to consider properly the length of time  that  the
    children had spent in the UK, particularly as  the  older  child  would
    complete seven years in the near future.  In summary, it is argued that
    the judge failed to strike a fair balance between  the  compelling  and
    compassionate circumstances and the public interest considerations.

12.  Mr Mohzan adopted these grounds in his submissions.  He  also  referred
    to the recent country guidance case in FA (Libya: Article 15(c))  Libya
    CG [2016] UKUT 413 which had held that due to changes  in  the  country
    situation since November 2013 the guidance given in AT and  Others  was
    now unreliable.  He submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  consider
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's family to relocate
    and whilst mentioning the best interests of the children had not  fully
    considered  all  the  factors  which  were  relevant  to  make  a  full
    assessment.

13.  Mr Bates conceded that the judge had  not  dealt  adequately  with  the
    issue of the best interests of the children and in particular  had  not
    considered the length of the children's residence  in  the  UK  and  in
    consequence this affected his assessment of whether it would be  unduly
    harsh for the family to relocate to Tobruk.

The Error of Law

14.  I agree that this concession is rightly made and that the  judge  erred
    in law by failing to consider all relevant matters when  assessing  the
    issue of whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  appellant  and  his
    family to relocate in Tobruk.  I also accept that  there  has  been  an
    inadequate consideration of the best interests  of  the  children,  the
    judge failing to consider the issues  identified  as  relevant  by  the
    Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State [2011] UKSC  4  and
    Zoumbas v Secretary of State [2013] UKSC 74 and by the Court of  Appeal
    in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ 874 .

15.  I am satisfied that the proper course is for the appeal to be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration by a different judge  of
    the issues of whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  appellant  and
    his family to  relocate  in  Tobruk  and  to  re-assess  the  issue  of
    proportionality taking full  account  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  The judge's findings of primary  fact  in  paras  21-26  are
    preserved.

Decision

16.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that this decision should  be
    set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    reconsider the issues of undue harshness and article 8.  The  anonymity
    order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains in  force  until  further
    order.




Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 16 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



