
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00947/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2018                           |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    [k h]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran whose date of birth is  recorded  as
    [~] 1988. He made an application  for  international  protection  as  a
    refugee. The application was refused.  There  were  then  a  number  of
    submissions made to the Respondent  coupled  with  some  delay  on  the
    Respondent's part. However, on 20 December 2017 a further decision  was
    made to refuse the application and it is that  decision  which  is  the
    subject matter of this appeal.

 2. However, before the matter had been resolved by the Secretary of  State
    representations were also made on human rights  grounds  based  upon  a
    relationship formed by the appellant, whilst in the United Kingdom with
    one Miss Allison, with whom the Appellant claimed to cohabit.

 3. On 20 February 2018 the appeal  on  all  matters  was  heard  at  North
    Shields by Judge Holmes and Judge Gumsley  sitting  as  a  Panel.  They
    dismissed both the asylum and the human rights appeals.

 4. Not content with those decisions, by Notice dated 21  March  2018,  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Permission to appeal was refused  on  the  asylum  claim  but
    allowed in respect of the human rights claim because the Panel found in
    terms  that  the  couple  who  living  together  out  of  wedlock/civil
    partnership could not rely on family life but rather only private  life
    in the context of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
    (ECHR).

 5. Mr Diwnycz accepted immediately and without argument, quite rightly  in
    my view that it was simply wrong as a matter of law for  the  panel  to
    have approached the issue of Article 8 ECHR in this  way.  Family  life
    has long been established, as a matter  of  law  to  include  de  facto
    relationships outside of  marriage  and  includes  also  the  right  to
    establish family life: X, Y. and Z. v. UK [1997] ECHR 20.  The  concern
    that I have is the extent to which that misdirection has  infected  the
    thinking of the Panel in the proportionality assessment.

 6. In my judgment the Appellant cannot be confident that  his  appeal  was
    dealt with on a proper basis. It may be that  had  the  Panel  properly
    categorised the relationship, they would have come to the same view  as
    that expressed  in  this  decision,  but  one  cannot  know.  Though  a
    relationship built when it is precarious is to  be  given  less  weight
    than one that is not built when precarious, family life  considerations
    generally carry greater weight than private life  considerations,  such
    as in student cases.

 7.  Mr Diwnycz, for the Respondent accepts that the proper course of  this
    case is for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    only  on  the  human  rights  appeal,  consistent  with  the  grant  of
    permission. If a fresh application for international protection were to
    be made by the Appellant for international protection,  as  a  refugee,
    that would go back to the Secretary of State to deal with in the  usual
    way.

 8. For the avoidance of doubt therefore the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contained a material error of law with respect  to  the  human
    rights aspect of the appeal, being the discreet human rights aspect  of
    this appeal i.e. the relationship contended for between  the  Appellant
    and Miss Allison.

 9. The asylum decision is affirmed but the  human  rights  appeal  is  set
    aside for error of law  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    remade.

10. In so far as it may be said that the issue of cohabitation  may  be  in
    issue, that matter is resolved given the concession  which  appears  at
    paragraph 49 of the Decision of  the  panel  and  which  concession  is
    maintained by the  Respondent  and  preserved  as  a  finding  by  this
    Tribunal.

Decision

The appeal is allowed: The decision of the First-tier Tribunal with  respect
to the asylum appeal is affirmed. The Decision made on human rights  grounds
with respect to the relationship contended for between the Appellant and  Ms
Alison, and what flows from that however, is set aside for error of  law  to
be remade in the First-tier Tribunal, not  before  Judges  Holmes,  Gumsley,
Page or Hands.






Signed                              Date: 20 December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker






