
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/00683/2018
                                                               PA/00684/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 17th December 2018                  |On 25 January 2019                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                            l z (First Appellant)
                           l z (second Appellant)
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maINTAINED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Attendance excused
For the Respondent:    Attendance excused


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a resumed hearing of the Second Appellant's appeal against  the
    refusal by the Secretary of State to grant her leave to remain  on  the
    basis of her human rights.  As noted in my previous  decision  of  14th
    August 2018 the First Appellant and her  son  (the  Second  Appellant's
    grandson) succeeded in their appeals before the First-tier Tribunal and
    their protection claims were  allowed  and  were  unchallenged  by  the
    Respondent.  Thus the only appeal that comes before me today is that of
    the Second Appellant, namely the mother of the First Appellant and  the
    grandmother of the First Appellant's child.

 2. When this matter previously came before me I  indicated  that  I  found
    there was a material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    assessment  of  the  Second  Appellant's  human  rights  appeal.    The
    consequences of those findings were that  a  discrete  portion  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision should stand, but  that  the  rest
    would return for me for remaking irrespective of the Second Appellant's
    human rights appeal.

 3. In light of my previous findings I adopt them herein for  the  sake  of
    completeness:

         "4.  Having heard submissions from both representatives I  do  find
             that there is a material error of law  in  the  decision  such
             that the findings made in respect of the Second  Appellant  in
             relation to her Article 8 family and/or private life should be
             set aside.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

         5.   In respect of the judge's findings in relation to the  Article
             8 rights of the Second Appellant they are contained  primarily
             in paragraphs 139 to 142 of the decision and it is fair to say
             that they are robust and concise.  As Mr McQuit rightly points
             out, the  judge  has  set  out  the  jurisprudence  concerning
             Article 8 at paragraphs 140 to 141 however,  what  is  lacking
             from the decision at paragraph 140 is an application  of  that
             jurisprudence to the findings of fact made by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal in respect of the protection  claim  and  the  shared
             traumatic history between the First and Second  Appellant  and
             the grandchild.  To illustrate the materiality of  this  error
             Mr McQuit took me to Annex C of the Respondent's bundle before
             the First-tier Tribunal which mentioned in paragraphs 2, 5 and
             8  that  the  First  Appellant  (whom   I   shall   refer   to
             interchangeably as the 'daughter') was living with the  Second
             Appellant (whom  I  shall  refer  to  interchangeably  as  the
             'grandmother') from 2009 since the  grandmother's  retirement.
             Thereafter the grandmother  looked  after  the  grandson  (the
             daughter's son), whilst the daughter was at  work,  and  their
             day-to-day activities and life included factors  and  features
             such as the grandmother going to  collect  the  grandson  from
             school.  Thereafter, as the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  found,
             both the grandmother and  daughter  believed  that  they  were
             surveilled by the Chinese authorities, and in any  event,  the
             grandson was kidnapped by those authorities and following that
             kidnapping,   the   grandmother   and   daughter   were   both
             instrumental in helping the grandson overcome  the  trauma  of
             that experience.

         6.   I note for the sake of completeness that there is no challenge
             to the shared factual history underlying this Article 8 onward
             appeal and I also note that the grandson has  been  raised  by
             the daughter and grandmother given that he is a child born out
             of wedlock and has had no input from his biological father.

         7.   In light of those  facts  as  gleaned  from  Annex  C  of  the
             Respondent's Bundle, it is clear that the  assessment  by  the
             First-tier Tribunal of the Second Appellant's Article 8 rights
             at paragraph 142 of the decision is perfunctory and  fails  to
             give a reasoned analysis of whether or not family life, or  an
             extended private  life,  has  been  engaged  (particularly  as
             family life may exist between a grandparent and grandchild, as
             established since the decision in the European Court of  Human
             Rights in Marckx v Belgium [1979] 2 EHRR 330, which  also  has
             been overlooked) and whether the decision would therefore have
             a disproportionate impact upon that family or private life.

         8.   In light of the above findings, I set aside paragraphs 139  to
             143 of the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shand  in
             their entirety.

         9.   The preceding findings in relation to the First Appellant  and
             her child and the shared  history  of  the  First  and  Second
             Appellant are preserved as they are contained in paragraphs  1
             to 138."

 4. Given that the First-tier Tribunal's findings at paragraphs  1  to  138
    are free from legal error, I adopt  those  paragraphs  as  part  of  my
    decision but do not set them out herein given  their  length  and  that
    their content is not controversial.  I however  take  those  paragraphs
    into account in reaching my decision.  I now  turn  to  the  Article  8
    assessment for the Second Appellant.

 5. In light of the facts as set out in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    and my previous findings, I find that the Second Appellant's Article  8
    rights as a grandmother of the First Appellant's  son  are  engaged  by
    virtue of the shared family life between these three individuals.

 6. In light of the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal in respect  of
    the protection claim and the shared traumatic history of the First  and
    Second Appellants and the Second  Appellant's  grandchild,  I  turn  to
    Annex C of the Respondent's Bundle which mentions in  paragraphs  2,  5
    and 8 that the First Appellant was living  with  the  Second  Appellant
    from 2009 since the  Second  Appellant's  retirement.   Thereafter  the
    Second Appellant looked after the grandchild whilst the First Appellant
    was at work and their day-to-day activities and life  included  factors
    and features, such  as  the  Second  Appellant  going  to  collect  the
    grandchild from school.  Thereafter  the  Second  Appellant  and  First
    Appellant believed they were surveilled by the Chinese authorities and,
    in  any  event,  the  grandchild  was  kidnapped,  and  following  that
    kidnapping the Second Appellant and First Appellant  were  instrumental
    in helping the grandchild  overcome  the  trauma  of  that  experience.
    Thus, given this  shared  traumatic  experience  and  the  instrumental
    nature of the Second Appellant's unchallenged evidence in  helping  the
    grandchild overcome the trauma of  the  kidnapping,  and  their  shared
    family life,  I  find  that  family  life  exists  between  the  Second
    Appellant as a grandparent and with her  grandchild,  pursuant  to  the
    European Court of Human Rights decision in Marckx v  Belgium  [1979]  2
    EHRR 330, and also separately between the Second and  First  Appellant,
    given that the grandchild has been raised without a  father  and  given
    that the Second Appellant  appears  to  have  adopted  the  role  of  a
    surrogate parent alongside her daughter.

 7. It is plain that the Second Appellant's removal will have more  than  a
    technical interference  with  the  family  life  she  enjoys  with  her
    daughter and grandchild, and indeed I find that the consequence of  her
    removal will be to remove an essential building block of  this  fragile
    and traumatised family unit.

 8. In respect of the grandchild, he is not a qualified child as  according
    to the evidence before me within the meaning of  Section  117D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, given that he  is  not  a
    British child and has not resided in the United Kingdom for seven years
    continuously.

 9. In terms of the public interest I take into account Section 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and I note that the Second
    Appellant previously gave evidence with the assistance of  a  Mandarin-
    speaking interpreter and did not give evidence in English, which  falls
    against her.  The Second Appellant appears to have been self-sufficient
    during her time in the United Kingdom which does not fall against  her.
    I further note, however, that the Second Appellant was present  in  the
    United Kingdom at a  time  when  her  status  was  precarious  and  the
    decision is in accordance with firm,  fair  and  effective  immigration
    control.

10. Notwithstanding the above statutory statement of the public interest, I
    take into account the position indicated by the  Secretary  of  State's
    Senior Presenting Officer, Mr S Kotas, whom by way of e-mail dated 25th
    October 2018 conveyed the following:

         "Further to the error of law decision and directions promulgated on
         28 August 2018 in the above appeal, I can confirm I  have  now  had
         sight of the Appellant's supplementary bundle of evidence,  and  in
         light of this and the preserved findings of fact, I do  not  intend
         to resist the second Appellant's Article 8 appeal.

         The SSHD therefore  invites  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  re-make  the
         decision accordingly and without the need for a further hearing".

11. In that light it is plain that the Respondent has  implicitly  accepted
    that the  supplementary  evidence  provided  by  the  Second  Appellant
    demonstrates the family life she shares with her  grandchild  (and  her
    daughter, the First Appellant) and that she is  an  intrinsic  part  of
    this family unit.  Given that the Secretary of State  does  not  resist
    this Article 8 appeal, and given that the First-tier Tribunal has found
    that it is in the child's best interests to remain with his mother,  by
    virtue of the family life shared between the Second Appellant  and  the
    grandchild, I further add that in my view it is  in  the  child's  best
    interests to remain in the care  of  his  grandmother  as  a  surrogate
    parent, and a key member of this family unit.   Thus,  given  that  the
    child's best interests are served by remaining with his mother whom has
    retained refugee status, and given that he would undoubtedly remain  by
    his biological mother's side, I can discern no  public  interest  other
    than the  specific  statutory  interest  stated  above  in  the  Second
    Appellant's removal from this family unit.  Thus, on balance I find the
    decision is a disproportionate interference with the family life of the
    Second Appellant with her grandchild and daughter and  the  balance  is
    tipped in favour of the Second Appellant remaining in this family unit.



12. In light of the above findings, I  find  that  the  Second  Appellant's
    removal would be a disproportionate interference with her family life.

13. Accordingly, I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

14. I re-make the decision in the above terms and hereby allow  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds.

15. The anonymity direction is maintained.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 14 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

