
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/00326/2017

                                                 PA/00328/2017

                                                 PA/00330/2017

                                                 PA/00332/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18th September 2017                    |On 11th October 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                      muhammAd shariq (First Appellant)
                       naila almas (Second Appellant)
                      muhammad bilal (third Appellant)
                      muhammad hamza (fourth Appellant)
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H Rashid, instructed by Marks & Marks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan born in 1961,  1964,  1990  and
    1996. They appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Devlin, dated 21st March 2017, dismissing  their  appeals  against  the
    refusal of their protection claims on asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  on
    24th July 2017 on  the  basis  that  the  judge  arguably  committed  a
    procedural irregularity capable of making a material difference to  the
    outcome of  the  appeals,  when  drawing  upon  his  common  sense  and
    experience as a practical and informed person at paragraphs 91 and  402
    of his decision, before finding aspects of the  Appellants'  claims  of
    fact to be implausible.

3.   The grounds submit that the judge had failed to adequately justify  his
    conclusions in paragraphs 91 and 402 in relying on his common sense and
    experience as a practical and informed  person.  This  amounted  to  an
    error of law because it was clear the  judge  was  not  impartial  when
    making his decision. Further, the judge erred in law in his assessments
    of the first information reports [FIRs]  and  in  failing  to  properly
    apply Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439. The judge had attached too much
    weight to the background material in finding that  these  reports  were
    not genuine.


Preliminary Issue

4.   There were directions on the  court  file  from  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jordan stating that there was only an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal in the case of Muhammad  Shariq  and  that  the  order  granting
    permission was not a grant in respect of all four Appellants.  However,
    it appears from the court file that there were separate notices for the
    third and fourth Appellants and the second Appellant was  dependant  on
    the first Appellant. Accordingly, I am  satisfied  that  there  was  an
    application for permission to appeal in respect of all four  Appellants
    and that the First-tier Tribunal granted permission on that basis.


Submissions

5.   Mr Rashid relied on the grounds, in  particular  at  paragraph  9,  and
    challenged the judge's findings at paragraphs 91 and 402. He  submitted
    that  the  judge  found  it  implausible  that  those   attending   the
    Appellants' home did not identify themselves (paragraph 91) and that it
    was also implausible that  the  relatives,  with  whom  the  Appellants
    stayed prior to coming to the  UK,  would  have  asked  them  to  leave
    (paragraph 402). The judge found it implausible on the basis of his own
    common sense and experience as a practical and informed person.
6.   Mr Rashid submitted that the judge failed  to  take  into  account  the
    circumstances of the Appellants and the actual evidence that was  given
    by them. He submitted that the judge's practical and common  sense  was
    of limited use when assessing the actions of the Taliban and he  relied
    on the judge's direction at paragraph 112 of the decision. The  judge's
    treatment of the evidence at paragraphs 91 and  402  demonstrated  that
    his decision was not impartial. He  was  not  entitled  to  rely  on  a
    practical  and  common  sense  approach  and  could  only  decide   the
    Appellants' case on consideration of all the evidence in the round. The
    judge  erred  in  looking  at  each  point  individually   instead   of
    considering it as a whole.

7.   In relation to the FIRs, Mr Rashid submitted that  the  judge  attached
    too much weight to the background material and failed to properly apply
    Tanveer Ahmed.  Throughout  the  decision  the  judge  was  not  making
    impartial assessments. His approach was flawed and the  Appellants  did
    not have a fair hearing, which amounted to a material error of law.

8.   Mr Tufan submitted that the cases relied on by the Appellants in  their
    grounds of appeal, namely Elayi (fair hearing - appearance) [2016] UKUT
    00508 (IAC) and MM v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    UKUT 105 (IAC), were not relevant because  the  Appellants  claimed  to
    have been persecuted by an unidentified group, which they  thought  was
    the Taliban. It was not a case where the judge was required  to  assess
    the  actions  of  the  persecutors,  or  indeed  the  security  forces.
    Accordingly,  Mr  Rashid's  reliance  on  the  case  of  Lopez-Reyes  v
    Immigration Naturalisation and Service 79 F 3d at 911 (9th Cir,  1996),
    which the judge quoted at paragraphs 116 to 119, was not relevant.

9.   There was no unfairness in this case. It could not  be  said  that  the
    judge was impartial in considering any of the points and,  accordingly,
    Elayi did not apply. The complaint, in relation to  paragraphs  91  and
    402, is that the judge's approach to plausibility was flawed because he
    assessed the evidence on the basis of his  own  experience  and  common
    sense.  This was a lengthy determination and complaint is made  against
    two discrete paragraphs. There was no material error of law. The  judge
    had not adopted an incorrect approach. Any challenge to the  weight  to
    be attached to the background material could not be successful  because
    this was a matter for the judge.

10.  In this case  the  judge  had  looked  at  each  issue  raised  by  the
    Appellants and the Respondent and then considered the evidence  in  the
    round. It could not be said that the judge was impartial or biased when
    the decision was read as a whole.  He did not approach  the  case  with
    any pre-determined view.  In any event, the appeal  could  not  succeed
    because there was no evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  to  show
    that the Taliban would be able to pursue the Appellants  were  they  to
    live in another city and therefore internal relocation  was  an  option
    that was open to them.

11.  In response, Mr Rashid submitted that he only relied on the  Article  8
    point made in the grounds if he succeeded  on  his  asylum  point.  The
    issue here was whether the judge had made a fair  decision.  The  judge
    had not taken into  account  background  material  in  looking  at  the
    evidence of the Appellants. Although he had not done  research  of  his
    own, he had failed to disclose at the time, or give judicial notice  of
    his view expressed at paragraphs 91 and 402. The judge had  not  looked
    at the situation in Pakistan in assessing why the Appellants' relatives
    would have asked the Appellants to leave. The judge had also failed  to
    deal with why the FIRs were discredited. The FIRs did  corroborate  the
    Appellants' accounts and the judge's findings on the basis of  his  own
    experience and not on the basis of the background material  meant  that
    the approach he had taken to the hearing was unfair. He could have come
    to a different conclusion had he approached the evidence impartially.


The Appellants' claims

12.  The Appellants entered the UK on  15th  November  2012  with  leave  to
    enter as visitors. They made applications for leave to remain on  human
    rights grounds in 2013. The applications were refused and their appeals
    withdrawn in December 2013. They made three further applications, which
    were refused. The third and fourth Appellants made protection claims on
    29th June 2016. The first Appellant made a protection claim on 8th July
    2016.

13.  The first Appellant's  protection  claim  was  on  the  basis  that  he
    refused to hand over his sons, the third and fourth  Appellants,  to  a
    group of men who  wanted  to  forcibly  recruit  them  for  jihad.  The
    incident took place on 7th September 2012. The men fired in the air  to
    disperse neighbours and then fled. After the incident,  the  Appellants
    moved, during which time they learned that the men had returned to  the
    family home.

14.  The third Appellant stated that, in November 2011, a group of  five  or
    six males approached him and asked him to join them. He  believed  they
    were the Taliban. He refused to join them and they began to harass him.
    He reported them to the police and a few weeks later they tried to kill
    him  and  his  brother,  the  fourth  Appellant,  when  travelling   by
    motorcycle. In August/September  2012  a  group  of  five  or  six  men
    attacked the Appellants' house firing guns at the front door. Following
    this the family left their home. Whilst in the UK, his  maternal  uncle
    contacted his family and told them that the same men had been round  to
    his home again.

15.  The fourth Appellant stated that in 2011 a group  of  people  tried  to
    force his brother to take part in jihad, but he did not know  who  they
    were. The same people tried to get him to join  them  and  in  November
    2011 he was attacked at his house and shot at.  He then left the family
    home and his paternal uncle informed him that these people continued to
    visit his home.

The judge's decision

16.  The judge  made  the  following  findings  in  relation  to  the  first
    Appellant:

         "91. Drawing upon my common sense and experience as a practical and
             informed person, I consider it to be implausible that the  men
             should at no point have given any indication as to  the  group
             to which they belonged, or  the  cause  for  which  they  were
             fighting, or that they should have said or done  nothing  from
             which their identity or cause could be  inferred  (whether  by
             the Appellant, his fellow villagers, or the police to whom  he
             reported the matter)."


         "92. The vagueness of the Appellant's answers  of  (sic)  interview
             may be contrasted with the information he bears to have  given
             in the First Information Report, dated 7 September 2012."


         "93. This which bears (sic) to  have  been  made  'through  written
             application  by  [him]'.  By  contrast  with  his  answers  at
             interview, this records the Appellant as having said that '...
             the cause  of  the  enmity  [was]  that  some  activists  were
             persuading [his] kids towards Jihad and  [he]  prevented  it'.
             The Appellant made no mention of this in his Asylum Interview,
             despite being asked to 'start [again] from the beginning' (Qu.
             60) and to explain 'Why [the  men]  would  want  to  kill  his
             sons?' (Qus. 61 to 64)."


         "96. Moreover, I consider the Appellant's apparent insouciance with
             regards to the group to which the men belonged, their aims and
             methods, to be so far-fetched and  contrary  to  experience  a
             human behaviour,  as  to  be  almost  incapable  of  belief  -
             particularly, in light of his claim  that  they  continued  to
             pursue him and his family after he had left his village."

17.  The judge found  that  he  was  unable  to  identify  any  satisfactory
    explanation for  the  vagueness  and  lack  of  clarity  in  the  first
    Appellant's answers. In interview, when asked whom he feared, the first
    Appellant stated: "There were some people misbehaving with my  children
    and they were asking them to join their group and they started visiting
    our home.  They came to our home address and were asking that  we  want
    your children to come with us, and then we refused to send our children
    with them and they started firing and the people they gather round  and
    they left because I refused and I said 'What are you doing?  I will not
    let my children do that'".

18.  When asked who these people  were,  the  first  Appellant  replied,  "I
    don't know which group they belong  to".  When  asked  if  it  affected
    others in the community he stated, "They  will  keep  looking  for  the
    young people to join them and somebody  will  join  them.   They  won't
    misbehave with  them".   When  asked,  "Did  you  ask  others  in  your
    community who these people were?"  he  replied,  "The  other  community
    members.  They didn't know either as they  had  covered  their  faces".
    When asked which group did they belong to, he stated, "I did  ask  them
    and they said we will reveal which group they belong to when  you  join
    us and there were four or five people and they started pushing me".

19.  The judge came to the following conclusions on the submissions made  by
    the presenting officer:

         "400.    The sixth point was  that  it  was  implausible  that  the
                Appellants should return to the family home in  Chat  Jamal,
                simply because they could  not  stay  with  their  relatives
                indefinitely, and their papers and belongings were there."


         "401.    I agree."


         "402.     Drawing  in  (sic)  my  commons   sense   and   practical
                experience,  I  do  not  consider  it  plausible  that   the
                Appellants' relations    would have asked them to leave,  if
                they believed that by doing  so,  the  Appellants  would  be
                forced to return to their home in Chat  Jamal,  where  their
                lives would be in danger. That claim is, in my  opinion,  so
                far-fetched and contrary to experience of human behaviour as
                to be incapable of belief."


         "403.    In any event, as the Presenting Officer pointed  out,  the
                Appellant were able to afford flights to the United  Kingdom
                in 2011 and 2012. They  also  owned  the  property  in  Chat
                Jamal, which they could have sold. There was no  reason  for
                them to be rendered destitute even if  their  relatives  had
                asked them to leave."


         "404.    As regards the documents, there are real questions  as  to
                why the first Appellant did not simply ask his neighbours in
                Chat Jamal to retrieve the relevant documents and send  them
                to them, or if that was not possible, why he did not  simply
                retrieve them himself and immediately return to  his  family
                in Karachi."


         "405.    The Appellant did not advance any satisfactory  answer  to
                either question."


         "406.    In any event, I do not  consider  it  plausible  that  the
                first Appellant would have taken his  family  back  to  Chat
                Jamal, in order to collect documents, and they stayed  there
                for a week to ten days, if he had been told that the men had
                been visiting the property on a regular basis."
         "407.    It follows that I consider the Presenting Officer's  sixth
                point to be well-founded."

20.  The judge's findings on credibility were as follows:


         "432.    I accept that Jihadist groups do attempt to recruit  young
                men to their cause. However, I cannot say that  all  of  the
                events described by the Appellants are events of a type that
                might happen in Pakistan, for I  was  not  referred  to  any
                comparable accounts in the country  background  information.
                The Appellants'  accounts  stand  apart,  in  terms  of  the
                assiduity of the men who sought to  recruit  the  third  and
                fourth Appellants; their failure to carry out any  of  their
                threats over a prolonged period of time; and their  apparent
                timidity."


         "433.    I have found that aspects  of  those  accounts  are  quite
                simply implausible.  Thus, I consider it to  be  implausible
                that:
                (i)    the men should at no point have given any  indication
                    as to the group to which they belonged, or the cause for
                    which they were fighting, and that they should have said
                    or done nothing from which their identity or cause could
                    be inferred
                (ii)   that the first Appellant should have said  so  little
                    about the  incident  in  Karachi,  and  that  the  third
                    Appellant  should  not  have  asked  him  for  any  more
                    information;
                (iii)  the Appellants' relations would have  asked  them  to
                    leave, if they believed that by doing so, the Appellants
                    would be forced to return to their home in  Chat  Jamal,
                    where their lives would be in danger;
                (iv)   the whole family should have returned to  their  home
                    district, within a short time of the attack, to check up
                    on the progress of his complaint, or  to  collect  their
                    documents, notwithstanding that they were aware that the
                    men continued to make efforts to locate them; and,
                (v)    the family should have stayed at home for a  week  to
                    ten days before they departed Pakistan."

21.  The judge, in relation to the FIRs, found at  paragraph  440:  "I  note
    the First Information Reports produced by the Appellants, but  bear  in
    mind the country background information with regards to the  ease  with
    which forged documents can be obtained in Pakistan. This causes  me  to
    approach them with some caution. The narrative in  both  reports  seems
    unaccountably vague - particularly given that they were sent  by  post,
    which rather  suggests  that  they  were  composed  at  their  authors'
    leisure. I have noted that there  is  no  independent  evidence  as  to
    provenance, and no attempt has been made to independently verify either
    report, whether by means of  confirmation  from  the  Pakistani  Police
    Force, or a report from an expert confirming that  they  correspond  in
    appearance, format and content with specimens known to be genuine."


22.  The judge concluded at paragraphs 441 to 443:


         "441.    I now come to look at all of the evidence  in  the  round.
                When I do, I find that the numerous difficulties that I have
                identified, exert an enormously strong  negative  pull,  and
                that there is very little advanced by the Appellant's  (sic)
                to counteract  it.   I  therefore  find  that  I  cannot  be
                satisfied, even to the lower standard  of  proof,  that  any
                part of their respective accounts of the events that led  to
                their final departure from Pakistan and the making of  their
                protection claims  in  the  United  Kingdom,  is  worthy  of
                credence."


         "442.    I reject their accounts in their entirety.  They (sic) not
                only internally and mutually discrepant, but, when looked at
                as a whole, entirely implausible."


         "443.    In short, I  do  not  believe  a  word  that  any  of  the
                Appellants says about being pursued by Jihadis in Pakistan."


Discussion and conclusion

23.  The judge dealt with each of the Appellants in turn setting  out  their
    immigration history and the basis of their protection claims.  He  then
    dealt with the reasons for refusal in respect  of  each  Appellant.  He
    noted the  documentary  evidence  submitted,  the  Appellants'  witness
    statements, the oral evidence and submissions.

23.  In coming to his findings and reasons, the judge again dealt with  each
    Appellant in  turn  assessing  whether  the  points  made  against  the
    Appellants in the  refusal  letter  had  any  merit.  He  assessed  the
    Appellants' explanations for the discrepancies pointed out therein. The
    judge carefully evaluated each point made in  the  refusal  letter  and
    gave reasons for why there  was  no  satisfactory  explanation  by  the
    Appellants or why the Respondent's conclusion was not sustainable.

24.  The judge directed himself at paragraph  111,  following  the  case  of
    Wani v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] SLT  875:  The
    decision maker is entitled to draw on his common sense and his  ability
    as a practical and informed person  to  identify  what  is  or  is  not
    plausible.  However,  the  judge  recognised  the  limitation  on   the
    usefulness of common sense and practical experience as touchstones  for
    decisions on plausibility. The judge also recognised the dangers of the
    decision maker implicitly re-characterising  the  persecutors'  actions
    according to his own conceptions of reasonableness,  referring  to  the
    case of Lopez-Reyes.

25.  Accordingly, the judge was well aware  of  the  legal  test  he  should
    apply in approaching the Appellants' evidence. The Appellants make  two
    complaints in relation to paragraphs 91 and 402.

26.  The judge's conclusion that the first Appellant was unable to  identify
    the group to whom his persecutors belonged was one which  was  open  to
    the judge on the evidence before him.  In coming  to  that  conclusion,
    the judge did not only rely on his common sense  and  experience  as  a
    practical and informed person, but also assessed the answers that  were
    given in the first Appellant's asylum interview and in oral evidence.

27.  It is clear from reading the  whole  of  the  judge's  conclusions,  in
    relation to the first Appellant, that he considered every aspect of his
    claim and the  background  material.  The  judge  was  not  merely  re-
    characterising  the  persecutors'  actions   according   to   his   own
    conceptions of reasonableness.   He  made  a  finding  that  the  first
    Appellant was unable to identify his alleged persecutors and that  this
    failed to support the Appellants' claim that they would be at risk from
    the Taliban on return.

28.  In relation to paragraph 402, the judge was dealing  with  points  made
    by the Home Office Presenting Officer.  The  Appellants  had  given  an
    explanation for why they had been asked to leave the home of relatives.
    The Appellants returned to the family home because they could not  stay
    with relatives indefinitely and their papers and belongings were there.
    The point made by the judge was, if the Appellants  were  genuinely  in
    need of protection, then it was not plausible that his relatives  would
    have asked them to leave. Even if there is some error in that approach,
    the judge also went  on  to  consider  the  fact  that  the  Appellants
    returned to the family home. This issue is more fundamental because, if
    the Appellants had suffered as they claimed, why would they  return  to
    their family home when their relatives asked them to leave.  There  was
    no explanation for why they had not gone elsewhere, or for why they had
    not asked somebody else to retrieve their documents. If the  Appellants
    were at risk of harm, the judge found that it was  not  plausible  that
    the first Appellant  would  have  taken  his  family  back  to  collect
    documents and stayed there for a period of ten days. This  finding  was
    open to the judge on the evidence. Again, it was not a  matter  of  the
    judge just looking at the  situation  and  applying  his  view  of  the
    evidence.

29.  It is unfortunate that the judge refers  to  plausibility  rather  than
    credibility in this regard, but in any event the judge's  treatment  of
    the sixth point made by the Presenting Officer, which he  sets  out  at
    paragraph 400, and his conclusion at paragraph 407, discloses no  error
    of law or impartiality. The judge agreed with the submission  that  the
    Appellants' actions in returning home, if they were indeed in  fear  of
    being recruited by jihadists, in order to retrieve documents was not  a
    satisfactory explanation for their actions.

30.  Accordingly, I am of the view that the judge's findings  at  paragraphs
    91 and 402 of the decision disclose no material error of law. The judge
    was not acting impartially or applying his own characterisation of  the
    events. He was assessing the Appellants' evidence and their actions  in
    the context of the situation and the Appellants' claim as a whole.

31.  Further, at paragraph 432 onwards, the judge set  out  his  conclusions
    on the Appellants'  credibility.  The  judge  identified  a  number  of
    discrepancies in the Appellants' account, ten in all,  and  found  that
    there were no satisfactory explanations. There was also no satisfactory
    explanation for the delay in claiming asylum.

32.  There was no error of law in the judge's  assessment  of  the  FIR.  He
    assessed what was said in the FIRs against  the  asylum  interview  and
    other evidence of the Appellants. He was entitled to rely on  the  lack
    of information as to where the FIR had come from  and  whether  it  was
    independently verified. The weight to be  attached  to  the  background
    material was a matter for the judge.



Summary

33.  The judge has properly directed himself  in  drawing  upon  his  common
    sense and experience as a practical person, and he was  well  aware  of
    the dangers of re-characterising the persecutors' actions according  to
    his own conceptions and reasonableness. The judge assessed the evidence
    and found it to be vague and contradictory. None of the Appellants were
    able to identify their claimed persecutors and the  judge's  conclusion
    that their accounts were not capable of belief was one which  was  open
    to the judge on the evidence before him. The judge did not act unfairly
    and he was not impartial.

34.  There was no error of law in the decision to  dismiss  the  Appellants'
    protection claim on asylum and human rights grounds.  It  was  conceded
    by Mr Rashid that the Article 8 claim could not succeed if there was no
    error in the judge's assessment of the protection claim.

35.  Accordingly, I find that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision to dismiss the appeal. The Appellants' appeals are dismissed.



Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.




              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 6th October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 6th October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



