
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00091/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 28 October 2019                   |On 20 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     J B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G L C Brown, instructed by Arshed & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Durance, promulgated on 9 April 2019.  That was  an
    appeal under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  against
    the decision of the respondent made on 7 December 2018  to  refuse  his
    claim for asylum.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo
    ("DRC"), born in 1954.  He served in the army,  eventually  becoming  a
    finance director in 1996 and in that capacity, was  asked  to  organise
    wages to be paid to Rwandan civilians who were to be  infiltrated  into
    the army in a clandestine manner.  That was on the orders of  the  then
    president.  He had refused to do so and was suspended  from  his  post.
    He was appointed to another unit in Kinshasa in February 2018  when  he
    was summoned by intelligence services.  He was then arrested,  detained
    but, was able to escape and fled to the United Kingdom.

 3. The respondent did not accept that the appellant had had problems  with
    the DRC military or that he had come into difficulty owing to a failure
    to carry out an order, did  not  accept  that  he  was  wanted  by  the
    authorities and given inconsistencies  in  his  accounts  nor  did  she
    accept the appellant's account of how he was  able  to  escape  from  a
    vehicle transferring him between prisons or as to how he  was  able  to
    leave the country.

 4. On appeal, the judge heard evidence from the appellant.   He  also  had
    the benefit of a bundle of background material and in addition to that,
    an expert report provided by Dr Mullen.  In addition,  the  appellant's
    case was supported by a number of documents indicative  of  service  in
    the army and a telegram referring  to  his  desertion  from  the  armed
    forces amongst others.

 5. The judge found that :-

      i) the appellant's account was not credible;

     ii) the appellant's account that there was a clandestine  programme  to
         assimilate 250 souls of Rwandan ethnicity into the army of the  DRC
         is  implausible,  an  expert  report  provided  by  the   appellant
         indicating that his account was not supported by  the  evidence  on
         the ground, the  events  described  by  the  appellant  only  being
         sourced to websites which are described as extremist and to peddled
         conspiracy theories;

    iii) the account of the escape and events leading up to the  appellant's
         flight from the DRC lacked credibility;

     iv) the appellant did not travel on a false passport;

      v) the appellant can return to the DRC giving insufficient evidence to
         permit departure from relevant country guidance.

 6. The appellant challenged the decision on the grounds that the judge had
    erred in

         "Failing ... to acknowledge ... a very major implied concession  to
         the appellant's position, in that he was indeed a  colonel  in  the
         DRC Army and, as such a deserter.  Second that a failure to  making
         a clear finding of fact and key aspects of the evidence is an error
         of law and it is on that basis the appellant faced persecution."

 7. In submissions, Mr Brown emphasised a failure to make a  finding  on  a
    material fact, not least as this was supported by a substantial  amount
    of additional evidence covering a number of years, which was supportive
    of the appellant's account of having served  in  the  DRC  Army  for  a
    number of years.

 8. In response, Mr McVeety submitted that in fact the judge had so that he
    did not accept anything in the appeal of account  (see  paragraph  51).
    Further, he submitted that the entire core to the appellant's claim was
    that he had deserted or left his post owing to a failure to  carry  out
    an order which resulted in sanctions being imposed on him.  Given  that
    that had been disbelieved then there was no basis on which it could  be
    said that he had been forced to  leave  the  military  and  accordingly
    there was no basis on which it could be said that he had deserted.   He
    submitted that it was unnecessary to find alternative reasons  for  him
    leaving the army as undoubtedly in his case.

 9. In response Mr Brown drew  attention  to  the  telegram  recording  the
    appellant's desertion for it had been referred to in the refusal letter
    at paragraph 32.  He said that no weight had been attached for instance
    it had not been dated again that was clearly not the case  now  it  was
    evident it was dated 8 March 2018.

10. It cannot properly be said that, as the  grounds  aver,  there  was  an
    implied concession as to the appellant's rank as a colonel in  the  DRC
    Army.  Mr Brown did not press the point.  There  is  no  acceptance  of
    this fact in the refusal letter nor  any  express  concession  to  that
    effect. It cannot be said there was any concession to that  effect  set
    out in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal or that it had been
    made by the respondent's representative at that hearing.  Further,  the
    judge summarises his conclusions at [28] and this does not include  any
    acceptance of service in the military and at [51] the judge said this:

         "I note from the findings above, that the appellant's case has been
         rejected in its entirety.  What is notable about this case is  that
         the account is not only subjectively devious but is  considered  by
         the experts to be positioned on the ground  to  which  it  is  only
         endorsed by those who  peddle  conspiracy  theories  and  extremist
         views.  That indicates that  the  appellant  has  manufactured  his
         claim.  This is a relevant conclusion.  This is not  a  case  where
         there is some kernel of proof that the appellant has embellished or
         re-exaggerated.  That is of  relevance  given  "of  McCluskey  J[1]
         (super)."

11. There is a clear finding that the judge rejected the  entirety  of  the
    claim.   There  is  no  challenge  to  that  finding  (or  indeed   the
    credibility findings); all that is  challenged  in  the  grounds  is  a
    failure to make a finding as to whether or  not  the  appellant  was  a
    serving military officer.  I do not consider that a failure  to  do  so
    was material.  The case as presented was not that the appellant was  at
    risk of being treated as a deserter per se, but that he  had  left  the
    army because of a specific set of circumstances, that is a  refusal  to
    follow what he considered to be an  unlawful  order  resulting  in  his
    transfer, investigation and imprisonment.  Mr  McVeety  submitted,  the
    judge did not accept this  account;  there  is  no  challenge  to  that
    finding; and there is therefore no finding, nor was the judge  required
    to make a finding as to  if  there  were  any  other  reasons  why  the
    appellant had ceased to form part of  the  DRC  armed  forces  or  why.
    Given that, there is no challenge  to  any  of  the  other  credibility
    findings and in this case in particular the evidence of the expert  was
    against the appellant and the judge concluded that the account had been
    fabricated (which is not challenged) it cannot be said that any failure
    not to make any findings as to whether the appellant was  in  the  army
    was material.

12. There are several ways in which the appellant could have left the army.
     He could, given his age, have retired or he may have been  discharged.
    Any finding that he had deserted or was being sought by the state  will
    be for him to prove.  Given that the judge had found that the appellant
    was  not  being  sought  by  the  state,  again  a  finding  which   is
    unchallenged, it cannot be said that any failure to reach a  conclusion
    about the rank or whether he had deserted is material.  The  allegation
    that he deserted the army (or would be seen as having done  so)  cannot
    be taken in isolation to the other findings of fact.

13. There is little merit in the  submission  that  the  judge  erred  with
    respect to the telegram, a better copy of which  is  now  produced.   I
    accept that it appears to show it was issued 8 March 2018 but I find it
    adds nothing to the overall picture.  The judge had  given  cogent  and
    compelling reasons for concluding that the appellant had not  told  the
    truth and had, as noted above, concluded that the appellant was not  at
    risk from the authorities.  He had good reason to reject the telegram's
    reliability as evidence and I was satisfied  the  error  was  material.
    Accordingly, for these reasons, I find that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law  and  I
    uphold it.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    an error of law and I uphold it.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 11 November 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
-----------------------
[1] See BM (false passport) DRC [2015] UKUT 00467 (IAC).

