
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00691/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st May 2018                               |On 10th May 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                            MRS JUSTICE O'FARRELL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [A A]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Nizami (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the  determination
    of the First Tier Tribunal Judge Metzer's  decision  dated  30  January
    2018, promulgated on 31 January 2018, allowing  [AA]'s  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, on  20  July  2015  to  make  a
    deportation order against him on the grounds that his Article 3  rights
    would be breached.



Factual background

 2. [AA] is a national of Somalia and a member of the Habar Younis sub clan
    of the Isaaq clan. He was born on [ ] 1964.

 3. On 31 March 1989, [AA] entered the United Kingdom and on 22 April  1997
    he was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 4. On 8 November 2003 [AA] was convicted of the murder of [HA],  a  Somali
    national living in the United Kingdom and fellow member  of  the  Habar
    Younis sub clan. He was sentenced to life imprisonment with  a  minimum
    term of 9 years and 8 months' imprisonment.

 5. On 8 August 2011 [AA]  was  served  by  the  Secretary  of  State  with
    notification that he was liable to automatic deportation.  On  20  July
    2015 the Secretary of State served on  [AA]  her  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order in accordance with section 32 (5) of the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007, refusing his human rights and protection claim.

 6. [AA] appealed against the Secretary of State's  decision.  On  18  July
    2017 the decision of the FTT Judge  Paul  was  promulgated,  dismissing
    [AA]'s appeal.

 7. [AA] appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  On  1  December  2017  the  Upper
    Tribunal determined that the FTT  decision  was  vitiated  by  material
    errors of law and the case was remitted to the FTT for a fresh hearing.

FTT Decision

 8. By a decision dated 30 January 2018, promulgated on  31  January  2018,
    FTT Judge Metzer allowed [AA]'s appeal on the basis that [AA] would  be
    at risk of a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR were he to be returned  to
    Somalia.

Grounds of appeal

 9. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  grounds
    that the FTT Judge failed to give  any  clear  reasons  as  to  why  he
    allowed the appeal and failed to  deal  with  the  submissions  of  the
    Presenting Officer or the points raised by the Secretary  of  State  in
    the refusal letter.

Legal Framework

10. The appellant is a 'foreign criminal' is within the meaning of  section
    32 (1) of the UK Borders act 2007 because he is not a British  citizen,
    he was convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence and was  sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months.

11. Section 32(4) of the 2007 Act states:

           "For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971
           (c.77), the deportation of a foreign criminal  is  conducive  to
           the public good."

12. Section 32(5) of the 2007 Act states:

           "The secretary of state must make a deportation order in respect
           of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)."

13. Section 33, Exception 1 provides that sections 32 (4) and  (5)  do  not
    apply where the removal of a foreign criminal would result in a  breach
    of his Convention rights.

14. Article 3 of the Convention provides that no one shall  be  subject  to
    torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

FTT decision

15. Before the FTT, [AA]'s appeal was based on Article 3 grounds only.  The
    relevant test was whether substantial grounds were shown for  believing
    that [AA], if deported, would face a real risk of  being  subjected  to
    treatment contrary to Article 3.

16. [AA]'s evidence was that he feared that members of the Haba Younis  sub
    clan and/or members of the family of the murdered [HA]  would  seek  to
    avenge his death if he is returned to  Somaliland.  He  relied  on  his
    witness statement and the statement  of  his  cousin,  [MS],  who  gave
    evidence that her uncle, [NE], who  was  one  of  the  key  negotiators
    involved in reaching agreements with the other family  in  relation  to
    the murder, had died in 2014 and there was no other figurehead  in  the
    extended family to assist in tribal disputes. Reliance was also  placed
    on the expert reports of Professor Mario Aguilar and Dr Marcus  Hoehne,
    who provided expert opinion as to the risk of retribution if [AA]  were
    to return to Somalia and the sufficiency of protection offered  by  the
    state.

17. The Presenting Officer did not call any expert evidence before the  FTT
    but relied on the matters set out in the Secretary of State's  decision
    dated 20 July 2015, in particular those dealing with the sufficiency of
    protection argument.

18. The findings of the FTT Judge are set out in paragraphs [18]  and  [19]
    of the decision:

         "[18].   Having considered the evidence of the appellant,  Ms  Said
         Elni and the two expert reports in relation to the issues in  which
         they are in agreement and applying  the  relevant  and  appropriate
         standard of proof, I find that even though the appellant is serving
         a substantial sentence, namely of life imprisonment in  the  United
         Kingdom and that there was at least some stage some possibility  of
         blood compensation and the fact that there has been no  threats  to
         the appellant in the United Kingdom or to his family in Somaliland,
         nonetheless the appellant remains at substantial risk  of  a  blood
         feud revenge killing were he to be returned to  Somaliland.  Having
         considered the expert evidence and taking  into  account  the  fact
         that the only possible negotiator, namely [NE],  has  sadly  passed
         away, and even  allowing  for  the  extended  period  of  time  the
         appellant has served  his  sentence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
         appellant remains at real  risk  of  ill  treatment  in  breach  of
         Article 3 of the ECHR were he to return to Somalia  or  Somaliland.
         Further in relation to the question of sufficiency  of  protection,
         it is clear from the report of Dr Hoehne and supported by Miss Said
         Elmi that the appellant would have difficulty even getting  to  his
         home area without risk of ill-treatment and that there  is  nowhere
         within the  country  where  he  could  be  safely  returned.  As  I
         indicated above, Mr Harvey did not pursue  the  issue  of  internal
         relocation.  I  also  find  on  the  question  of  sufficiency   of
         protection that given the prevalence  of  revenge  killings,  there
         would be no sufficiency of protection by either the police force or
         the court system within Somalia or Somaliland.

         [19].    In all the circumstances, I find that  the  appellant  has
         established to the relevant standard that were he to be returned to
         anywhere in Somalia or Somaliland where he has not been since  1989
         and where he lacks any meaningful familial  or  clan  support,  the
         appellant would be at risk of a breach of Article 3 of the European
         Convention on Human Rights by reason of the actions of  the  family
         of the man he murdered or persons within their sub clan."

Appellant's submissions

19. Mr Melvin, on behalf of the appellant Secretary of State, submits  that
    the FTT Judge failed to deal with the  submissions  of  the  presenting
    officer or the points raised in the refusal letter.

20. Mr Melvin submits that the FTT Judge failed to consider the sufficiency
    of protection arguments set out at pages 12-13 of the  refusal  grounds
    or the evidence relied on. The  report  entitled  government  and  clan
    system in Somalia dated 5 March 2013 included evidence that there was a
    functioning police force in Somaliland:

         "Member of the Guurti stated that the police in Somaliland consists
         of people from different clans and that all Somali clans could thus
         be found within the police. Therefore, if a person commits a crime,
         others from their clan will be found within the police system.  The
         police will contact the persons clan. It is primarily the  police's
         responsibility to investigate crimes, but the clan will assist  the
         police.  The  clan  members  are  the  police's  eyes.   In   urban
         environments, the victim goes to the  police  station  and  reports
         crimes. In rural areas, the victim goes to the  clan  in  the  same
         case. This depends on the availability of police officers. In rural
         areas, two clans who do not agree can turn to the police.

         An employee at UNDP stated that the police's capacity is limited in
         terms of human rights. All police stations have  received  training
         in the matter of human rights, which does not necessarily mean that
         these rights are implemented. More support is needed for the police
         in Somaliland. The police cannot ensure law and order  efficiently.
         Everything has to do with clan and the family can  go  through  the
         clan to get relatives out of jail..."

21. Mr Melvin further submits that the FTT Judge failed to grapple with the
    underlying weakness in the expert reports relied on by [AA]. There were
    significant differences between the experts that the FTT  Judge  simply
    ignored. Professor Aguilar considered that [AA] would be at risk of the
    death penalty from the sharia courts. Dr Hoehne rejected that view  but
    considered that [AA] would be at a more generalised  risk  of  reprisal
    based on local, customary law. The risks identified by the experts were
    speculative, without any supporting evidence.

22. Mr Melvin's case is that the FTT Judge failed to give any  reasons  for
    rejecting the Secretary of State's criticisms of the expert reports. He
    reached a conclusion without giving adequate reasons for the same  and,
    in so doing, failed to deal fairly with the legitimate  submissions  of
    the Secretary of State.

Respondent's submissions

23. The respondent's case is that the Secretary of State has not identified
    any material error of law in the FTT Decision. The Secretary  of  State
    is seeking, improperly, to re-argue the appeal on the evidence.

24. Reliance is placed on the decision in Mukarkar v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 at paragraph [40]:

         "...different tribunals, without illegality or  irrationality,  may
         reach different conclusions on the same case... The mere fact  that
         one tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually direct generous
         view of the facts of a particular case does not mean  that  it  has
         made an error of law, so as to justify  an  appeal  under  the  old
         system, or an order for reconsideration onto the new. Nor  does  it
         create any precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of State's right
         to argue for a more restrictive approach on a similar case  in  the
         future. However, on the facts of the particular case, the  decision
         of the specialist tribunal should be respected."

25. Ms  Nizami,  on  behalf  of  [AA],  submits  that  the  sufficiency  of
    protection issues were before the FTT Judge and he  expressly  referred
    to pages 12-13 of the Secretary of State's refusal letter as containing
    the submissions relied on by the Presenting Officer.

26. Ms Nizami disputes Mr Melvin's characterisation of the  expert  reports
    as conflicting. Although there  were  differences  between  the  expert
    views, both Professor Aguilar and Dr Hoehne agree that [AA] would be at
    risk of ill-treatment if he were to be returned to Somalia. She  relies
    on Dr Hoehne's assessment at paragraphs [10] to [11], namely, that [AA]
    would be at risk of encountering Habar Yuonis from  other  lineages  on
    his journey to Erigabo and that he would be at a high risk  of  falling
    victim to revenge killing on his  return.  At  paragraph  [12]  of  his
    report, Dr Hoehne states that he agrees largely with the  deliberations
    of Professor Aguilar in this case.

27. Dr Hoehne  identifies  two  substantial  points  of  disagreement  with
    Professor Aguilar at paragraphs [13] and [14] of his  report.  Contrary
    to Professor Aguilar, he does not consider that a  state  of  execution
    under sharia law would be likely and his view is that the  jurisdiction
    of the clans is recognised by the government of Somaliland. However, he
    states clearly at the end of that section of his report that [AA] would
    be at risk of  a  revenge  killing.  Therefore,  although  the  experts
    disagree on the source of the risk, through the sharia courts or  local
    elders, they agree that there would be such a risk.

28. Ms Nizami submits that there is no material error of  law  in  the  FTT
    Decision. However, if she is wrong, it would not make any difference to
    the outcome because the expert evidence was so clear and compelling.

Discussion and conclusion

29. We have some sympathy for the position of the  Secretary  of  State  in
    that, aside from the reference to the reasons in  the  refusal  letter,
    the FTT Judge did not set out  the  points  raised  by  the  presenting
    officer and explain his reasons for rejecting them.

30. However, the Secretary of State did not  call  any  factual  or  expert
    evidence to challenge [AA]'s case and therefore, the FTT Judge did  not
    have the same  volume  of  material  to  consider.  He  identified  and
    considered the key points relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State  by
    reference to the relevant factual and expert evidence before him.

31. The FTT Judge considered the risk that would be faced by  [AA]  on  his
    journey to Erigavo. That was addressed by Ms Said  Elmi  (at  paragraph
    [12] of the decision) and by  Dr  Hoenhe  (at  paragraph  [15]  of  the
    decision). Mr Melvin makes the point that no evidence  is  produced  to
    support those assertions. Dr Hoenhe does refer to  supporting  evidence
    in paragraph [10] of his report. In any event, that is an attack on the
    underlying merits of the appeal and not an error of law on the part  of
    the FTT Judge.

32. The FTT Judge considered the  sufficiency  of  protection  issue.  Both
    experts referred to this issue in their reports. At paragraph  [24]  of
    his  report,  Professor  Aguilar  considers  that  there  would  be  no
    government or police capability  to  intervene  to  prevent  a  revenge
    killing. At paragraph [10] of his report, Dr  Hoehne  states  that  the
    police would not intervene and  cites  an  incident  of  which  he  has
    personal knowledge. Although it would have  been  clearer  if  the  FTT
    Judge had referred to the 2013 report relied on  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, that report is equivocal as to the capability of the police.  It
    confirms that there is a functioning police  force  in  Somaliland  but
    also states that: "the police's capacity is limited in terms  of  human
    rights ...  The  police  cannot  ensure  law  and  order  efficiently."
    Therefore, even if the FTT Judge had analysed that report, it would not
    have outweighed the views expressed by the experts.

33. The FTT Judge recognised and referred to the disagreements between  the
    experts. He did  not  analyse  those  disagreements  in  his  decision.
    However, he was entitled to reach the  conclusion  that  they  were  in
    agreement on the fundamental issue in the case,  namely,  whether  [AA]
    would be at risk of a revenge killing.

34. The FTT Judge gave adequate reasons for his decision. He  set  out  the
    relevant factual and expert evidence and  explained  the  matters  that
    persuaded him that, despite the absence of threats made to [AA],  there
    was a risk that [AA]'s  Article  3  rights  would  be  breached  if  he
    returned to Somalia.

35. There was no error of law in  the  decision.  The  FTT  Judge  directed
    himself to the appropriate test and was entitled to  conclude,  on  the
    basis of  the  evidence  before  him,  that  the  Article  3  case  was
    established.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
law

The decision shall stand



Signed:                                 Date: 03 May 2018

Mrs Justice O'Farrell






