

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: PA/00488/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |        Decision & Reasons        |
|                                  |Promulgated                       |
|On 17 November 2017               |        On 19 December 2017       |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                    j k a
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms E Mitchell, counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:   Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.       The Appellant, a national of  Egypt,  date  of  birth  15  February
    1999, appealed against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  an  asylum
    claim and recognition as a refugee made on 30 December 2016.

2.       His appeal against that decision came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S Turquet (the Judge) who, on 24 April 2017, dismissed the appeal
    on all grounds but made an  anonymity  direction  which  is  continued.
    That adverse decision led to the  grant  of  permission  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne on 11 September 2017.   The  Respondent  made  a
    Rule 24 response on 28 September 2017 which, in short, sought to  argue
    that there was no material error in the Judge's decision.

3.       The grounds of appeal are extensive and varied.  So  far  as  I  am
    concerned, without doing injustice to the elegance of the drafting, the
    significant grounds seem  to  me  to  be  ground  4  (in  dealing  with
    procedural fairness) and ground 2, (the treatment of the expert country
    evidence).  Grounds 2 and 3  go  to  the  core  element  of  the  claim
    relating  to  the  assessment  of  psychiatric  evidence  and  evidence
    relating, to put it broadly, to the  Appellant's  mental  and  physical
    health and the risks he faces on return.

4.       The essential claim is that by reason of  events  that  arose,  the
    Appellant remains at risk either as a result of an  honour  killing  or
    alternatively, a blood feud, without effective protection in  the  home
    area and elsewhere in Egypt were he to  be  returned.   The  additional
    element is the Appellant's mental health  and  the  impact  on  him  on
    removal.

5.       For the purposes of this decision  I  have  considered  with  great
    care the extensive arguments that have been run for and  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant by Ms Mitchell.  In short, I take the view that the Judge
    sought to decide the various issues that arose, and by  and  large  she
    did so.  It seemed to me that the Judge's errors  are  first  that  she
    took into account issues which had not been directly raised.  She  also
    misjudged the significance of the nature of  the  screening  interviews
    and differences arose with the AIR as being of such significance so  as
    to dispose of issues of credibility.

6.       Secondly, it seemed to me that the Judge erred  in  addressing  the
    background evidence and particularly the  expert  evidence  as  to  the
    level of risks that might be faced from such  type  of  killing  as  he
    feared.  Part and parcel of those adverse  conclusions  I  concede  did
    lead at least to the  significant  appearance  that  having  failed  to
    satisfy the Judge that the lower standard of proof had been  met.   The
    rejection of the claim because of unspoken  matters  in  the  screening
    interview, bearing in mind  the  Appellant  was  at  the  time  of  the
    screening interview a child and just an  adult  at  the  point  of  the
    asylum interview, I conclude that there was the  appearance  of  unfair
    adverse findings made against the Appellant's credibility.

7.       Before looking at all the evidence in the round the  Judge  reached
    adverse  conclusions  on  the  claim  at  a  time  when  the  principal
    objections were certainly, not put, or alternatively not raised by  the
    Judge so as to encourage submissions to address the important issues.

8.       I bear in mind particularly that the age of the  Appellant  was  at
    all times pertinent to the claimed events and pertinent in the  context
    of mental health to the kind of issues that could arise in his care and
    since he had been in the United Kingdom.  For these reasons, whilst  as
    I say I think the Judge did do her very best to  try  and  address  the
    issues raised, it did not become apparent in  the  reasoning  that  she
    achieved her aims but  rather,  having  adversely  concluded  upon  the
    Appellant's account and having rejected  it,  she,  consistent  as  she
    would say  it  therewith,  rejected  other  evidence  or  drew  adverse
    conclusions  from  the  absence  of  other  evidence  to  buttress  the
    conclusion that the Appellant had not suffered in  the  manner  claimed
    and was not a potential victim of a blood feud.

9.       If I have not done total justice to the submissions made by  either
    side to it simply because it seems to me  at  this  stage  unnecessary.
    There were procedural errors of law and certainly  arguable  errors  in
    relation to the assessment of the evidence and the  proper  application
    of the case law.  In the circumstances it seemed to me that this  is  a
    case where the Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  Regrettably,
    the only fair and reasonable course for the  proper  disposal  of  this
    matter is that it should be returned to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
    re-started all over again.  That is the consequences the  parties  have
    submitted to me of this matter. Whilst I would have preferred  to  deal
    with the appeal in the Upper Tribunal,  since  the  whole  decision  is
    going to be set aside, it  seemed  to  me  that  the  right  course  in
    accordance with the Presidential Direction, paragraph 7.2, is that  the
    matter returns to the First-tier Tribunal.  It is  a  great  pity  that
    this should need to be the case but it seems to me fairness demands it.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter is to be remade in  the
First-tier Tribunal

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed
    Date 24 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


