
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00343/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 May 2019                       |On 28 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    m h s
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms K Reid, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent" and Mr H S  as  "the
    Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia who appealed against  a  decision
    of the Respondent refusing him international  protection.  That  appeal
    was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  AM  Black  who,  in  a
    decision  promulgated  on  20  February  2019,  allowed  it   on   both
    humanitarian protection grounds and under Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal. It was granted on  3  April
    2019 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal PJM Hollingworth. His  reasons
    for so granting were: -

         "It is arguable that the Judge has attached insufficient weight  to
         the available evidence in relation to suitability. It  is  arguable
         that the Judge has set out an insufficient analysis of  the  extent
         of the  reasoning  based  on  the  available  medical  evidence  in
         construing the evidence given by the Appellant. It is arguable that
         the overall credibility assessment by the Judge has been  affected.
         In this context it is further arguable  that  the  past  dishonesty
         attracted greater weight. At paragraph 60 the Judge referred to not
         doubting that the Appellant had lied in the past to the  Respondent
         and Entry Clearance Officer. The Judge went on to  state  that  the
         Judge did not condone his dishonesty. The  Judge  referred  to  the
         ambit of the available medical evidence. It is arguable that  these
         issues are pertinent to the outcome given the  issues  advanced  in
         particular at paragraph 10 of the  permission  application.  It  is
         further arguable that procedural irregularity took place  affecting
         the outcome as put  forward  at  paragraph  14  of  the  permission
         application. "

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. At today's hearing Mr Walker sought to pursue only two of  the  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal. He firstly referred me to paragraph 12 of
    the grounds seeking permission to appeal. This argues that the identity
    of the Appellant, the validity of his marriage, the  paternity  of  the
    children and his nationality  remained  unresolved.  It  suggests  that
    suitability issues were to be considered but that the Judge had clearly
    failed to apply them in the context of the appeal and  with  regard  to
    the Appellant's overall credibility despite finding that the  Appellant
    had made false entry clearance applications, lied in the  past  to  the
    Respondent and Entry Clearance Officers and has given  little  evidence
    of substance,  stating  largely  that  he  cannot  remember  events  in
    Somalia. However, Mr Walker,  quite  rightly,  accepted  that  the  DNA
    evidence within the appeal went a long way to proving the paternity  of
    the children. However, the Appellant has  behaved  dishonestly  in  the
    past.

 6. Mr Walker urged me to accept that the Judge had also fallen into  error
    in her approach to medical evidence. He referred me to paragraph 52  of
    the  Judge's  decision  where  she  finds  that  the  Appellant  has  a
    debilitating cognitive  impairment  and  whilst  there  is  no  medical
    evidence on the issue he is not capable of taking employment to support
    himself. The Judge also found there that  he  has  difficulty  engaging
    with those around him if complex issues are raised. He has right  sided
    physical weakness which would render even menial  work  very  difficult
    indeed. He cannot put on  his  own  shoes,  according  to  the  medical
    evidence. The prospect of his being able to find employment  on  return
    are very limited indeed, to the point of being unlikely. As I  say,  Mr
    Walker urged me to accept that this was no more than speculation on the
    part of the Judge.

 7. Mr Walker did  not  seek  to  resist  Ms  Reid's  argument  that  Judge
    Hollingworth, in granting  permission  to  appeal  did  not  do  so  in
    relation to the "misdirection of law"  grounds.  This  related  to  the
    suggestion the Judge had incorrectly applied country guidance from  the
    authority of MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]  UKUT
    00442 (IAC). In particular a failure by the Judge to consider that only
    those without family support who will not be in receipt of  remittances
    from abroad and who have no real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
    livelihood  on  return  who  will  face  the  prospects  of  living  in
    circumstances falling below that which is  acceptable  in  humanitarian
    protection terms. In any event, it is  plain  from  a  reading  of  the
    Judge's decision that she has given appropriate  consideration  to  the
    relevant country guidance. She sets it  out  at  paragraph  48  of  the
    decision. At paragraphs 52-54 she makes findings  in  relation  to  the
    circumstances the Appellant would face on return to Somalia  and  gives
    adequate reasons for those findings. She also makes  findings  that  he
    would be unable to work on return to his country  of  origin,  that  he
    would be destitute and that he would be returning alone.  At  paragraph
    55 she explains why, even  if  funds  were  remitted  from  the  United
    Kingdom, this would not assist the Appellant.  The  Judge  has  further
    considered these issues at paragraphs 63 and 64 of her decision.  There
    is no perversity therein. The Judge has given proper  consideration  to
    relevant country guidance before coming to a decision that was open  to
    her.

 8. Ms Reid relied upon her Rule 24 response. She argued that the Judge had
    dealt with all material factual  disputes  and  has  provided  adequate
    reasons for coming to the conclusions that she  did.  I  find  for  the
    reasons set out in that response the Judge has not materially erred  as
    asserted in the Respondent's grounds. The Judge  has  fully  considered
    the material facts which adversely affected the Appellant's credibility
    with particular  reference  to  the  Appellant's  previous,  apparently
    dishonest visa application. The Judge has set out these applications at
    paragraph 38 of her decision and has further noted at paragraph 40 that
    she had not been provided with the Appellant's application form or  the
    decision and reasons of the Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the
    refusal of entry clearance. However, at paragraph 57  of  her  decision
    the Judge has explicitly recorded that the  applications  made  by  the
    Appellant were not to his credit. She has given appropriate  weight  to
    the past dishonest applications at paragraph 60 of the decision and has
    gone on to fully explain why the past dishonesty had little bearing  on
    his circumstances on return. The Judge has given careful  and  detailed
    consideration to the medical evidence contained within the  Appellant's
    bundle and has considered all the competing issues in relation thereto.
    In so doing she has taken into account medical evidence including  that
    to be found at pages 73 and 85 of the Appellant's bundle. The former is
    from Barts Health NHS Trust which has attached to it the Appellant's GP
    notes. The latter is from the East London NHS Foundation Trust and is a
    report  of  Laura  Hardy  who  is  a  specialist  speech  and  language
    therapist. It makes  reference  to  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    medical reports which show that  he  presented  with  severe  cognitive
    difficulties and echolalic speech and that  from  the  report  writer's
    observations  the  Appellant  presented  with   significant   cognitive
    communication difficulties.  There  is  no  speculation  whatsoever  in
    paragraph 52 of the Judge's decision. The Judge has taken into  account
    the evidence that she had and has come to conclusions that were open to
    be made. Those conclusions are adequately  reasoned.  Contrary  to  the
    Respondent's assertions the Judge has adequately dealt with  the  issue
    of the validity of his marriage, the paternity of his children and  his
    nationality. They do not remain unresolved. The Judge has made findings
    in relation to the relationship that he has with his wife and children,
    his nationality and the DNA evidence which establishes that he  is  the
    father of the children.

 9. None of the Respondent's grounds are made out. The Judge  has  come  to
    factual findings that were open to be  made  on  the  totality  of  the
    evidence that was before her. Her decision is adequately  reasoned  and
    contains no material error of law whatsoever.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 23 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

