
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/00631/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 2nd May 2017                       |          On 25th May 2017           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between


                                    h t t
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity having previously been ordered  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
there being no application to remove the order, I see no  reason  to  do  so
and the order remains in place.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  a  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The following circumstances appear uncontroversial.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam.  She was  born  on  2nd  January
    1982.  Dependant on the outcome of her appeal is the  position  of  her
    son "A1" born in the UK on 6th August 2015.  The Appellant has an older
    child, a son born in Vietnam in 2005, whom  she  last  saw  about  five
    years ago, and who has remained in Vietnam living  with  relatives,  an
    aunt in Phugu District, Hung Yen Province.

 3. The Appellant moved to Hanoi City when she was 12 years old to  support
    herself.

 4. In 2010, aged 28, and having had her eldest child,  she  accepted  what
    she thought was a genuine offer of employment selling clothes to China,
    and arranged for her son to go to relatives so she could  take  up  the
    offer. In the event, she was forced to work as a prostitute in China.

 5. In 2013 she escaped and, with the assistance of a man she met in China,
    she travelled, over a period of months, to the United Kingdom  arriving
    on 10th August 2014.

 6. On 5th May 2015, the Appellant, pregnant and  having  become  separated
    from the Vietnamese people with whom she  was  living,  claimed  asylum
    asserting that she was frightened to go home because she owed money  to
    her traffickers.

 7. She was referred to the National Referral Mechanism who concluded  that
    the Appellant had been the victim of trafficking in 2010, when she  was
    forced to go to work as a prostitute in China for three years.

 8. On 5th January 2016, the Respondent refused the Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum,  on  the  basis  that  she  would  not  be  at  risk  from  her
    traffickers,  there was in any event  a sufficiency of protection  and,
    finding  no  significant  obstacles  to  her  return  and  integration,
    concluded  she did not qualify to remain under the Immigration Rules at
    paragraph 276ADE (HC 395 as amended) (private life Rules) and that  her
    removal along with her baby, under Section 10 of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999, would not breach Article 8 ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The Appellant appealed.  The Appellant asserted that the brothel owners
    in China would seek her out in Vietnam and try to  kill  her.   Further
    she had no family to rely on. Her father  is  dead.   Her  mother  left
    Vietnam taking two of her siblings with her years ago, and she has  had
    no contact with her since.  She believes, having read  about  gangs  of
    traffickers on the internet, that her traffickers have a reach that can
    extend anywhere, including to finding her on  return  to  Vietnam,  and
    they would do so because of the money that she owes. Her own experience
    of paying off the police when she has been stopped for  not  wearing  a
    helmet on a motorbike, shows a degree of corruption in the police force
    which means that there would be no sufficiency  of  protection  by  the
    state  against  her  old  traffickers  because  they  would   pay   for
    protection. She would be unable to escape her traffickers by  going  to
    the area that her family came from because she had told her traffickers
    that she came from that area, so they  would  be  able  to  locate  her
    whether she was in Hanoi, from where she had been trafficked, or in her
    family home area.   Her mother's sister is still alive but gave her  no
    help when she was young and had to leave and go to Hanoi, and would not
    help her now.  She had spoken to her  aunt  about  the  possibility  of
    returning to live with them and her aunt had raised concerns about  her
    presence affecting their standard of living and creating a risk to  the
    family from the traffickers.

10. Judge Fowell found that the Appellant had been trafficked but, applying
    the case of Nguyen v SSHD [2015] UKUT 00170 (IAC), concluded that  risk
    from her traffickers would be minimal given that she has had no contact
    with them for years, and would be returning to a  rural  location  away
    from Hanoi from where she was trafficked.  The case  provided  guidance
    that it was rare for a victim to encounter her traffickers  on  return,
    but that in any event, there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  from
    traffickers in Vietnam. The judge found that although  the  Appellant's
    aunt had raised concerns about the cost of having  the  Appellant  live
    with her, and concerns about a risk from her traffickers, a risk  which
    he concluded did not exist, the  aunt  had  not  refused  to  help  the
    Appellant on return  to  Vietnam,  nor  was  there  evidence  that  the
    Appellant would not be able to care for herself and her son  living  in
    her home rural area.  The judge noted that the case of LB [2004]  UKIAT
    00331 (IAC) concluded that it would not be unduly  harsh  to  expect  a
    single mother with a baby and two other children to relocate to a  safe
    area where she had no family, to get  away  from  gangs  demanding  the
    repayment of loans.

11. The judge noted that the country information including the Respondent's
    Country of Origin Information Report of May 2016 and the sources relied
    upon therein made it clear  that,  in  the  Appellant's  circumstances,
    there was no basis to conclude that she would be at risk of persecution
    or serious harm on return, but that in any event any such risk was  met
    by a sufficiency of protection.  In respect  of  Article  8  the  judge
    noted that the Appellant could not meet the Immigration  Rules  on  the
    facts as he had found  them  to  be,  and  that  her  and  the  child's
    circumstances did not otherwise warrant a grant of leave under  Article
    8 ECHR.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    application was on five grounds:

    (i)    The judge failed to consider a risk  of  re-trafficking  by  new
         traffickers given her particular vulnerability as a woman  who  had
         been trafficked for sex work, with two illegitimate  children,  and
         without family support.

    (ii)   The judge failed to reason why her traffickers would  no  longer
         be interested in her because the judge failed to refer  to  country
         evidence in support of his contention that  passage  of  time,  and
         absence  of  contact  from  the  traffickers  reduced   risk.   The
         conclusion was undermined by the  international  dimension  of  the
         historical trafficking from Vietnam to China.  Further the  judge's
         conclusion that the Appellant had family resources was contrary  to
         her evidence that her aunt had refused to help her previously  when
         she was a child.

    (iii)  The question of internal relocation was inadequately  considered
         in the context of LB [2004] UKIAT  00331  because  gangs  demanding
         repayment of loans cannot be equated with international traffickers
         and further the judge  had  failed  to  deal  with  the  particular
         vulnerabilities of the Appellant.

    (iv)  The  Rules  based  assessment  was  flawed.    "Very  significant
         obstacles" as referred to in paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  HC  395  was
         inadequately considered. A finding that the Appellant could  return
         without risk, or that there was a sufficiency of protection to meet
         any risk, or that there was a viable option of internal relocation,
         was an insufficient answer to  the  question  of  very  significant
         obstacles.  Taking account of the Appellant's  vulnerability,  lack
         of family support, the stigma attached to single  mothers  and  the
         lack of a means of supporting  herself  properly,  were  sufficient
         basis upon which to find that there were  insurmountable  obstacles
         to her reintegration.

    (v)    In terms of Article 8 outside of the Rules the judge  failed  to
         consider whether there was a reasonably arguable case under Article
         8 which had not been sufficiently dealt with  by  consideration  of
         the Rules.

13. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on 9th September 2016 but granted on renewal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds were repeated in full with the addition of  a  response  to
    the First-tier Tribunal's refusal to grant permission to the point that
    there had  been  a  complete  failure  to  consider  a  risk  from  new
    traffickers, and that the judge's conclusion  that  the  Appellant  has
    family in Vietnam was made on the erroneous view that  the  family  had
    not refused to assist her, when the Appellant's evidence had been  that
    they would not help her.

14. On  17th  October  2016,  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted  the  Appellant
    permission to appeal, without restriction, but specifically because  it
    was found  arguable  that  there  had  been  inadequate  reasoning  for
    rejecting the Appellant's claim  to  be  at  real  risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked.

Discussion

15. Before us, Mr R Sharif appeared for the Appellant. He was instructed by
    Fountain Solicitors, who were themselves instructed in place of Migrant
    Legal Project who had represented the Appellant before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Mr Sharif had not had earlier connection with the  case.   He
    relied upon the renewed Grounds of Appeal.

16. Mr Sharif, whilst accepting that it had never  been  suggested  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant was at risk  from  different  or
    new traffickers, submitted the  failure  to  assess  such  a  risk  was
    "Robinson" obviously wrong because it would have been apparent  to  the
    judge, from the country information provided in the bundles that such a
    risk existed. We pressed  him  to  take  us  to  the  relevant  country
    information, and he took us to the Country of Origin Information Report
    "Country Information and Guidance Vietnam: Trafficking" of May 2016  at
    page 164, but it was apparent there was nothing there  to  sustain  the
    argument, and the point fell away.

17. During discussion, we pointed out to Mr Sharif that in  any  event,  as
    the grounds had not challenged the judge's finding that, even if  there
    was  risk  to  the  Appellant  of  being  re-trafficked,  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection, any error in  assessment  of  risk  was  not
    material.  Mr Sharif gamely requested permission to amend his  grounds,
    to challenge the judge's conclusion on  that  point.   He  took  a  few
    minutes to consider the country information  but  was  unable  to  draw
    together, or particularise, a ground.  Taking us again to page  168  of
    the Respondent's guidance, as to the matters to be considered  and  the
    protection available (paragraph 2.33 through to  2.48)  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal case of Nguyen, he was unable to point to any strengths in the
    ground.

18. In respect of Ground 2 Mr Sharif reiterated the ground's assertion that
    the fact that there had been no contact with the traffickers for  years
    did not establish that they would not be interested  in  pursuing  her.
    Further, reasoning that the Appellant would be in a rural  area  rather
    than in Hanoi, was predicated on finding that she would go to the rural
    area because of the  support  of  family  there,  but  the  Appellant's
    evidence was that her aunt would not  help,  so  the  finding  was  not
    supported by the evidence.

19. In respect of Ground 3 Mr Sharif argued that when considering  internal
    relocation there had  been  inadequate  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    vulnerabilities in terms of her personal circumstances.

20. In respect of Grounds 4  and  5,  relating  to  Article  8,  Mr  Sharif
    indicated that he had no submissions to make but relied on the  grounds
    as drafted.

21. Mr Kotas for the Respondent argued that the failure to consider a  risk
    from new traffickers was not erroneous because the  Appellant  had  not
    relied on such a risk.

22. Mr Kotas submitted that, reading the decision in the round, the reality
    was that there were two points that the judge found were fatal  to  her
    claim.

23. Firstly, as the  decision  made  clear,  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    forthright about the family circumstances in Vietnam, only conceding in
    cross-examination that she had been  in  contact  with  the  family  in
    Vietnam, and on the one hand saying that the family would not help  her
    now because they had not helped her when she had been forced to support
    herself by going to work in Hanoi when she was 12 years old, and on the
    other, that they were looking after her son whom she had  sent  to  the
    family when she thought that she was going to obtain new work in  2010,
    but was in fact trafficked.  In the context of all the evidence it  was
    open to the judge to find that the aunt had not refused to help.

24. Secondly there was no medical  evidence  of  particular  vulnerability,
    including medical or psychological factors  having  an  impact  on  the
    Appellant, as the judge noted at paragraph 32 of the decision.  To  the
    point that the judge was entitled to find  in  the  alternative  ,  and
    contrary to his primary conclusions, that,  in the event the  Appellant
    faced a risk in Hanoi and there was insufficient protection  available,
    the risk could be avoided by going to the safe haven of the home  area,
    and that was not unduly harsh for her to relocate  from  Hanoi  to  the
    family's rural home area.

25. Mr Kotas submitted that those points were sufficient to deal  with  the
    remainder of the grounds. In the  context  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    paragraph 276 ADE and  the  issue  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration, nothing additional had been relied upon, as identified  by
    the judge at paragraph 34 of the decision. Regarding  Article  8  ECHR,
    whilst the judge  might  have  said  more,  the  facts  as  found  were
    incapable of giving rise to a different result.  The Appellant had only
    been in the United Kingdom since 2014, and the judge had concluded that
    she could safely return to Vietnam, and can look after herself and  her
    child.

26. Mr Sharif indicated he did not wish to reply.

27. We begin by considering the ground relying upon the judge's failure  to
    consider a risk from new traffickers.  The Appellant had not  expressed
    a subjective fear of being re-trafficked by new traffickers,  the  risk
    was not relied upon in the Grounds  of  Appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, so far as we can tell, as part of the submissions  made
    by the Appellant's legal representative. The findings in respect of the
    lack of any real risk to the  Appellant  in  the  context  of  her  own
    circumstances, as they were evidenced to the judge, including her  age,
    absence of health problems, ability to call on family  support  and  to
    earn a living legitimately, were all findings open to the judge on  the
    evidence,  as  we  explain  below,  and  clearly  pointed   away   from
    vulnerability to being re-trafficked by new traffickers.  It is not  an
    error of law for the judge to fail to deal with an argument  which  was
    not raised, and where clearly, as on the facts found  here,  the  judge
    would  in  any  event  have  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had   not
    established, even to the low standard, that there was such a risk.

28. The grounds arguing error  in  the  judge's  reasoning  concerning  the
    support available to the Appellant from family are without  merit.   In
    the Appellant's  unusually  short  witness  statement  she  states,  at
    paragraph 5:

      a) "my aunt, my father's sister is still alive.  I could not stay with
         her.  She didn't help me when I was young and had to go  and  work,
         so I do not think she would help me now ..."

29. As Mr Kotas pointed out the piecemeal way in which  the  evidence  came
    out was unsatisfactory.  Only when pressed in cross-examination did the
    Appellant admit that she had had contact with her aunt,  and  that  she
    still lives in  Hung  Yen,  about  two  hours  from  Hanoi,  where  the
    Appellant was born and lived until she was 12.   It  was  only  in  re-
    examination that she went on to say that she had  spoken  to  her  aunt
    about the possibility of returning to the family in  Vietnam,  and  the
    aunt had been concerned that it would affect the family's  standard  of
    living, and that they were worried  about  the  traffickers.   Evidence
    that her son lived with her aunt only came out following  clarification
    by the judge.  In those circumstances, it was  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that the aunt had not actually refused  to  help  her,  albeit
    that she had concerns. The judge was entitled to make his finding  that
    the concern about risk from the  traffickers  was  unfounded  and  that
    there was no evidence to show that the Appellant  would  be  unable  to
    care for herself and her son.  Mr Sharif argued that the  circumstances
    of the Appellant in the context of her age, gender, health, skills  and
    family ties required greater exploration, but brought  forward  nothing
    that the judge has not considered.

30. In asserting that the judge needed to bring forward evidence to support
    his "contention" that the Appellant's remove to a  rural  location  and
    the passage of years without contact from her traffickers  reduced  the
    risk of being re-trafficked  the  argument  is  flawed.   Firstly,  the
    burden is on the Appellant to establish her case, and it  was  open  to
    the judge to find that it has  not  been  established.  Secondly  those
    conclusions are in-line with the reported  cases  concerning  risk  and
    sufficiency of protection of  Nguyen  and  LB.   The  grounds  fail  to
    identify any evidence going to show that  the  Appellant's  traffickers
    would still be interested in her.  Mr Sharif could take us  to  nothing
    in the country information revealing  the  judge's  conclusions  to  be
    perverse, and his suggestion that the fact that  the  traffickers  took
    her across an international border from Vietnam into China does not  of
    itself suggest either a reach or current interest, making  the  judge's
    conclusion unsustainable.

31. Mr Sharif's argument that the consideration of internal relocation  was
    insufficiently individualised  fails,  for  the  reasons  at  [28]-[29]
    above.

32. All the grounds challenging the judge's  findings  in  respect  of  the
    judge's assessment of risk, none of which are made out for the  reasons
    above, are in any event fatally flawed by the failure to challenge  the
    sufficiency of protection finding.  We have set out our reasoning above
    as to why Mr Sharif's late  appreciation  of  that  difficulty  mid-way
    through his submissions, and consequent request to amend  the  grounds,
    could not meet with success (see [17] above).  In short, as per Nguyen,
    the historical nature of the trafficking was relevant, the  country  is
    large with some 90 million people  and  the  chance  of  the  Appellant
    coming across her traffickers is "very slight".  In  Nguyen,  a  single
    mother with three very small children returning alone to Vietnam,  even
    in the context of having previously been trafficked, was found  not  to
    be at real risk of harm on that account.  At paragraph 52 the  Tribunal
    stated "It is speculative and no more to suggest that she would face  a
    real risk of coming across her previous traffickers or that, as a woman
    in the circumstances in which she would return, she faced a  real  risk
    of being trafficked by someone  else."   Additionally,  Nguyen  guides:
    "there is evidence, in the US State Department report of 2010, referred
    to in paragraph 50 above, to support the Respondent's conclusion in the
    decision letter that there is a sufficiency of protection  provided  by
    the authorities in Vietnam."

33. For all the reasons above the judge was entitled to conclude  that  the
    Appellant had failed to establish her case, to the  relevant  standard,
    on international protection grounds.

34. We turn briefly to the remaining family and  private  life  grounds  of
    challenge.  Although permission was not refused on these grounds  there
    was no express recognition of any merit in the grant of permission, and
    Mr  Sharif  did  not  seek  to  elaborate  upon  the  grounds  or  make
    submissions. The challenge is to form not substance.  We can deal  with
    the matter shortly. Having found that the claimed risks associated with
    return were not made  out,  and  having  considered  all  the  personal
    attributes and circumstances of the Appellant and her sons as described
    in the evidence, it was inevitable that  the  judge  concluded  on  the
    facts,  that  the  Immigration  Rules  were  not  met  and   that   the
    circumstances of this family otherwise did not require a grant of leave
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

35. For all the reasons set  out  above  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge does not reveal any error of law  and  it  stands.   The
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.






Signed           E. Davidge                        Date 17 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



