
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP/KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00364/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23rd January 2017                      |On 3rd February 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                              MOUNKADIR HASSAN


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chelliah of Counsel instructed by Forward &
Yussuf Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 12th November 1991.

2.   He entered the United Kingdom illegally in October  2005  to  join  his
    mother who had been granted asylum in 2001 and naturalised as a British
    citizen in 2004.  He was served with a deportation order  on  2nd  June
    2015.  On 14th August 2015 he claimed  asylum  and  removal  directions
    were deferred as a result.  On 28th October 2015 his  asylum  interview
    was conducted.  His claim for asylum or other protection was refused in
    the decision of 4th January 2016.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision on the basis  that
    it would be in breach of his fundamental human rights to  separate  him
    from his family; more particularly that his removal to Mogadishu  would
    entail a risk to his safety and wellbeing.  He claimed that his  father
    was involved in the government in Somalia and that that would  cause  a
    risk to him.  He also believed that as a Muslim he would be  in  danger
    from Al Shabab and ISIS.  Further that being Westernised  he  would  be
    unable to adapt to life in Mogadishu  and  would  thereby  be  rendered
    destitute and at risk from victimisation.

4.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gibbs  on  12th  May
    2015.  It was made clear to the Judge by Mr Chelliah  that  the  appeal
    was only to be pursued on the basis that the appellant was entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.  It was argued  that  the  appellant  did  not
    speak Somali and would be unable to support himself in  Somalia  as  he
    had no family.  He was a member of a minority clan and therefore  would
    have little support in Mogadishu and most likely would end up in an IDP
    camp.  Significantly Mr Chelliah also stated that he was not relying on
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   The Judge,  having considered the question  posed  in  MOJ  and  Others
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC),  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis that on return to  Mogadishu  the  appellant  would
    face  a  situation  which  would  constitute  inhuman   and   degrading
    treatment.  Thus it was found in his favour that he would  be  entitled
    to humanitarian protection in accordance with  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

6.   The Secretary of State, however, sought to challenge  that  finding  on
    the basis that it fell far short of the analysis which was expected  in
    the terms of MOJ and Others.  Permission was granted for the matter  to
    be considered by way of a  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  that
    hearing came before me on 3rd August 2016.

7.   For the reasons, as set out in my decision of  9th  September  2016,  I
    found that the reasoning of the Judge was so deficient as to amount  to
    an error of law.  In those circumstances the decision was set aside  to
    be remade.

8.   The matter came before the Upper Tribunal on  8th  December  2016    Mr
    Jarvis had submitted a detail skeleton argument together with a  number
    of  bundles  of  documents.   Mr  Preedy,  who  then  represented   the
    appellant, indicated that he had not had the opportunity of seeing such
    documentation nor to consider fully  the  issues  raised  therein.   In
    those circumstances I permitted an adjournment.

9.   Thus it was that the matter finally came before  the  rehearing  before
    me on 23rd January 2017.  On that occasion  the  appellant  produced  a
    further statement which he adopted in his oral evidence.  Both  parties
    made their submissions.

10.  The appellant has eighteen convictions for  30  offences  between  22nd
    February 2010 and 9th  April  2015.   On  10th  February  2015  he  was
    convicted of making false representations to  make  gain  for  self  or
    another;  facilitating  the  acquisition  and  possessing  of  criminal
    property and possessing controlling articles for use in fraud.  He  was
    sentenced to eighteen weeks' imprisonment.  On 4th March  2015  he  was
    convicted of travelling on a railway without paying a fare for which he
    was fined.  On 9th April 2015 he was convicted of attempted theft  from
    a person and sentenced to a further  twenty  weeks'  imprisonment.   On
    15th January 2017 according to his evidence he was arrested  by  police
    in connection with drugs and has been bailed to return  to  the  police
    station in March.

11.  Mr Chelliah invited my attention to his skeleton argument to note  that
    he does not in that submission seek to raise the issue of asylum nor of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The burden of his submissions  remain  as  they
    were before Judge Gibbs, namely the issue  of  humanitarian  protection
    and the risks to the appellant were he to be returned to Mogadishu.

12.  The ambit of humanitarian protection is set out in  paragraph  339C  of
    the Immigration Rules namely whether, if he be returned to his  country
    of origin, he would face a real risk of suffering serious  harm  or  be
    unable or owing  to  such  risk  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of that country.

13.  Serious harm encompassing  unlawful  killing,  torture  or  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment  of  a  person  or  the  serious  and
    individual  threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or  person  by  reason  of
    indiscriminate violence in  situations  of  international  or  internal
    armed conflict.

14.  In considering that question it is important to consider the  framework
    as set out in MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 (IAC).  It is  significant  to  note  the  head  note  which
    provides:-

         "The significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
         Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
         assist with access to livelihoods, providing less of  a  protection
         function than previously.  There are no clan militias in Mogadishu,
         no clan violence, and no clan based discriminatory treatment,  even
         for minority clan members.


         ix)  If it is accepted that a person facing a return  to  Mogadishu
             after a period of absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all
             the circumstances.  These considerations will include, but are
             not limited to:


             circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
             length of absence from Mogadishu;
             family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
             access to financial resources;
             prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
             or self-employment;
             availability of remittances from abroad;
             means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
             why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
             enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.


         (x)  put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
             explain why he would not be able to  access  of  the  economic
             opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic  boom,
             especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees
             are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been
             away.


         (xi) It will therefore only be those with no clan or family support
             who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and  who
             have no real prospect of securing access to  a  livelihood  on
             return who will face the prospect of living  in  circumstances
             falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in   humanitarian
             protection terms.


         (xii)    The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those
             who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to
             live in the city without being subjected to an  Article  15(c)
             risk or facing a real risk of destitution.  On the other hand,
             relocation in Mogadishu for a person of minority clan with  no
             formal links to the city, no access to funds and no other form
             of clan, family or social support is unlikely to be  realistic
             as, in the absence of means to establish a home and some  form
             of ongoing financial support it will be a real risk of  having
             no alternative but to live in makeshift  accommodation  within
             an IDP camp where there is a real  possibility  of  having  to
             live  in  conditions   that   will   fall   below   acceptable
             humanitarian standards".


15.  In the  screening  interview  of  15th  September  2015  the  appellant
    indicated he was born in Mogadishu but had no one to go back to as  his
    sister Faizalai had died in Somalia in 2010.  He stated that  he  spoke
    no other language.  He could not remember  when  he  left  Somalia  but
    thought that he went to Kenya by car but did not know how long  he  had
    stayed there.  He had taken a  direct  flight  to  the  United  Kingdom
    organised by his mother.

16.  In interview, he indicated that following his mother's  departure  from
    Somalia, he continued to live there with his mother's  friend  but  did
    not know how long that was for.  He said he was 3 or 4 when his  mother
    left and he was 13 when he arrived in the United Kingdom.  He could not
    remember much of his life or going to school.  Before he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom he had been living with his sister in Kenya for up to  7
    or 8 years. She died in 2006.

17.  The statement of his mother of 21st March 2016  was  more  informative.
    She entered the United Kingdom in 1998 having  lost  contact  with  the
    appellant.  She  discovered  his  whereabouts  in  2004.   In  2005  he
    travelled from Somalia to Kenya by boat and entered Kenya  around  2005
    where he stayed with his sister.  He left Kenya by plane in 2006.

18.  What seems to be clear, however, from the combination of  the  evidence
    as presented is that the appellant lived for the first  thirteen  years
    of his life with a friend in Mogadishu.  It was only in the latter part
    that he came to live with his sister in Kenya before making the journey
    to the United Kingdom.

19.  In his oral evidence before me the  appellant  confirmed  that  he  had
    spent that period living in Mogadishu.  He was unaware of what part  of
    Mogadishu that was but he lived with  a  friend  of  his  mother  in  a
    household with  others.   The  friend  had  a  sister  and  there  were
    children.  He could not recall whether the children were of his  friend
    or of her sister.  In any event that friend ran a business  buying  and
    selling goats and cows.  He was agreed  that  he  had  attended  school
    going to the Madrasa where he learnt Arabic  and  English.   He  agreed
    that he spoke some Somali language living in Mogadishu. He  also  spoke
    Arabic.

20.  It would seem  therefore  on  the  basis  of  that  evidence  that  the
    appellant left Somalia towards the end of 2004/early  2005  and  stayed
    with his sister until the arrangements had been completed  for  him  to
    obtain a visa to come to the United Kingdom.  Effectively he  has  been
    absent from Mogadishu for some thirteen years.

21.  In terms of clan membership the  appellant  had  claimed  in  interview
    that he did not know what his clan was.  At the  hearing  before  Judge
    Gibbs in May 2015 he claimed to have been a member of the Bajuni  clan.
    He claims that the family with whom  he  lived  in  Mogadishu  for  the
    thirteen years was also of the Bajuni clan.

22.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  appellant's  mother,  in  her  asylum
    application of 15th July 1998, indicated she belonged to the  Bravanese
    ethnic grouping.  In her interview  the  appellant's  mother  indicated
    that the Bajuni were a sub-clan of the Bravanese.

23.  In that connection my attention was drawn by Mr Jarvis  to  the  report
    on minority groups in Somalia (September  2000)  in  which  the  Bajuni
    elders had made it clear that the Bajuni did not consider themselves to
    be Benadiri people, although they did acknowledge that  they  had  some
    links with the Bravanese people in  the  way  of  trading  links.   The
    elders emphasised that there were examples of intermarriage between the
    Bajuni and the Bravanese, which arose through those traditional trading
    links.  It would seem that contrary  to  the  contention  made  by  the
    appellant's mother the Bajuni were not a sub-clan of the Bravanese.

24.  Further,  according  to  the  elders  most  Bajuni  speak  some  Somali
    although the main language spoken by the Bajuni is Kibajuni, a  dialect
    related to Swahili.  That is of some significance  because  I  note  in
    paragraph  25  of  the  determination  by  Judge  Gibb,  that  in   the
    appellant's oral evidence before him was that he did not  speak  Somali
    but only Swahili which is in conflict to the evidence that  I  received
    from him orally namely that  he  spoke  Arabic  and  English  and  some
    Somali.

25.  It seems from the report that the main occupation  of  the  Bajuni  and
    indeed of the Bravanese was  that  of  fishing  in  the  coastal  towns
    between Kismayo and Kenya.  The appellant's mother indicated she  lived
    in the area of Kismayo.  If so such does not explain how  it  was  that
    the appellant came to be born in Mogadishu and lived there.

26.  A description of the atrocities and looting and killings  described  by
    the appellant's mother before her coming to the United Kingdom seems in
    sharp contrast to the family with whom the appellant  claimed  to  have
    lived, there being no suggestion that they have experienced any of  the
    violence normally attributable to  the  experience  of  minority  clans
    around that time.

27.  In all the circumstances the appellant has failed to satisfy me on  the
    appropriate balance and burden of proof that he is Bajuni or  a  member
    of a minority clan which is vulnerable in Mogadishu.  I  find  it  more
    likely that the family with whom he had lived enjoyed at the very least
    the protection and support  of  majority  clans  if  not  indeed  being
    members of a majority clan themselves.

28.  In that connection my attention was also drawn to a number of  reports,
    in particular the Political Economy Analysis  in  Mogadishu  (Tana  May
    2012) and the Hamarweyne Fish Market Rehabilitation Project (NIS 2013),
    also to the report Minority Groups in Somalia 2000.  In  summary  there
    seems to have been  reference  made  to  small  Bajuni  communities  in
    Mogadishu in addition to the population in Kismayo and the islands.  At
    that time there was evidence of  a  longstanding  Bajuni  community  in
    Mogadishu (Hamar-weyne  district).   The  Tana  Report  indicates  that
    Hamarweyne is mostly inhabited by  Benadiri  clans  which  include  the
    Bajuni and that there has been a lot of intermarriage with the  Hawiye.
    It also indicated that Bondher district is mainly inhabited by minority
    groups Reer Hamar that the Shangani district is also dominated by Arabs
    but the majority of residents of the Shibis district  were  Arabs  with
    the administration being of  mixed  of  both  Arabs  and  Hawiye.   The
    Waaberi district contains Reer Hamar  populations.   Bajuni  leadership
    has also been recorded as  inhabiting  Ajmarwey  district  and  issuing
    support  for  the  Somali  leadership  as  of  2015.   Bajuni   has   a
    representative in the initial formation of the FGS government in  2012.



29.  Reliance was also placed on  security  protection  Mogadishu  in  south
    central Somalia and joint reports of the Danish Immigration Service and
    the Norwegian Landinfo's Finding Fact  Mission  to  Nairobi  Kenya  and
    Mogadishu Somalia (6th April to 7th May  2013).   Such  indicates  that
    Hamarweyne is a  district  very  much  of  mixed  status  and  a  great
    attraction to "foreigners".  It is said that 80% of  the  residents  in
    that area are foreigners within the meaning that they do not  originate
    from Mogadishu.  It is said that any person irrespective  of  clan  can
    today settle in  Hamarweyne.   In  addition  clan  affiliation  is  not
    important for the people of Mogadishu to feel safe.

30.   Whether or not the appellant is of the Bajuni community it would  seem
    that he could safely return to Hamarweyne and enjoy the support of that
    community in its economic prosperity.

31.  In terms of access to financial resources and prospects of  securing  a
    livelihood it is to be noted that the appellant has worked in the  past
    and indeed has worked as a mechanic and at other occupations.

32.  Mr Jarvis invites me to consider that the position  of  the  Bajuni  in
    Mogadishu reflects the position of the Benadiri  as  a  whole,  as  was
    noted by the Upper Tribunal in AAW (expert evidence - weight)  Somalia
    [2015] UKUT 673 (IAC).   In  connection  he  invites  my  attention  to
    paragraphs 54 and 55 of that decision as agreeing that there is a  well
    established and predominant Mogadishu community who have rebuilt  their
    businesses in the aftermath of the initial period of the civil war.  In
    April  2014  a  member  of  the  Benadiri  was  appointed  as  district
    commissioner for the Hamarweyne district of Mogadishu.  There has  been
    a significant return to  Mogadishu  of  a  Benadiri  people  after  the
    departure of the Al Shabab.  As the 2012 Danish Report  indicated  many
    Benadiri people living in Mogadishu were successful businesspeople  and
    engaged or employed in the administration, many have reopened shops and
    undertaken other business activities.

33. The appellant is not "a foreigner" in the sense of having no connection
    with Mogadishu but I find that even if  returning  to  Mogadishu  after
    some considerable time such a factor will not be held  against  him  by
    those who inhabit that area.  The appellant  can  speak  Arabic,  which
    assists in relation to certain community groups as well as  Somali  and
    English.  Indeed English is one of the languages now taught and used in
    Somalia.  Mr Jarvis also places reliance upon a news article  from  the
    Somali news channel, Radio Dalsan of 14th April 2014, recording the way
    in which Mogadishu has changed in recent years and how there have  been
    many Somali British who make up the members of the diaspora.   It  said
    that the use of English language is widespread in the city as a result.
     It is said that there is somewhat of an  economic  boom  in  Mogadishu
    following the departure of ISIS and Al Shabab.  Accordingly I am  asked
    to find that the appellant, with his  ability  to  speak  a  number  of
    languages, would find  no  difficulty  in  securing  work  and  finding
    support on return to Mogadishu.  I am asked to find  that  nothing  has
    been adduced by way of evidence from the appellant to  show  that  that
    would not be the case.


34.  Whilst the appellant maintains that there are no  relatives  or  anyone
    to support him in Mogadishu, such clearly depends upon the  credibility
    of the account as to the nature of the family and of its  circumstances
    overall.  It is Mr Jarvis's submission  that  at  the  very  least  the
    appellant's mother and possibly other members of the family  have  been
    less than  frank  to  the  authorities  as  to  the  reality  of  their
    experiences in Somalia and of their relationships one with  the  other.
    In support of that Mr Jarvis returns  to  the  application,  originally
    made by the appellant's mother, in which family details  are  set  out,
    including those of the appellant.    Although  Mr  Mustafa  Ali  Mistri
    claims to be the brother of the appellant's  mother  and  indeed  lives
    with them at the same address, nevertheless he  is  not  one  of  those
    named by her in that relationship.  All the children bear the  name  of
    Mustafa, including the appellant.  The application by  Mr  Mustafa  Ali
    Mistri for asylum as set out in November 2000 is produced and has  been
    compared.   Mr Mustafa suggests that he and his  sister  (Halima)  (the
    appellant's mother) and his brother left with the help of an  agent  in
    the period August and October 2000 and then went to Nairobi  in  Kenya.
    Halima's evidence however is quite different in  that  she  escaped  in
    1992 and went to Kenya, she makes  no  mention  of  escaping  with  her
    brothers but rather with her sister and husband.

35.  The assertion  made  by  Mr  Jarvis,  as  communicated  at  a  previous
    hearing, is that there is a strong reason to believe that Mr Mistri  is
    not the uncle but in fact the father of the appellant.  This was one of
    the reasons that a request for an adjournment was  requested  in  order
    for further investigations to be undertaken as to that contention.   In
    the event neither the appellant's mother or uncle agreed to attend  the
    hearing notwithstanding that they were requested to do so.  That stands
    in some contrast to the willingness of the appellant's mother to attend
     the hearing before Judge Gibbs .  It is unnecessary for me to conclude
    affirmatively one way or the other as to whether the suggestion by  the
    respondent has merit.  I find that it is of  considerable  significance
    that the appellant's mother and uncle have shown a marked reluctance to
    subject themselves to questioning on this aspect.  It of  course  calls
    into question the very basis upon which they claimed asylum and  indeed
    were granted asylum.  The  appellant  denies  that  Mr  Mistri  is  his
    father.  Whatever may be the relationship as between his mother and  Mr
    Mistri, what is entirely clear is that although the  one  purported  to
    come with the other as indicated by  the  Home  Office  their  accounts
    differ considerably.  Such must undermine the credibility that  can  be
    attached to any evidence emanating from the family unit as to  presence
    or absence of family members still in Mogadishu or in Somalia.

36.  As to the security situation in  Mogadishu  that  is  set  out  in  the
    decision of MOJ.
     In paragraph 386 of MOJ it was noted that large numbers of people  have
    chosen to return to  Mogadishu  and  notes  the  evidence  of  improved
    conditions for arrivals in the city.  Since 2014 the security situation
    has continued to improve.  Nothing has been presented to me  on  behalf
    of the appellant to indicate that the optimism  of  MOJ  has  not  been
    borne out by future developments.

37.  In seeking to apply, therefore, the principles as identified  initially
    in MOJ I find that the appellant will be returning  to  Mogadishu  with
    the advantage of having grown up in that city. I  find  it  significant
    that when questioned as to which district he had grown up in initially,
    appellant had indicated he did not know.  I do  not  find  it  credible
    that somebody who has spent thirteen years in the  city  would  not  be
    aware of the district in which they grew up.   There  is,  however,  no
    reason why he could not return to  the  same  area  that  he  lived  in
    before.  If a Bajuni I find that he would  have  the  support  of  that
    clan. Further, even  if  returning  without  clan  support,  given  the
    economic prosperity of the city and of the ethnic mix within it, I find
    that the appellant would in all likelihood be able to obtain  work  and
    employment and economic support.  I do not rule out the possibility  of
    family support.  He is able to speak a number of languages  which  will
    be of assistance to him in practical terms.

38.  The burden rests upon the appellant to show that he would be unable  to
    access  the  advantages  of  the  growth  in  economic  prosperity   in
    Mogadishu.  He has shown no good reason why he could not  benefit  from
    work or support as a returnee, particularly with his ability  to  speak
    English.   I find no credible evidence to support  his  claim  that  he
    would be destitute or have to reside in an IDP camp.  He is not a  lone
    woman but a young man who has not shown that he is incapable of looking
    after himself and earning a living.   There  is  nothing  to  indicate,
    indeed, that even if he were in an IDDP camp such would expose  him  to
    the form of serious harm and that is envisaged in  the  high  threshold
    test required by Article 3.  In that connection I note the comments  of
    the Court of Appeal in Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442, paragraph 31. Also  to
    what was said by the Upper Tribunal in AAW at paragraph  64,  the  fact
    that an appellant has no family accommodation in Mogadishu to return to
    does not necessarily mean living in  conditions  that  fall  below  the
    Article 3 threshold.  The appellant can apply for a resettlement  grant
    and is well placed to secure work in a vibrant construction industry in
    Mogadishu today.

39.  Looking at the matter overall I find that to return  the  appellant  to
    Mogadishu would not be such as to engage the threshold of  humanitarian
    protection or to expose him to any  significant  danger  or  difficulty
    such as to engage Article 3.  The appellant claims  in  his  additional
    statement that he would be attacked due to his clan membership  or  due
    to his being Westernised.  Given the nature  of  the  evidence  as  was
    found in MOJ and subsequently, I do not find in any sense  a  realistic
    or real risk of either of those matters happening.

40.  In all the circumstances therefore  the  appeal  of  the  appellant  is
    dismissed both in respect of the Immigration  Rules  and  in  terms  of
    Human rights.  I find that he can properly and lawfully be  removed  to
    Mogadishu.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 2 Feb 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

