

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00220/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 17 January 2017                       |On 19 January 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 ALIREZA [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant's appeal against refusal of asylum  was  dismissed  in  a
    decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bradshaw,  promulgated  on  20
    October 2016.

 2. On 15 November 2016 FtT Judge Grimmett granted permission to appeal  to
    the UT, saying that it was "arguable that the judge, having  asked  for
    written submissions at the end of the hearing, should  have  reconvened
    the hearing when those submissions  included  significant  new  medical
    evidence".

 3. The grant of permission says nothing about anything else  arising  from
    the proposed grounds; but in light of  the  outcome  on  the  foregoing
    point, that does not matter.

 4. The FtT decision deals with the new evidence issue at paragraphs  26  -
    37. The judge set out the Ladd v Marshall principles at paragraphs 30 -
    31.  In so far as the materials tendered included medical evidence, the
    judge said this was a new matter; that no reference had been made to  a
    health issue when he asked for confirmation of the basis of the  appeal
    at the beginning of the hearing; that the "record  of  the  CMR  of  30
    August 2016 specified there was no medical evidence to be called"; that
    in  all  the  circumstances  it  was  not  appropriate  "for  the  said
    psychological trauma service report to be admitted into evidence";  and
    that there were "appropriate procedures  to  cover  such  a  situation"
    [presumably a reference to the possibility of a fresh claim].

 5. There  had  been  no  "CMR"  (case  management  review  hearing).   The
    reference to such a hearing must also involve some slip over dates,  as
    30 August 2016 was the date of the full hearing before Judge Bradshaw.

 6. There was a "pre-hearing review", a paper exercise only, on  16  August
    2016.   Just  before  then,  the  appellant  switched  to  his  present
    representatives.  The note on the file of the pre-hearing  review  does
    not record that no medical evidence was to be called, nor is there  any
    explicit  indication  to  that  effect   from   previous   or   present
    representatives.

 7. Ms Loughran said that information from the appellant  had  showed  that
    medical evidence might be appropriate, and a  report  had  been  sought
    promptly, once she had been instructed and authority obtained  for  the
    expenditure on legal aid.  The report was available only on 1 September
    2016, so there was no delay in obtaining or tendering it.  The  medical
    evidence was advanced for its relevance to the  asylum  claim  and  the
    evaluation of the appellant's evidence. It was  not  said  to  found  a
    separate case on health grounds under article  3  or  article  8.   The
    judge had allowed himself to be misled by the information that no  case
    was proposed on health grounds.

 8. In my view, this is one of those unfortunate cases where  a  series  of
    relatively minor misunderstandings and shortcomings  of  procedure,  to
    some extent attributable to parties but also to the judge,  have  added
    up to error of law.

 9. The judge was not helped by the fact that he does not  appear  to  have
    been told at the hearing that a medical report had been instructed, but
    not received, or  by  the  fact  that  there  was  no  application  for
    adjournment, in advance or at the hearing, and  no  application  to  go
    "part heard".  That is a framework within which  the  medical  evidence
    looked at first glance as if it went only to a separate and novel  case
    on health grounds.

10. It may often be useful to have written submissions, but where a hearing
    has not been completed, and even if such submissions  are  directed,  I
    think the better  practice  is  to  fix  a  further  hearing,  so  that
    submissions are finalised in open forum.

11. The desirability of a further hearing should have  become  plain,  once
    the application to introduce further evidence was  made,  to  test  the
    issues by exchange of oral submissions before the judge.

12. There was no delay through want of due diligence on  the  part  of  the
    appellant or his representatives in obtaining the medical  report.   It
    was capable of having a significant influence on the result.  There  is
    no reason to think the report might be found  anything  but  apparently
    credible; the issue is how far it takes  the  appellant's  case.   Once
    matters are more clearly scrutinised, the Ladd v Marshall test was met.
     The evidence should  not  have  been  excluded.   Further  submissions
    should have been heard on its effect.

13. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  None  of  its  findings  are  to
    stand, other than as a record of what was said on that  occasion.   The
    nature of the case is such that it is appropriate in terms  of  section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit  the
    case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

14. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Bradshaw.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            18 January 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




