
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00023/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th June 2017                        |On  6th July 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     EL
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Howard, instructed by Fountain Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  respondent
   in this determination  identified  as  EL.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings





   1. It is very important to stress that the appellant's daughter,  C1,  is
      not and was not responsible in any way for the assaults  upon  her  by
      her mother. She is not in any way responsible for the  lengthy  prison
      sentence her mother received after her conviction for those  assaults,
      to which she pleaded guilty. The level and nature of  the  contact  C1
      has with her mother is determined by her Special Guardian and,  before
      that by Social Services, who were and are acting solely  in  her  best
      interests. The outcome of this deportation appeal by  C1's  mother  is
      not because of anything C1 has or has not done or said or written  but
      is a consequence of the very serious offences committed by her mother,
      for which she was convicted, sentenced and imprisoned.


            Error of Law


   2. EL was convicted and sentenced to a total of 8 years' imprisonment  on
      15th April 2011 for a number of violent offences against her daughter,
      who is now 9 years old, over a period of  time.  This  child  was  the
      subject of a care order but, following the appointment  of  a  Special
      Guardian, the care order was discharged.  Whilst  in  prison  EL  gave
      birth to another child who was removed from her care the  day  of  her
      birth and, also following care proceedings, is with her birth  father.
      On 6th May 2011, EL was informed by the SSHD that it was  intended  to
      make  a  deportation  order  against  her.  After  reminders  EL  made
      representations. Her representations were rejected  and,  for  reasons
      set out in a decision dated 4th March 2014, her protection  and  human
      rights claims were refused. A deportation  order  was  signed  on  9th
      March 2014.


   3. EL appealed on asylum and human rights grounds.


   4. The First-tier Tribunal judge reproduced paragraphs A398, 398, 399 and
      399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in her decision.


            Grounds relied upon by the SSHD seeking permission to appeal


   5. Ground 1 - The judge erred in law in allowing the  appeal  under  Rule
      399(a)(ii)(c),  which  does  not  exist,  with  reference   to   s117C
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


            Ground 2 - The judge materially erred in law in her findings on
            the risk of re-offending.


            Ground 3 - The judge failed to adequately or  at  all  consider
            the public interest in deportation.


            Ground 4 -  The  judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  the  best
            interests of the children.


            Ground 5 -The judge erred in her approach to the test  of  very
            compelling circumstances.




            Ground 6 - The judge failed to consider properly or at all  the
            s72 Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 certificate.


            I conclude that legal error is not material because the  First-
            tier Tribunal judge dismissed the appeal on asylum and  Article
            3 grounds  (both  medical  and  international  protection).  No
            application to appeal the dismissal of the appeal on asylum and
            Article 3 grounds was made by EL.


   6. Although the grounds are set out as  six  separate  grounds  asserting
      errors in the judge's decision, the essence of the  challenge  pursued
      by the SSHD is that the judge failed fundamentally to properly address
      the public interest in deportation; failed to  address  paragraph  398
      Immigration Rules and  in  particular  that  the  public  interest  in
      deportation will only be outweighed where there  are  very  compelling
      circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs  399  and
      399A  Immigration  Rules;  failed  adequately  to  consider   s117C(2)
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  namely  that  the  more
      serious the offence committed by the foreign criminal the  greater  is
      the public interest in the deportation  of  the  criminal;  failed  to
      consider adequately whether there were very  compelling  circumstances
      other than  the  Exceptions  set  out  in  s117C(4)  and  (5)  of  the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


   7. In [30] of her decision, the First-tier Tribunal judge recorded that


                  "Given  the  8  year  prison  sentences,  however,  [EL's]
                  personal rights to  private  and  family  life  cannot  of
                  themselves displace the automatic deportation  presumption
                  and decision".


            It seems from this  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  has
            considered Article 8 in terms of rights to family  and  private
            life rather than a right to  respect  for  family  and  private
            life, tainting the limited consideration  of  factors  weighing
            for and against EL, she undertook. This is the  only  reference
            to the length of sentence. The judge  has  not  considered,  in
            reaching her decision, the greater public interest in deporting
            EL given  her  serious  crime.  She  refers  to  EL's  personal
            history,  including  her  rape  as  a  child,  her  depression,
            attempted suicide risk and  that  it  was  her  own  child  she
            assaulted as relevant to the issues


                  "which displace the contention that it  is  "conducive  to
                  the public good" that [EL] be deported."


            The judge fails to  consider  at  all  that  deportation  of  a
            criminal offender goes beyond depriving  the  offender  of  the
            chance of re-offending; it extends to deterrence and preventing
            serious crime generally and to upholding public  abhorrence  of
            such offending (see DS (India) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 544). The
            First-tier Tribunal judge failed to assess the public  interest
            in deportation by reference to any analysis of Parliament's and
            the Secretary of State's assessment  of  the  strength  of  the
            public interest in  the  deportation  of  EL  and  whether  the
            Article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to  outweigh  that  (see
            Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60).

   8. The judge stated in [37] that her primary consideration  is  the  best
      interests  of  the  two  children,  especially  C1.  She   found   the
      deportation of EL would  not  be  in  their  best  interest  and  then
      proceeds to find that EL meets the Exception  to  deportation  on  the
      basis of the children's family life  with  EL  and  the  unduly  harsh
      effects upon her children were she  to  be  deported.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal judge stated she had considered s117C but  only  referred  to
      s117C(6). She referred to the crimes being


                   "bizarre against an apparent background of violence  that
                  the appellant appears to have  suffered  as  a  child  and
                  which was never addressed or treated - an  explanation  of
                  sorts for the crimes against [C1] - and at a time when the
                  appellant was suffering from mental illness."


            Although the best interest of the children carry  great  weight
            and are properly regarded as a primary consideration, they  are
            not  the  primary  consideration  in   the   consideration   of
            deportation. The children's rights are not a passport  to  EL's
            rights (Mahklouf v SSHD [2016] UKSC 59). The more pressing  the
            public interest in  deportation  the  stronger  the  children's
            rights will have to be to prevent deportation (BL  (Jamaica)  v
            SSHD [2016] ECWA Civ 357). The First-tier Tribunal judge failed
            to engage with these propositions  in  her  assessment  of  the
            proportionality of deportation;  she  restricted  her  findings
            primarily to the best interest of the  children  deporting  her
            would be a "very significant interference with  the  Article  8
            rights of the children". It is only  in  her  final  conclusion
            that the judge referred to the public interest  in  deportation
            being outweighed  by  the  significant  interference  with  the
            Article 8 rights of the children but, reading the decision as a
            whole,  her  reasoning  both  left  out  of  account   material
            considerations and failed to have adequate regard  to  material
            considerations.

   9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  only  passing  reference  to  the
      sentencing judge recommending EL for deportation. It is unusual for  a
      sentencing judge to make  such  an  ancillary  order  because  of  the
      deportation framework  introduced  by  primary  legislation.  When  an
      experienced judge makes such an  order,  this  should  be  taken  into
      account.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  referred   to   it   being
      "incredible"  that  there  was  no  psychiatric  evidence  before  the
      sentencing judge that may have resulted in mitigation of sentence. His
      Honour Judge Tony Mitchell is an experienced circuit judge. If he  had
      been of the view that a psychiatric report was  necessary  to  him  in
      passing sentence he would have ordered  one.  In  any  event,  such  a
      report was requisitioned by EL's legal defence  team,  who  appear  to
      have chosen not to put it before HHJ Mitchell. El did not  appeal  the
      sentence. First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt's references to the lack of a
      psychiatric report being "incredible" and that EL's current solicitors




                  "could ... offer no explanation as to why crucial evidence
                  about the appellant having  been  raped  as  a  child  and
                  matters which would be  relevant  to  her  depression  and
                  extraordinary behaviour were not explored in  the  context
                  of mitigation"


            is an impermissible and speculative basis upon  which  to  make
            her assessment of the proportionality of EL's deportation.


  10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt made a finding that


                  "there is no evidence that the  appellant  is  a  risk  to
                  anyone apart from herself and possibly her children if she
                  has unsupervised contact with them....There is no evidence
                  that she is a risk to anyone beyond her own family, and in
                  any event there is now a Court Order  that  precludes  her
                  from working with children".


            Whilst this finding is a reflection  of  the  OASys  report  it
            leaves out of account the reason  why  she  is  precluded  from
            working with children and why she has no  unsupervised  contact
            with C1. That a court order may prevent her committing  violent
            offences against her child or children in the future is  not  a
            factor that weighs in EL's favour.


  11. In short the judge has left out of account material considerations and
      has placed impermissible weight upon others. I am not satisfied  that,
      had these matters been  considered  as  they  should  have  been,  the
      outcome would have been the same. It follows the errors of law made by
      the judge were material ones.

  12. I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  and  will  proceed  to
      remake it.

  13. I heard submissions from both parties on 15th June 2017  and  reserved
      my decision. I have read and considered the documents relied  upon  by
      EL in her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

            Remaking the decision

  14. EL, a Jamaican national date of birth 6 November 1976, arrived in  the
      UK on 11th October 2000 and was granted leave to enter  as  a  visitor
      for 6 months. On 5th April  2001  she  made  an  application  and  was
      granted leave to remain as the spouse of a British citizen until  23rd
      October 2002. On 12 April 2003, after a further application,  she  was
      granted indefinite leave to  remain.  Following  the  signing  of  the
      deportation order, her leave to remain was invalidated.


  15. EL was charged with:


                  Count 1: Wilfully assaulting young person under 16 between
                  1 March 2010 and 7 May 2010, to which she pleaded guilty
                  and was sentenced to 32 months imprisonment and
                  disqualified from working with children;


                  Counts 2 and 3: Wilfully assaulting young person under 16
                  between 1 March 2010 and 7 May 2010 to which she pleaded
                  not guilty. These counts were ordered to lie on file;


                  Count 4: Cause grievous bodily harm with intent to do
                  grievous bodily harm on 6 May 2010 to which she pleaded
                  guilty and was sentenced to 64 months consecutive.


                  Count 5; wilfully assaulting young person under 16 between
                  5th May and 8th May 2010 to which she pleaded guilty and
                  was sentenced to 2 years concurrent.


                  Count 6: Assault occasioning actual bodily harm on 9
                  December 2008 to which she pleaded not guilty. The count
                  was ordered to remain on file.


                  Count 7: wound with intent to do grievous bodily harm. She
                  pleaded guilty to the lesser offence of unlawful wounding
                  between 22 October 2008 and 21 October 2009. She was
                  sentenced to 32 months concurrent.


                  Count 8: wound with intent to do grievous bodily harm. She
                  pleaded guilty to the lesser offence of unlawful wounding
                  between 22 October 2008 and 21 October 2009. She was
                  sentenced to 35 months concurrent.


                  Counts 9: Wilfully assaulting young person under 16
                  between 22 October 2008 and 21st October 2009 to which she
                  pleaded not guilty. The count was ordered to lie on file.


                  Count 10: Wilfully assaulting young person under 16
                  between 22 October 2008 and 6 May 2010 to which she
                  pleaded not guilty. The count was ordered to lie on file.


  16. Thus on 15th April 2011 she was sentenced  to  a  total  of  8  years'
      imprisonment,  recommended  for  deportation  and  disqualified   from
      working with young children.

  17. EL has two children: C1 born in the UK on [ ] 2001, a British  Citizen
      and C2 also born in the UK and a British Citizen. C1  lives  with  her
      Special Guardian with whom she was originally  fostered.  The  Special
      Guardian can exercise parental responsibility to the exclusion of  EL,
      who retains parental responsibility as her birth parent. C2 lives with
      her birth father, having been removed from the care of EL on  the  day
      of her birth. According to EL's witness statement she sees C1  once  a
      week on Sunday and they speak on the phone  every  day;  she  sees  C2
      every Thursday for 5 hours and speaks to her on the phone  every  day.
      There is no supporting witness statement from the Special Guardian  or
      from C2's father. Social Services in June 2016  refer  to  one  weekly
      telephone call and one supervised visit every four weeks; EL does  not
      address the  contradiction  between  her  statement  and  what  social
      services say.


  18. The OASys Assessment dated 6th June 2015 sets out EL's  account  after
      an initial interview on 30 June 2011. She is recorded as stating  that
      she became angry when she lost her employment in  November  2008.  She
      admits to incidents of punishing C1with a belt, to striking C1 on  her
      right cheek with a hot iron leaving burning to her face in  May  2010,
      to throwing the TV remote control striking C1 on the forehead  causing
      an injury that required hospital treatment. EL is recorded as  denying
      the allegations made against her of having drilled C1's knee and pubic
      bone and of leaving C1 outside naked with her body covered in  clothes
      pegs. She is recorded as failing to suggest a  reasonable  account  of
      how those injuries were sustained.  C1  was  aged  7  when  the  abuse
      started and 8 when she was placed in the care of social services.  The
      report recounts EL stating she  felt  angry  with  herself  and  being
      unable to control her  anger;  that  although  there  is  a  different
      culture of punishment in Jamaica where she was brought up  she  stated
      that it was not an excuse for her behaviour but it contributed to  the
      way she acted.  The  report,  prepared  whilst  EL  was  in  detention
      awaiting release on licence/immigration bail, records that although EL
      accepts "much of the blame for the  majority  of  the  offences  using
      factors in her life to justify her  actions"  she  continues  to  deny
      using the drill and leaving C1 outside, naked and covered  in  clothes
      pegs.  The report sets out the history of contact between C1  and  EL:
      initially, through court order, 3 supervised visits a year  and  three
      letters a year plus birthday, Easter and Christmas; in 2013,  she  was
      having more telephone calls (once a month) and possibly slightly  more
      supervised contact visits in prison; in February 2014, it is  recorded
      that there are fortnightly telephone calls and visits at least once  a
      month/every fortnight. In May 2015 Social Services stopped all contact
      (from EL's witness statement dated 20 September 2016, she now sees  C1
      every Sunday and they speak  on  the  phone  every  day).  The  Report
      confirms  there  have  been  no  poor  temper  control  or  aggressive
      behaviour incidents whilst in prison. She has enhanced status on  IEPS
      and worked in a trusted position in the  prison.  The  report  records
      that EL is at medium risk of reoffending against children when in  the
      community and at low risk  of  offending  against  the  public,  known
      adults, other prisoners and staff.


  19. A letter from Nottingham City Council Children and Families team dated
      11 February 2016 records that


                  "after initial difficulties, direct contact  between  [C1]
                  and [EL] was believed to  be  a  positive  experience  for
                  [C1]. It was noted that her relationship with  her  mother
                  improved over  time.....In  February  2014  [C1's]  foster
                  carer obtained a Special Guardianship Order for [C1],  and
                  at this point her  case  was  closed  to  Nottingham  City
                  Council....The Probation Officer [in March  2015  when  EL
                  had applied to be released on bail] was querying the  fact
                  that direct contact was taking place between [C1] and  her
                  mother, as this is unusual in a case  where  a  child  has
                  suffered significant abuse....There were worries about the
                  emotional impact on [C1], who had described feeling guilty
                  and responsible for her mother's imprisonment and her  own
                  consequent separation from her birth family. At times [C1]
                  had also suggested that she herself had caused some of the
                  injuries  she'd  suffered  by  her  mother....All  contact
                  between [C1] and [EL] was stopped until an up-to-date risk
                  assessment could  be  completed....It  was  noted  between
                  April to October 2015 there was a deterioration in  [C1's]
                  mood and behaviour....In view of [C1's] expressed  wishes,
                  her emotional well-being and the relationship she appeared
                  to have built with [EL] over time it was believe to be  in
                  her best interest to re-establish  contact.....During  the
                  contact  sessions  [EL]  talks  positively  to  [C1]   and
                  encourages her to behave well at home and at  school.  She
                  has also shown concern and expressed appropriate  physical
                  affection   to    [C1]....[C1]    seems    more    settled
                  emotionally.....the impact on [C1] of EL being deported is
                  uncertain. [C1] does appear to have a strong desire to see
                  her mother, and to be part of  her  birth  family.  [C1's]
                  behaviour and emotional wellbeing  seemed  to  deteriorate
                  when  contact  was  stopped  between  April  and   October
                  2015....therefore  it  seems   likely   that   she   would
                  experience her mother's deportation as a loss."


  20. In an updating letter dated 16  June  2016,  Nottingham  City  Council
      stated that the plan at that time was for 1 weekly telephone call  and
      a supervised visit every four weeks between  EL  and  C1.  The  Social
      worker states that the


                  "option of a  re-referral  to  CAMHS  for  [C1]  has  been
                  discussed when/if [EL] is deported  to  Jamaica.  My  main
                  concerns regarding [C1] and her contact with [EL] are that
                  it remains a positive experience  for  her,  that  she  is
                  supported appropriately in terms of her feelings and  that
                  contact is safe and supervised by an appropriate adult.".


            There is no indication by social services  that  contact  will,
            even at some undefined future time, become unsupervised.

  21. EL does not, in her witness statement  dated  20  September  2016  now
      acknowledge her guilt of the drilling  incident  or  the  clothes  peg
      incident. She does not refer  to  her  motivation  in  committing  the
      offences for which she pleaded guilty but refers  to  having  received
      counselling and suffering from depression. She says she was  suffering
      from depression when  she  committed  the  offences.  The  psychiatric
      report dated 31 March 2011 prepared for the  court  upon  instructions
      from her legal team was not produced to the sentencing judge  on  11th
      April 2011. It confirms EL is fit to plead, appear  in  court  and  be
      sentenced.  It  states  that  she  does  not  suffer  from  a  serious
      depressive illness as such and that her low mood is


                  "primarily explainable as a reaction to the situation  she
                  now finds herself in."


            Dr Hayes states that she may well have been feeling in low mood
            and dissatisfied with her life at the  time  of  offending  but
            this could not


                  "explain her alleged behaviour to her daughter. In summary
                  there is no psychiatric evidence for her offending by  way
                  of mental illness. It is likely that  further  exploration
                  would identify traits within her personality which allowed
                  her to carry out the acts she did."

  22. Dr S N Mohamed prepared a psychiatric report dated 23 August 2016.  He
      was not provided with  the  report  from  Dr  Hayes,  which  had  been
      prepared shortly  after  her  conviction  and  before  sentencing.  Dr
      Mohamed describes her account of her background. He concludes that she




                  "seems to have been suffering from depressive episodes for
                  a number of years....she could well  have  been  suffering
                  from depression during  her  commitment  of  the  offences
                  against her own child...she will in all probabilities fall
                  into deeper depression with more severe  consequences,  if
                  she is forced to return to Jamaica, at this stage."


            Dr Mohamed does not record any discussions he had with EL about
            her offending; he had sight of the OASys report which refers to
            the refusal by EL to accept that she was guilty of the drilling
            and clothes peg abuses. He does not record that any  depression
            she may  have  been  suffering  from  could  have  led  to  the
            commission of the offences for which she was convicted. He does
            not identify any traits in her personality that could have  led
            to her committing the offences she did. He reports that EL told
            him that she


                  "has been in touch with [her  daughters]  regularly  until
                  quite recently".


            This reference to what appears to be a reduction in contact  is
            not explained in EL's witness statement or elsewhere.

  23. A letter in support was relied  upon  from  [DP].  It  refers  to  the
      appellant and her having been friends for over 11 years  and  that  EL
      has in all that time been law abiding  and  of  good  character.  [DP]
      states


                  "... we all fall down sometimes and we  deserve  a  second
                  chance....[EL] is a good  person  and  what  happened  was
                  completely out of character".


            I have placed no weight at all upon this witness statement - EL
            is not law abiding or of good character. What she  did  to  her
            daughter  was  not  a  one-off  incident  of  abuse  but  abuse
            stretching over a period of  time.  The  witness  statement  is
            incorrect on its face and, if the writer has known  EL  for  11
            years she must have known that. I can place no  weight  on  her
            opinion when the basis of  that  opinion  is  so  fundamentally
            factually flawed. A letter from her husband [WP] also describes
            EL as kind hearted and caring. This is so plainly  contrary  to
            the fact of EL's serious assaults on her daughter that  I  have
            placed no weight upon it.

  24. A letter from [DG] dated 15th April 2015 states that she has known  EL
      since 2004. There is reference in that letter to EL "helping out" as a
      classroom assistant for an autistic child at Saturday  school.  It  is
      not clear if this was before her conviction or after  her  release  on
      licence.  If  the  latter,  it  is  surprising  given  that   she   is
      disqualified from working with children as part of her  sentence.  The
      letter refers to EL's stressful health issues  but  makes  no  comment
      whatsoever about the effect of her actions on EL's children - a matter
      which, given she has known her since 2004 I would have  expected  some
      reference to be made. This  letter  is  of  no  assistance  to  me  in
      reaching my decision given the lack of any apparent insight  into  the
      consequences to EL's children of EL's criminal behaviour.


  25. I have placed no weight on a letter from [AG] dated  30th  March  2015
      who describes EL as a


                  "lovely woman kindhearted, very  caring,  hardworking  and
                  forever going out of her way to help in anyway she  can  a
                  woman of  good  character  and  happy  that  she's  in  my
                  daughters and  grandchildren's  life....She  is  wonderful
                  mother caring and raising her daughter doing the very best
                  she can".


            EL is clearly not a woman of good character; she is not  raising
            her daughter and she is not a wonderful mother.



  26. Similarly I have not placed any weight on a  letter  from  [CJ]  dated
      15th April 2015 who describes EL as a person of good character. I have
      placed no weight upon the letter from EL's mother - she is in  Jamaica
      and has not seen EL for many years. There is  no  indication  she  has
      ever met or spoken to or written to either of the children;  there  is
      no indication that she has seen EL with her children. I can  place  no
      weight on her assessment of EL as a person or as a mother.


  27. I am prepared to accept the appellant may have been depressed  at  the
      time of the offences although the psychiatric report prepared at  that
      time was not conclusive in that diagnosis. The most recent  report  by
      Dr Mohamed does  not  identify  any  traits  in  EL's  personality  or
      character that could have led her to commit the offences she did. That
      was a matter left open by  Dr  Hayes  for  further  investigation.  In
      neither report is it even suggested that depression  could  have  been
      either a cause or have contributed to the commission of  such  serious
      offences. The most recent report does not attempt to  investigate  why
      she has been denying her responsibility for some of the  acts  she  is
      accused of committing and to which she pleaded guilty. Had there  been
      any indication at her trial, before a very experienced  Circuit  Judge
      and where she was represented by experienced counsel, that EL may  not
      have been guilty of the offences as charged, or that  the  psychiatric
      report prepared by Dr Hayes should have  been  produced  and  that  it
      would have had an effect either upon her plea, her conviction  or  her
      sentence, it is inconceivable that such matters would  not  have  been
      raised and considered.

  28. In his sentencing remarks HHJ Tony Mitchell says:

                  "The facts outlined tell  an  horrendous  story  of  child
                  abuse by you upon your own child over  a  period  of  time
                  that culminated in the dreadful injury to  her  face  that
                  you made her lie  about  consistently....just  hearing  it
                  outlined that you took a drill and drilled your daughter's
                  knee and  then  made  her  clear  it  up  and,  not  being
                  satisfied, you drilled her pubic bone. To frighten her  is
                  your explanation, not with the intention of  causing  harm
                  and yet there is nothing before me to  suggest  that  your
                  mental state would have made you possibly imagine that you
                  would not be causing harm.....Failing to ensure that  your
                  daughter received help when before your own eyes  was  the
                  clear evidence  of  serious  burns,  whatever  sentence  I
                  impose  it  is   utterly   unforgiving,   deplorable   and
                  depressing....I have taken  account  in  giving  you  full
                  credit, as you will see and hear,  for  the  guilty  pleas
                  that you entered."

  29. The inescapable fact is that EL's guilty plea was an acceptance by her
      at trial of having drilled her daughter's knee and public bone or,  if
      she had denied committing those offences in her  written  plea,  there
      would have been a Newton hearing to establish the basis upon which she
      was to be sentenced. There is no scope for EL to claim  that  she  was
      not responsible for having drilled  her  daughter's  knee  and  public
      bone.


  30. HHJ Tony Mitchell confirmed in his sentencing remarks that had EL  not
      entered guilty pleas he would have sentenced her to a total number  of
      12 years' imprisonment. Because of her guilty pleas, the sentence  was
      reduced to a total of 8 years.


  31. The respondent takes the view that there is no family life between  EL
      and either of her children; she is not their  carer  and  the  limited
      contact she has does not amount to a parental  relationship,  even  if
      she retains parental responsibility.


            Conclusion

        32. EL has, at least until May 2015, continued to deny the offences
            of using a drill on her daughter's  knee  and  pubic  bone  and
            leaving her outside naked with  clothes  pegs  over  her  body,
            despite  this  being  in  her  daughter's  statements  for  the
            criminal  prosecution.  It  is  unambiguously  clear  from  the
            judge's sentencing remarks that she was sentenced on the  basis
            that she did drill her daughter's knee and pubic bone and it is
            simply not open to her to ask this Tribunal to go  behind  what
            would have been either an agreed basis of plea or a finding  by
            the judge that the appellant had done those things. Although EL
            accepts much of the blame, she uses factors in her own life  to
            minimise her liability for those actions. There is no  evidence
            that she does now accept full responsibility.


        33. The report by Dr Mohamed and the  most  recent  social  service
            report appear to indicate  that  contact  between  EL  and  the
            children is not as EL asserts in her witness statement, made at
            around the same time. There is no supporting witness  statement
            from either the Special Guardian or C2's father.  There  is  no
            evidence to suggest that C2 would suffer significantly  if  she
            did not have face to face contact or,  if  that  face  to  face
            contact ceased, that any distress caused could not  be  managed
            with appropriate care and intervention from her primary  carer.
            The evidence plainly states that if C1 were to  cease  face  to
            face contact, intervention would  be  necessary  and  this  has
            already been mooted; her Special Guardian and  social  services
            are alive to this.

        34. I have significant doubts that supervised  contact  between  C1
            and EL, even if it  is  once  a  week,  amounts  to  a  genuine
            parental relationship. The Special Guardian  is  authorised  to
            take all decisions in connection with C1 without consulting EL.
            There is no evidence that there is any such consultation in any
            event. Even if there were and even if I were to accept that the
            relationship between C1 and EL amounts to  a  genuine  parental
            relationship,  there  is  no  possibility  at  all  that   EL's
            deportation would cause or result in C1 having to leave the UK.
            Even  if  face  to  face  supervised  contact  (or  even   some
            unsupervised contact in the future)  were  to  increase,  there
            would be no possibility of C1 having to leave the UK.

        35. In relation to C2 there is no evidence that her father consults
            EL about her upbringing. Face-to-face contact once  a  week  of
            the nature described by EL  (shopping,  chatting,  bowling  and
            similar activities) does  not  amount  to  a  genuine  parental
            relationship. But if I am wrong and it does amount to a genuine
            parental relationship, or became so in the future, there is  no
            possibility at all of C2 having  to  leave  the  UK  if  EL  is
            deported. She is settled and cared for by her father. There  is
            no suggestion that she will live with her mother  -  with  whom
            she has not lived since her birth to her mother in prison.

        36. The length  of  EL's  prison  sentence  requires  there  to  be
            compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those  set  out  in
            Exceptions 1 and 2. None have been suggested. At most there  is
            concern at the possible  psychological  harm  EL's  deportation
            might cause C1 but it has not been  even  suggested  that  this
            could  not  be  properly  handled  in  the  UK  by  appropriate
            intervention.

        37. It is of course in the best interest of a  child  that  she  is
            able to maintain contact other than by telephone or Skype  with
            a parent and the best interests of children carry great  weight
            in deciding a deportation appeal. Social Services and  now  the
            Special Guardian facilitate supervised access but that is a far
            cry from amounting to compelling circumstances over  and  above
            the  general  best  interest  of  a  child  and  the  potential
            consequences to that child - which can be managed. There is  no
            evidence of any compelling circumstances  at  all  which  could
            begin to weigh in the balance in favour of not deporting EL.

        38. Furthermore, EL was convicted of very serious offences  against
            her daughter C1, for  which  she  still  does  not  admit  full
            responsibility. It is well established that  the  more  serious
            the  crime  the  more  pressing  the  public  requirement   for
            deportation and the greater the children's interest  will  have
            to  be  to  find  that  deportation   is   a   disproportionate
            interference in either the child's or EL's right to respect  to
            private and/or family  life.  The  seriousness  of  the  crimes
            committed by EL against C1 cannot be  underestimated.  Had  she
            not pleaded guilty she would have been sentenced to  12  years'
            imprisonment. Even if she admits full  responsibility  sometime
            in the future, that cannot minimise or reduce  the  seriousness
            of  the  crimes  or  the  pressing  public  interest   in   her
            deportation.


        39. EL's claims to be at risk of serious harm if removed to Jamaica
            were rejected by the First-tier Tribunal and there has been  no
            appeal against those findings. There was no  credible  evidence
            that there are any obstacles never mind  significant  obstacles
            to her reintegration into Jamaica where her mother and  brother
            live. Such medical attention and medication as EL  requires  is
            available in  Jamaica,  albeit  not  necessarily  at  the  same
            standard as is available to her in the UK.

        40. EL had enhanced status in prison; there  were  no  disciplinary
            matters against her and the OASys report generally commends her
            for her developing insight and increased ability to manage  her
            emotions and temper. She has worked and there are no complaints
            about her behaviour. She is assessed at low risk of  offending.
            That she has managed, during her time in prison and  whilst  on
            licence to positively change her attitude  and  behaviour  does
            not and cannot be enough to outweigh the public interest in her
            deportation given the seriousness of the crimes and the  length
            of her prison sentence. That she is at low risk  of  committing
            crime in the future does not in any way diminish the nature and
            seriousness of the crimes she has already  committed.  That  is
            not to say that everyone  who  is  convicted  of  offences  and
            sentenced to 8 years'  imprisonment  should  be  deported.  The
            factors that weigh  in  favour  of  EL  include  that  she  has
            supervised contact with the  child  she  physically  assaulted,
            that she has contact with her younger daughter,  that  she  has
            developed anger management techniques and changed her behaviour
            and attitude, that she is at low risk of re-offending, that she
            previously had indefinite leave to remain, that it  is  in  the
            best interest of the children that she continue  to  have  some
            face-to-face contact  with  them  and  that  she  suffers  from
            depression.


        41. The factors that weigh against EL include the public  revulsion
            in respect of the offences for which  she  was  convicted,  the
            very  serious  nature   of   those   crimes,   her   restricted
            acknowledgment of her responsibility for those crimes, and  the
            lack of compelling  circumstances  that  militate  against  her
            deportation.


        42. Taking all these matters together I am entirely satisfied  that
            the balance between the competing interests in play is  capable
            only of being struck against EL. Even if she has, or develops a
            genuine parental relationship with both children  in  the  near
            future, all that can possibly be said in her favour is  plainly
            and significantly outweighed by  the  public  interest  in  her
            deportation.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by EL on human rights  grounds  by
dismissing it

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



                                    Date 5/7/2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
