
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00058/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2016                  |On 14 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR A J
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Maqsood, Hamlet Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Samimi
    which was promulgated on 23 June 2016.  I will continue  the  direction
    for anonymity which was made in the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant
    (as he was in the First-tier Tribunal, and which  designation  I  adopt
    hereafter for ease of reference) is of Burmese nationality and  Rohinge
    ethnicity. He pursued a claim under the 1951 Refugee  Convention  (and,
    in the alternative, for humanitarian protection) on the  basis  that  a
    return to Bangladesh would also violate human rights protection.

2.   The decision sets out the substantive burden and standard of  proof  at
    paragraph 4. It summarises the appellant's claim at paragraphs 5 and  6
    and deals with the respondent's submissions at 7  and  the  appellant's
    submissions at 8.  The findings and conclusions are found at paragraphs
    10 to 20 of the determination.

3.   The matter turned largely on the credibility  of  the  appellant,  with
    particular  regard  to  issues  concerning  his  treatment  whilst   in
    Bangladesh.  Because claims of  this  type  are  heavily  dependent  on
    credibility findings it is important that the judge sets out with  care
    and with precision the assessment which  is  made  in  relation  to  an
    appellant's credibility and the  legal  and  factual  basis  for  those
    conclusions.

4.   The focus of Mr Clarke's submissions on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State  (whose  appeal  this  is)  related  to  paragraph  17   of   the
    determination which reads as follows:

         "On the totality of the evidence before me I do  not  find  in  the
         circumstances of this case the respondent has satisfied the  burden
         of proof on the higher degree of probability that the Refugee  book
         submitted by the appellant is not  genuine  or  that  it  has  been
         obtained for the sole purpose of supporting the appellant's  asylum
         claim.  In any event, the appellant's evidence  of  his  background
         and ethnicity as a Rohinge has been consistent.  I therefore accept
         that the appellant has made his best endeavours to support his case
         that he is a Rohinge Refugee who escaped the Refugee camp and  that
         he is not a national of Bangladesh."

5.   I took the provisional view that there was  an  error  on  the  judge's
    part in reversing the Convention burden  of  proof  and  requiring  the
    Secretary of State to satisfy the Tribunal that the  refugee  book  was
    not genuine.  It is regrettable that  in  making  this  assessment  the
    judge made no reference to the guideline authority of Tanveer Ahmed and
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 00459.  The
    principles to be derived from that judgment are summarised in paragraph
    38 and read as follows.

         "1.  In asylum or human  rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
         claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely  can  be
         relied on.

         2.   The decision maker should consider whether a document  is  one
         on which reliance should be properly placed after  looking  at  all
         the evidence in the round.

         3.   Only rarely will there be the need to make  an  allegation  of
         forgery, or evidence strong enough to support it.   The  allegation
         should  not  be  made  without  evidence.   Failure  to   establish
         allegation on the  balance  of  probabilities  to  a  higher  civil
         standard does not show that the document is reliable."

3.   Mr Maqsood who appears for the appellant made two submissions  on  this
    point.  First he maintained that there  is  an  implied  allegation  of
    forgery  based  upon  the  fact  that  the  Secretary  of   State   has
    consistently suggested that there are alterations to the  document  and
    secondly, that in a lengthy narrative in the determination at paragraph
    14 the  judge  deals  with  those  matters  and  comes  to  a  balanced
    conclusion on them which is unimpeachable.

4.   In my assessment those submissions do not  hold  good:  first,  because
    serious allegations of forgery must be made  expressly  and  cannot  be
    inferred from other comments or representations.   Secondly,  and  more
    importantly, the singling out of this particular item and the  reversal
    of the burden of proof leaves the  reader  of  the  decision  with  the
    impression that the overall approach of the judge to the  evidence  was
    flawed.

5.   The second issue is whether the misapprehension by the judge as to  the
    burden of proof in relation to this one item of evidence  (the  Refugee
    book) is such as to infect the remainder of the decision.  Initially  I
    took the view that the words "in any event" which come part-way through
    paragraph 17 of the decision serve to indicate that  the  judge  placed
    that matter on one side and then proceeded to examine the  evidence  in
    its totality notwithstanding her misapplication of the burden of  proof
    in relation to it.

6.   However I was persuaded by the submissions of Mr Clarke who took me  to
    various parts of the decision and indicated ways  in  which  the  judge
    placed undue weight upon her flawed finding with regard to that Refugee
    book and therefore did not make a proper  and  balanced  assessment  of
    credibility in the round.

7.   Mr Maqsood took me again to paragraph 14 and to  the  assessment  which
    the  judge  gave  there.  However,  I   cannot   be   confident   that,
    notwithstanding the lengths to which  the  judge  went  to  review  and
    analyse the evidence, that the flaw in relation to  the  assessment  of
    the Refugee book has been properly mitigated.

8.   I have concluded there an error of law, and that it is a  material  one
    which goes to the heart of the decision.  In those circumstances it  is
    appropriate that the decision be set aside.

9.   Mr Clarke and Mr Maqsood both agree that, were I  so  to  conclude,  as
    this is a credibility issue the proper course, following  the  Practice
    Direction, would be to remit this matter to a First-tier Tribunal to be
    decided afresh.



Notice of Decision

Having found a material  error  of  law,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside. The matter is remitted to be heard afresh by a First-
tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Samimi.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date: 14 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

