
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00857/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent   |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8th December 2017                     |On 10th January 2018                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Azmi (Counsel), French & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Row, promulgated on  29th  June  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Sheldon Court in Birmingham on 23rd June 2017.  In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter falls before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on [ ]
    1975.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  16th
    January 2017, denying her  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended).

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant came to the UK on 26th October 2003 on a  visitor's  visa
    which was valid for six months until 22nd March 2004.   She  came  with
    her husband.  Both of them then overstayed.  It was only on  20th  July
    2016 that she made an asylum claim  based  upon  her  membership  of  a
    particular social group.  The basis of the Appellant's  claim  is  that
    she has suffered domestic violence from her husband, who in early  June
    2016 left the house, and  she  does  not  know  his  whereabouts.   The
    Appellant returned to Bangladesh, where she contacted her in-laws,  and
    they became concerned about her husband's whereabouts, and thought that
    the Appellant's son might inherit some of their property, as  a  result
    of which the Appellant was threatened by her elder brother-in-law, that
    if she returned  to  Bangladesh  he  would  kill  her.   The  Appellant
    received a threatening text from her  husband's  younger  brother  (see
    paragraph 14 of the determination).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the asylum claim could not succeed because  if  one
    looks at her answer to question 96 during her asylum interview, she had
    not expressed any fear of her elder  brother-in-law.   Her  claim  now,
    explained the judge (at paragraph 29) was that this  elder  brother-in-
    law had left the army in 2005 or 2006, and he would use  his  influence
    to obtain information against the Appellant, and target her, by  reason
    of which she could not now return.

 5. The judge went on to explain (at paragraph 30) that the claim that  the
    Appellant's in-laws "are involved in the Bangladeshi security services"
    had been mentioned very late in the day and that, "these  matters  have
    been brought up by the Appellant after the decision in order to come to
    the specific points made by the Respondent in that decision.  This does
    damage the Appellant's credibility" (paragraph 30).

 6. The judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge had erred as  a  matter
    of fact in stating that the Appellant had not mentioned  her  husband's
    family's involvement in the security services until after  the  refusal
    decision.  This is because the Appellant had  raised  this  during  her
    asylum interview itself.  To assess the Appellant's credibility on this
    basis was therefore factually incorrect.

 8. On 27th September 2017, permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis
    that "the  grounds  are  arguable,  albeit  only  just".   In  granting
    permission, it is stated that,  "the  judge  did  give  several  other,
    sustainable, reasons for finding that the Appellant was not at risk  on
    return ..." (see paragraph 3).

 9. On 8th November 2017, a Rule 24 response  was  entered  to  the  effect
    that, "the fact that the Appellant may have a brother-in-law who  is  a
    relatively junior officer in the Bangladeshi Army has not  impact  upon
    her ability to internally relocate within  Bangladesh"  (see  paragraph
    3).

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 8th December 2017, Mr  Azmi,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, relied on the fact that the judge's conclusion
    (at paragraph 31) was to the effect that,

         "I do not find that the Appellant's elder brother  or  cousin  have
         any involvement with the security services in  Bangladesh,  are  in
         any position of influence, or are able to obtain any information by
         using such influence.  I find these matters have been fabricated by
         the Appellant to boost her claim".

11. Mr Azmi, however, submitted that these conclusions follow directly upon
    the judge's analysis at paragraph 30, namely, that, "these matters  had
    been brought up by the Appellant after  the  decision  ...".   Mr  Azmi
    submitted that this was factually incorrect because if one looks at the
    interview notes at B7 and at B20, one finds recognition of the family's
    involvement with the armed services in Bangladesh first,  at  questions
    17 to 20, and thereafter more importantly, at questions 92 to 94.

12. Given that the Appellant had earlier to her in-law's  involvement  with
    the intelligence services, her claim, that they opposed a threat and  a
    risk to them, became a credible claim, and the judge had  excluded  the
    possibility of so treating it.

13. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that there was no error of law at  all
    in the determination of IJ Row, let alone a "material" error.  This  is
    because if one looks at the questions at B20 one finds that  the  elder
    brother had left the army in Bangladesh, and  when  the  Appellant  was
    asked about this, she did not know the circumstances in which  she  had
    left, and whether this was an honourable or a dishonourable  discharge.
    In either event, since he was no longer in the army, he was  not  in  a
    position to elicit the help of the armed services, or the  intelligence
    services, to threaten the Appellant in any way whatsoever.

14. Second, when the Appellant was actually asked why she could not  return
    at question 96, what she had said was that,  "in  Bangladesh  I  cannot
    travel on my own".

15. Third, the judge had expressly referred to the  Appellant's  answer  at
    question 96, before coming to any conclusions, because  this  reference
    was made at  paragraph  29  of  the  determination,  and  the  ultimate
    conclusions were drawn at paragraph 31 of the determination.

16. Fourth, insofar as the judge does refer to the evidence being  produced
    late in relation to these family members, the judge is  entirely  right
    because he explains how it is that at the hearing, "the  Appellant  has
    advanced two further arguments".  What she has said is that  since  the
    text  of  10th  July  2016  she  has  received  further   threats   and
    communications from her in-laws.  She states that her elder brother in-
    law was in the army.  Moreover, "her husband's cousin Al-Amin works  in
    the intelligence services.  Her brother-in-law and cousin would be able
    to use their influence to find out where she lives and how"  (paragraph
    25).  These were new matters in  terms  of  the  actual  risk  of  ill-
    treatment opposed by the elder brother-in-law and the cousin,  Al-Amin,
    whatever may have been the position in terms of the Appellant  relating
    the general  background  of  her  in-laws  during  the  course  of  the
    interview.  The judge could not be criticised for  referring  to  these
    facts as he did.  Accordingly, there was no error of law at all.

17. In his reply, Mr Azmi submitted that one could not over-look  the  fact
    that the Appellant did refer to her in-laws being in  the  army  during
    the interview.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

19. First, the decision of Judge Row is entirely right on the basis of  the
    terms that it is made.  Judge Row refers to question  96  specifically.
    This question (at B20), is  specifically  on  the  matter  of  how  the
    Appellant's husband's family would know if she travelled back to Sylhet
    in Bangladesh.  The Appellant explains that, "if you say a word here it
    spreads to Bangladesh so they would find out".  This, in  itself,  does
    not show a risk from her  in-laws.   But  even  more  importantly,  the
    Appellant continued her answer with the words that,  "in  Bangladesh  I
    can't travel on my own, I would need someone accompanying me ...".

20. That expresses a general concern of being able to  get  about  in  that
    part of the world which many a traveller may generally  entertain,  and
    certainly one who, having lived in the United Kingdom,  is  faced  with
    the prospect of returning back there.  At the very least, it  does  not
    evince any fear of attack or ill-treatment  from  anyone.   The  judge,
    accordingly, was entirely correct to find as a matter of fact, that the
    answer to this question, did not show the Appellant being put at  risk.



21. Second, and no less importantly, any notion that the Appellant would be
    at risk from her elder brother-in-law was not made  out  on  the  lower
    standard of proof.  This is not only because the  elder  brother-in-law
    had left  the  army.   This  is  a  question  that  the  Appellant  was
    specifically  asked  at  question  94.   What  appears  to  have   been
    overlooked by all the representatives before me  today  is  the  answer
    that the Appellant had given at that time, which was  to  do  with  the
    Appellant having left the army because of "something  to  do  with  the
    funds in the office" and it was because of this that the Appellant went
    on to explain that, "I don't exactly know whether he left  the  job  or
    they chucked him out" (question 94).

22. There appears to be here a very real  possibility  of  the  Appellant's
    elder  brother  having  been  dishonourably  ejected  from  the   army.
    Accordingly, the conclusion drawn by the judge that "these matters have
    been fabricated by the Appellant to boost her claim" (paragraph  31  of
    the determination) was a conclusion that was entirely open to the judge
    on the evidence before the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

An anonymity order is made.


Signed
                                Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th December 2017


