
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/00531/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2017                        | On 7 December 2017            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                                  s.m.e.j.
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRTARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai, Counsel, instructed by David Grand
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Walker, promulgated on 19 May 2017.  I will continue with the anonymity
    direction which was made in the First-tier Tribunal in respect both  of
    the appellant and each of her dependants  since  the  outcome  of  this
    appeal will also be dispositive of their appeals.

2.   I can  deal  with  the  matter  relatively  briefly  in  the  light  of
    agreement between Mr Rai who acts for the appellants and Mr  Duffy  who
    acts for the Secretary of State.   It  was  accepted  in  the  Rule  24
    statement that this appeal should be allowed and the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal set aside. In the  intervening  period,  the  Upper
    Tribunal promulgated its decision  in  ZMM  (Article  15(c))  Libya  CG
    [2017] UKUT 00263 (IAC), which recast the country guidance in  relation
    to Libya.

3.   For present purposes I need only read from the head  note  and  from  a
    couple of key paragraphs within  that  determination.   The  head  note
    reads as follows:

         "The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person."

4.   Paragraph 5 of the decision reads as follows:

         "This appeal has been selected  as  country  guidance  because  ZMM
         could fairly be described, with no disrespect intended, as ordinary
         and unremarkable.  He is male, he is healthy, he speaks Arabic  and
         he was originally from Tripoli.  He does not have a family for whom
         he is responsible and as far as we  are  aware  has  no  particular
         vulnerabilities.  He has been in the United Kingdom since 2014."

5.   I need not trouble myself with the other material in ZMM  but  the  key
    matters are dealt with under the sub-heading of 'the risk' at paragraph
    92:

         "All of this data must be assessed  against  the  backdrop  of  the
         general country information.  The situation  is  complex  and  fast
         moving but two features stand out.  There is at present a  manifest
         failure  of  State  protection  for  the   ordinary   citizen   and
         indiscriminate violence is liable to erupt anywhere  at  any  time.
         In the context of this extreme volatility we are satisfied that the
         cumulative effect of the evidence is such that  the  Article  15(c)
         test is satisfied."


    and part of paragraph 93 reads as follows:


         "We cannot however be satisfied that the peace in  these  oases  is
         stable or durable or that the notional returnee to Libya  would  be
         able to safely access such locations."


6.   It is therefore evident that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was predicated on country guidance which has subsequently been  revised
    to a considerable extent. It follows that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal must be set aside.

7.   In relation to the findings of fact which were made in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal these are clearly expressed and there is no  reason  to  doubt
    the credibility of the appellant.  It is agreed by both representatives
    that the Upper Tribunal is in a position to assess the  level  of  risk
    based upon the facts as they were found  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Indeed, such assessment admits of only one answer.

8.   Inevitably in the light of ZMM, as was fairly and promptly conceded  by
    Mr Duffy, the risks in this instance  are  of  such  significance  that
    Article 15(c) is plainly engaged. The appellant and her dependants (who
    are also the subject of the current appeal)  have  a  proper  claim  to
    humanitarian protection. All these appeals are therefore granted on the
    ground of humanitarian protection.

9.   In the  circumstances,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  consider  the
    alternative asylum ground which is raised on the papers or  indeed  any
    other  human  rights  grounds.  I  expressly  make   no   findings   or
    determination on those matters.



Notice of Decision

   1) The  appeal  (including  the  connected  appeals  of  the  appellant's
      dependents) is allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
      set aside.
   2) The decision is remade  allowing  each  and  all  of  the  appeals  on
      humanitarian protection grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Mark Hill                      Date         7 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



