
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00580/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 09 August 2019                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Behbahani of Behbahani & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Miss Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge McCall ('the Judge') promulgated on 22 March 2019 in
        which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection  and
        human rights grounds.

Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on the 16 February 1988 who
        entered the United Kingdom on 3 October 2015, lawfully,  travelling
        on her own passport with a valid student Visa. On 8 March 2018  the
        appellant claimed asylum which was refused  on  4  September  2018.
        This is the decision challenged on appeal.

     3. The Judge treated the appellant as  a  vulnerable  person  for  the
        reasons set out at [16] of the decision under challenge.

     4. There was no dispute the appellant is a citizen  of  Iran  who  was
        born into the Islamic faith as a Shia Muslim or that the  appellant
        was granted leave to remain in the UK  which  remains  valid  until
        2021.

     5. The Judge identifies as the  crux  of  the  appellant's  claim  her
        alleged conversion to  Christianity  and  the  Iranian  authorities
        perception of her conversion as apostasy. The Judge had the benefit
        of hearing oral evidence from the appellant and a  Pastor  Connolly
        but was not satisfied the appellant had established that she  is  a
        genuine Christian convert. At [59] the Judge writes:

             "59.     The Appellant claims that she  fears  persecution  by
                  the  Iranian  authorities  and  non-state  actors.  I   am
                  satisfied that the Appellant  has  fabricated  her  asylum
                  claim and she has not converted to  Christianity  and  nor
                  will she be perceived or suspected of having converted  to
                  Christianity."

     6. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal,  the  operative  part  of
        which is in the following terms:

             "2.  The grounds, which were  in  time,  complained  that  the
                  Judge erred  in:  (1)  failing  to  consider  evidence  in
                  context  at  [22,23,34,38,41];  (2)  failing  to  consider
                  relevant  background  evidence  [39];  and  (3)  a  flawed
                  assessment of the appellant's claim to have  converted  to
                  Christianity.

             3.   The grounds are arguable.

             4.   It is arguable that the Judge, having identified  the  SA
                  (Iran)  guidance  at  [47]  fails  to  apply  it  in   his
                  assessment at  [50],  where  church  attendance  is  tied,
                  arguably without evidence, to depth  of  religious  faith;
                  and the reasoning for rejecting conversion arguably  rests
                  on  plausibility/inherent  probability,  without  adequate
                  evidential foundation."

     7. The respondent in his Rule 24 reply of 19  June  2019  opposes  the
        appeal asserting the  Judge  properly  considered  the  appellant's
        claim to have  converted  to  the  Christian  faith  and  that  the
        credibility of the appellant's account was primarily a question  of
        fact, which was a matter for the Judge. The respondent  asserts  on
        balance it was properly open to the Judge to find  the  appellant's
        claimed  fear  of  persecution  by  the  Iranian  authorities   was
        fabricated and that sound reasons have been provided to support the
        finding that the appellant had not converted  to  Christianity  and
        nor will she be perceived  or  suspected  of  having  converted  to
        Christianity. The respondent asserts the grounds amount to no  more
        than disagreement with the  negative  outcome  of  the  appellant's
        appeal.

Error of law


     8. In his submissions Mr Behbahani relied  upon  the  grounds  seeking
        permission to appeal arguing  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
        evidence in proper context. It was argued the finding at [22]  that
        the appellant had gone to great lengths to argue that her  protests
        and persecution in Iran were not political  was  incorrect  as  the
        appellant had gone to great lengths to explain that she herself and
        not the Iranian authorities regarded  her  own  activities  is  not
        political whereas the authorities in  her  country,  Iran,  equated
        human rights activities/protests to being  the  same  as  political
        activities/protests or crimes which is said to  be  an  explanation
        wholly consistent  with  the  well-documented  background  material
        relating to Iran. The finding at [23] where the  Judge  finds  that
        nowhere in the letter from Professor Speed was there any  reference
        to the appellant having converted to Christianity  from  Islam  and
        fearing return is criticised on the basis  that  letter  was  never
        tendered  as  evidence  that  the  Professor  was  aware   of   the
        appellant's conversion or was evidence that he was  confirming  the
        appellant's religious conversion and that  there  was  no  evidence
        before the Judge  to  even  suggest  Professor  was  aware  of  the
        appellant's religious activities. The Judge is also criticised  for
        taking the letter of the Professor out of context  and  attributing
        to it a context which may not have been attended by the  author  of
        the letter. The grounds assert this amounts to  material  error  in
        the assessment of the letter from the Professor. The  grounds  also
        challenge  the  Judges  expressed  concern  the  contents  of   the
        appellant's Facebook account were in English which is explained  by
        the Microsoft English translation tool used, and argues  the  Judge
        failed to give regard to the appellant's explanation in her witness
        statement as to the premise or focus as to why she was  relying  on
        limited  extracts  from  this  source.  The  criticisms  concerning
        alleged  failure  to  consider  background  material  and  to  make
        findings based upon  perception,  assumption,  and  speculation  in
        respect  of  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's  conversion  to
        Christianity are expanded upon in the appellants grounds.

     9. There is a pending country  guidance  case  relating  to  risk  for
        Christian converts in Iran but the same is not  yet  available  and
        nor is it appropriate to adjourn this matter at  this  stage  where
        consideration is only being given to the question  of  whether  the
        Judge erred in law in a manner material to the decision to  dismiss
        the appeal.

    10. The challenge to the decision,  in  relation  to  the  question  of
        context, reflects/repeats the submissions made before the Judge. It
        is not made out the Judge did not  properly  examine  the  evidence
        with the required degree of anxious scrutiny as a whole, especially
        that given by the appellant and that provided  in  support  of  her
        claim. The fact the  appellant  may  not  agree  with  the  Judge's
        conclusions does not mean they were considered in an  inappropriate
        manner without having due regard to the evidence. The Judge  begins
        by considering a matter the appellant specifically stated  she  was
        not seeking to rely upon as part of her claim, namely any  fear  on
        return due to political opinion or membership of particular  social
        group or alleged past experiences in Iran [21]. The Judge looked at
        the appellants statements and  oral  evidence  relating  to  issues
        surrounding those claimed activities and  whether  they  undermined
        her credibility or not. No arguable error is made out in the manner
        in which the Judge considered that evidence or  the  findings  that
        key aspects of the evidence in relation to  this  aspect  were  not
        found to be credible. At [40] the Judge specifically finds:

             "40.     The Appellant claims that she has been  told  by  the
                  authorities  that  as  a  result  of  her  activities   in
                  University in Iran she will not be permitted to work for a
                  public authority or State department now or in the future.
                  The authorities did however permit  her  to  complete  her
                  studies and they have permitted her to leave Iran,  return
                  for a holiday and then leave Iran again. The Appellant did
                  therefore  enjoy  freedom  of  education  and  freedom  of
                  movement both within and outside  of  Iran.  I  find  that
                  freedom inconsistent with  the  claims  that  she  was  an
                  activist in 2011 and therefore of adverse interest at that
                  time to the authorities. I find that account does not ring
                  true."

    11. It is not made out the Judge's conclusion that the early aspects of
        the appellant's claim are not credible  is  outside  the  range  of
        findings reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence.

    12. The Judge thereafter considered the issue of  the  claim  regarding
        conversion to Christianity from [42]. It is of note that  the  bulk
        of the grounds of challenge relate to the Judge's findings  in  the
        preceding paragraphs  with  the  grant  specifically  referring  to
        specific paragraph numbers appearing between [22 - 41].

    13. The Judge refers to a number of cases.  The  often-quoted  Scottish
        case of TF (Iran) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
        [2018] CSIH 58 contains an extensive discussion of how to  approach
        the fact-finding exercise in cases where the  appellant  claims  to
        have converted to Christianity.  So far as Dorodian was  concerned,
        it was said that while it would no  doubt  be  desirable  that  the
        individual concerned be vouched for by someone  in  a  position  of
        leadership within the relevant church, it is  more  important  that
        the  evidence  be  given  by  someone  who  has  knowledge  of  the
        individual whose commitment is in question.  What mattered was that
        they have sufficient knowledge of the practices of  the  church  of
        which they are a member; sufficient  experience  of  observing  and
        interacting with those seeking to become  members  of  the  church;
        sufficient knowledge and experience of others who have gone through
        similar processes of engagement in church activities with a view to
        becoming members of the  church;  and,  in  cases  such  as  these,
        sufficient knowledge of the individuals concerned and of the manner
        in which they have thrown themselves into church activities.

    14.  The  Judge  clearly  adopted  an  approach  consistent  with  such
        guidance. Whilst the grounds refer to SA  (Iran)  [2012]  EWHC  275
        this is a decision of the High Court which has  no  binding  effect
        and is a persuasive authority only. The Judge  specifically  refers
        to the guidance both in Dorodian and SA  (Iran)  at  [47]  and  was
        clearly aware of not only the content but also submissions made  in
        relation to these decisions.

    15. The Judge at [49] accepted that Pastor Connolly  is  an  expert  in
        spiritual and religious matters  but  expressed  concern  regarding
        some of the evidence given to the Judge. The Judge was particularly
        concerned that matters the appellant put forward as  barriers  that
        prevented her attending church could have been overcome easily  and
        it has not been shown to be irrational for the  Judge  to  conclude
        that a person claiming to have converted to  Christianity  appeared
        to have made little effort to  attend  church  when  there  was  no
        arguable reason why she could not have found a  place  to  worship.
        At [50] the Judge specifically finds:

             "50.     Pastor Connolly was asked how often the Appellant had
                  attended church since September 2018 and he  replied,  "up
                  to Christmas not there every week, I would say  every  one
                  in three and since then not seen her very  much".  It  was
                  put to  him  that  he  was  suggesting  she  had  attended
                  approximately four times between September and  Christmas,
                  and he replied, "no, I would say  more  than  that,  about
                  seven  times.  She   may   have   attended   other   group
                  activities".  In  the  Appellant's   oral   evidence   she
                  confirmed she had not attended  the  Church  weekly  since
                  September 2018 and explained she had had finance and  work
                  problems and they impacted on her studies. For a person to
                  change their religion in the manner as  explained  by  the
                  Appellant and with the consequences of placing their  life
                  in danger and possibly their remaining family in Iran than
                  one would expect them to embrace the freedom to be able to
                  attend church and  pray.  Surely  if  a  person  is  going
                  through a difficult period that is when  they  need  their
                  faith and their church most? I find that the Appellant has
                  chosen not to  do  that  and  rather  than  she  has  been
                  prevented from  attending  I  find  that  the  Appellant's
                  activities are  more  in  keeping  with  the  Respondent's
                  analysis of this Appellant in that religion  to  her  does
                  not really mean very much. I respect the opinion of Pastor
                  Connolly however, taking all the evidence in the  round  I
                  am not satisfied the Appellant has genuinely converted  to
                  Christianity as she claims and I find she  is  fabricating
                  her claim in order to remain in the UK and  for  no  other
                  reason."

    16. This is not a conclusion arrived at  on  the  basis  of  the  Judge
        failing to consider all the evidence or solely on the basis of  the
        appellant's  attendance  at   church.   The   appellant   has   not
        demonstrated the Judge failed to consider all the evidence  in  the
        round of  which  attendance  at  church  was  one  relevant  issue.
        Similarly it has not been established the Judge applied a  personal
        perception or view when assessing the evidence sufficient  to  take
        the  same  out  of  context.  The  appellant's  evidence  regarding
        conversion to Christianity is clearly considered within the context
        of her life in the United Kingdom.

    17. Having found the claim to have converted was fabricated  the  Judge
        proceeded to consider whether the appellant would still face a real
        risk on return as the Judge had been specifically invited to do  by
        the appellant during the course of the hearing. These findings  are
        set out from [51] in which the Judge arguably finds the appellant's
        claim that her family home in Iran was raided as a  result  of  her
        Christian conversion to be fabricated; especially as there  was  no
        explanation as to how the authorities in Iran could have learned of
        her attendance at a church in the UK in such a short timeframe with
        so few people being allegedly aware of this event on the  basis  of
        the appellant's own evidence. The Judge considers the social  media
        and Facebook pages relied upon by the appellant but finds there  is
        no evidence to link the same with the authorities in Iran  such  as
        to create a real risk on return.

    18. At [59] the Judge finds:

             "59.     The Appellant claims that she  fears  persecution  by
                  the  Iranian  authorities  and  nonstate  actors.   I   am
                  satisfied that the Appellant  has  fabricated  her  asylum
                  claim and she has not converted to  Christianity  and  nor
                  will she be perceived or suspected as having converted  to
                  Christianity."

    19. The Judge's dismissal of the appellant's claims on all  grounds  on
        the basis no real credible risk had been established is  a  finding
        within the range of those reasonably available to the Judge on  the
        evidence. As ever  in  such  cases,  the  question  of  whether  an
        appellant has established their claim is fact specific.

Decision

    20. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

    21. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29 July 2019












