
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00082/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2018                             |On 18th January 2018          |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    [f m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, [FM], was born on [ ] 1990 and is a  female  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  At an  initial  hearing,  I  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's [decision] was vitiated by error of law and I set it  aside.
    My decision (dated 15 August 2017) appears below:

         "1.  The appellant, [FM], was born on [ ]  1990  and  is  a  female
         citizen of Afghanistan.  The appellant had claimed asylum in August
         2015 but by a decision  dated  16  December  2015,  her  claim  was
         refused by the respondent who also made a decision  to  remove  her
         from the United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  appealed  against  that
         decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bradshaw)  which,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 8 August 2016, dismissed the  appeal.   The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   Permission to appeal had initially been refused  by  both  the
         First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  However, by  an  order
         dated 13 March 2017, Collins J gave permission  in  an  application
         for judicial review to review the  refusal  of  permission  by  the
         Upper Tribunal.  Granting permission, Collins J wrote:

             "2.  There seems to me to have been a failure both by the  FtT
             Judge and the UT Judge to consider the claim on the basis that
             the claimant's partner is a  British  citizen  so  that  their
             child is also a British citizen.  That, coupled with  the  two
             other Danish children should have been fully considered.

             3.    The  claimant  and  her  partner's   breaches   of   the
             immigration law may not prevail over the  child's  Section  55
             rights.

             4.   I refuse  permission  on  the  grounds  relating  to  the
             claimant's asylum on Article  3  claims  in  relation  to  the
             alleged risk of persecution in Afghanistan.  That was properly
             rejected by the judge."

         3.   Judge Bradshaw considered whether Article 8 ECHR should  apply
         in this case at [35].  After a brief analysis, she decided that  it
         should not.  The sole criterion by which she reached that  decision
         concerned the application of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
         and Immigration Act 2009:

             "It is clearly in [the children's] best interest to  be  with,
             preferably, both their parents.  The baby will remain with his
             mother whether she returns to Afghanistan alone  or  with  her
             husband in a family unit.  The  family  have  a  choice.   The
             appellant  can  return  and  make  an  application  for  entry
             clearance in accordance with  the  Rules  or  the  family  can
             travel to Afghanistan together and family life can continue as
             heretofore.  There was no cogent evidence to suggest that  the
             decision to remove  would  undermine  her  physical  or  moral
             integrity."

         4.   It should be remembered that this analysis  was  conducted  by
         the judge while she was still considering whether to proceed with a
         full Article 8 analysis.  This  is  puzzling  because  the  matters
         discussed by the judge at  [35]  clearly  go  to  the  question  of
         proportionality, a question which would have been considered if the
         judge had decided that an Article 8 analysis should  be  conducted.
         By considering Section 55 only and by deciding not to proceed  with
         a full Article 8 analysis, the judge has, in effect, carried out  a
         limited  and  incomplete  proportionality  assessment.   It   would
         perhaps have been better if the judge had decided  that  Article  8
         did apply and that a full Article 8  analysis  was  required.   One
         consequence of  the  partial  consideration  which  the  judge  has
         conducted is that she has (as Collins J observed)  failed  to  take
         any or any  proper  account  of  the  British  nationality  of  the
         youngest child, an factor very likely to be of  importance  in  any
         consideration of Article 8 ECHR .  I find it likely that,  had  the
         judge carried out a full Article 8 analysis, she would  have  taken
         the child's nationality into account.  As  it  is,  the  judge  has
         erred in law by failing to consider the nationality of the child.

         5.   I set aside the judge's decision.  I preserve the findings  as
         regards asylum and Articles 2/3 ECHR.  I appreciate that  the  full
         Article 8 analysis which the Upper Tribunal will  now  conduct  may
         touch upon questions  of  risk  of  return  to  Afghanistan  but  I
         stressed to Mr Hussain, who appeared for the  appellant,  that  the
         appeal will not be further considered on asylum or Article 2/3 ECHR
         grounds.

         Notice of Decision

         6.   The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  which  was
         promulgated on 8 August 2016 is set aside.  The judge's findings as
         regards asylum and Articles 2/3  ECHR  are  preserved.   The  Upper
         Tribunal will re-make the decision in respect of  Article  8  ECHR.
         For the avoidance of doubt, the Upper Tribunal finds that Article 8
         ECHR is engaged in this case and will carry  out  a  full  analysis
         accordingly.

         7.   No anonymity direction is made.

         DIRECTIONS

         (1)  The parties shall send to the Upper Tribunal and to each other
         any written evidence upon which they  may  respectively  intend  to
         rely at least ten clear days prior to the next hearing.

         (2)  The decision will be re-made in the Upper Tribunal following a
         resumed hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane.   The  time
         estimate is two hours.  A Dari interpreter will be provided."

 2. At the resumed hearing, I was assisted by Mr McVeety, who appeared  for
    the respondent and who told me that, in light  of  the  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State accepts that  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the  appellant  and  her  partner  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that the child of  the  appellant  and  her  partner  is  a
    British citizen, the appeal should be allowed given the  provisions  of
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  (as  amended)  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's own current policy.  The public interest does not  require  the
    removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom in such circumstances.

 3. I agree and remake the decision allowing the appeal on Article  8  ECHR
    grounds against the respondent's decision dated 16 December 2015.

Notice of decision

The appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds  against  the  respondent's  decision
dated 16 December 2015 is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 10 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

