


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00669/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th September 2017                |On 13th September 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     JBN
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Francis, instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born in 1971. He arrived in the
       UK in 1999 as a visitor with entry clearance, he claimed  asylum  on
       the basis of having been kidnapped by rebels which he said  led  the
       Ugandan authorities to believe he had assisted those  rebels,  which
       in turn  led  to  a  fear  on  his  part  of  persecution  from  the
       authorities. He was granted temporary admission.  His  asylum  claim
       was refused in April 2000, and the  appellant  did  not  attend  his
       appeal which was subsequently dismissed.

    2. In 2010 the appellant instructed  Lincolns  Solicitors  who  made  a
       legacy application which was rejected in  2013.  At  this  point  he
       instructed his current solicitors, and in April 2016  the  appellant
       made a statement which set out that he is an openly gay man who  had
       left Uganda originally for this reason as he  feared  serious  harm,
       and that this fear continues and is why he now claims  asylum  in  a
       fresh claim. This claim was  investigated  by  the  respondent,  who
       interviewed the appellant  in  November  2016,  and  refused  it  in
       January 2017.  His appeal against  the  decision  was  dismissed  by
       Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   McCarthy   in   a
       determination promulgated on the 8th March 2017.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law in ignoring an  important
       strand  of  the  appellant's  evidence  and  misunderstanding  other
       points, so that the key decision, that he is not gay, was  unsoundly
       made.

    4. I found that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  for  the
       reasons set out in the Error of Law Decision which appended as Annex
       A to this decision, and set aside the decision of Judge McCarthy  in
       its entirety. The matter now comes before me to remake the appeal.

    5. The appellant attended the hearing on 12th September  2017  but  did
       not give evidence due to his mental health problems, but he tendered
       three other witnesses: Dr Barbara Harrell-Bond; Mr PS and Ms  Yvonne
       Tyno. Mr Nath stated he understood why the appellant  had  not  been
       called to  give  evidence  given  the  psychological  report  of  Dr
       Chisholm. Aside from the witness evidence I heard  submissions  from
       both Ms Francis and Mr Nath.

    6. It was agreed by Mr  Nath,  as  it  had  been  by  the  Home  Office
       Presenting Officer before Judge McCarthy, that  the  only  issue  in
       this appeal is whether the appellant is openly gay. It was  accepted
       for the respondent that if I found the appellant to be an openly gay
       man that it was not disputed he would  then  have  shown  he  was  a
       refugee with a well founded fear of return to Uganda. It was  agreed
       by the respondent that it was not therefore necessary to explore any
       other issues to determine the appeal.

    7.  Mr Nath relied upon the points made in the refusal  letter  to  say
       that the appellant had not shown himself to be a gay man along  with
       the observation  that  none  of  the  witness  evidence  showed  the
       appellant currently to be in a relationship  with  another  man.  Ms
       Francis relied upon her skeleton argument augmented by further  oral
       submissions to  say  that  the  witness  evidence  demonstrated  the
       appellant to be an openly gay man,  and  that  the  reasons  in  the
       refusal letter were not valid ones showing he was not one.



Conclusions - Remaking

    8. The key aspects of the appellant's evidence  are  that  he  contends
       that he is a gay man who came to an understanding he was gay  whilst
       a school boy in Uganda. He had his first same-sex relationship  with
       a fellow pupil, BT, when he was about 16 years old, in 1991, and  as
       a result of being caught having sex with this boy was expelled  from
       school. He then had to relocate to Kampala, where he managed  to  do
       further studies and work, and live with the assistance of a brother,
       R, and an uncle who had more liberal views away from the rest of the
       family and community from whom he was estranged. He left his address
       and regular work in 1996, and left Uganda to come to the UK in March
       1999, as he was afraid police  were  going  to  question  him  about
       another matter and that in the  course  of  that  investigation  his
       sexual orientation would come out in evidence from  family.  He  did
       not make this claim on arrival as he was afraid  and  did  not  feel
       able to do so. Whilst in the UK he had a same sex relationship  with
       a student called BM who had immigration problems  between  2005  and
       2010, and they lived  together  for  three  years.  He  also  had  a
       relationship with a British man who was married to a  woman,  called
       MA, in 2010. He has had other casual relationships in this  country.
       The appellant  says  that  he  was  able  to  put  forward  a  claim
       disclosing his true fear of return to Uganda based on his  sexuality
       in April 2016 because he has received help and support from gay  and
       straight friends in Oxford,  where  he  has  lived  since  2012  who
       introduced him to his current representatives. He believes his  life
       would be at risk in  Uganda  as  a  gay  man  who  cannot  hide  his
       sexuality.

    9. The Secretary of State argues that  the  appellant's  claim  is  not
       credible, in summary for the following reasons:

    . He presented a false claim based on fear of the police  due  to  their
      believing he was assisting rebels in the  north  of  Uganda  initially
      when entering the UK and initially lied about being  married  when  he
      entered the UK. He had said he had claimed asylum now  on  this  basis
      because he understood he could be granted status on this basis,  which
      indicated he was simply opportunistically making this claim.

    . He delayed 17 years before presenting the claim he says  is  the  true
      one based on his sexuality despite being represented by  a  number  of
      lawyers since his arrival.

    . Some of the answers the appellant  gave  at  interview  did  not  make
      sense: for instance, he said he did not claim asylum in the UK  before
      on the basis of his sexuality because he did not feel safe to  do  so,
      and yet he also says he came to the UK to find safety from Uganda.

    . Some of his answers at interview were vague: for instance, giving  the
      point he realised he was gay as 20 years but saying he realised he did
      not like girls when he was 15 years old, and that he was aware of  his
      sexuality at 16 years old.

    .  Some  of  his  answers  at  interview  and  in  his  statement   were
      inconsistent: for instance, when he last saw his first boyfriend BT in
      Uganda is given in his statement as  1993  and  in  his  interview  as
      around 1995.

    . At interview the appellant did not give the full names of the men,  BM
      and MA, with whom he had had relationship in the UK.

    . He had never actually been persecuted in Uganda for being  gay  before
      he left.

    . His two witness statements submitted with his fresh claim, from AM and
      AK, were not considered to sufficiently support his claim.

   10. Dr Brock Chisholm is a chartered clinical  psychologist  who  is  an
       expert in the diagnosis and treatment of  those  who  have  suffered
       trauma. He is an expert who has provided evidence in  the  Court  of
       Appeal, Supreme Court, the European Court of Human Rights and to the
       United Nations. He has written a careful and coherent report on  the
       appellant, and confirmed his duty to the Tribunal. Dr Chisholm gives
       a reasoned conclusion why he does not find  that  the  appellant  is
       malingering or faking his symptoms. Mr Nath made no submissions that
       I should not accept his evidence. I find that his evidence should be
       given significant weight in the consideration of this appeal.

   11. The psychological evidence of Dr  Chisholm  is  that  the  appellant
       suffers from confusion when asked questions and exhibits a disrupted
       memory, and finds that this will have affected his ability to recall
       specific events and thus to present his asylum claim coherently, and
       would have made him vulnerable to accepting poor  advice.  He  finds
       that he might have psychotic symptoms which amount to a  schizotypal
       personality disorder, although he was unable to provide an immediate
       definite diagnosis. He  notes  that  his  symptoms  also  reach  the
       criteria for  major  depressive  disorder.  He  concluded  that  the
       appellant's mental health problems  would  also  have  impaired  his
       ability to form relationships; to  plan  and  implement  a  coherent
       strategy; and to have asked other for help with his asylum claim.

   12.  I  find  that  the  psychological  evidence  provides  a   possible
       explanation for the appellant having delayed in  making  his  asylum
       claim; for his being unable to fully explain  himself  at  interview
       and for his having given vague or inconsistent answers; and for  his
       not  wanting  to  give  full  names  or  get  others  involved  with
       supporting his asylum claim; and also for his not having  a  current
       partner or maintained relationships with ex-partners  so  as  to  be
       able to engage their help at this stage.

   13. I also observe that the key events and persons have  been  presented
       by the appellant in his current claim, both  in  his  interview  and
       statement, in a way which has been broadly consistent and always had
       the same broad chronology, even if dates have been different. I also
       note that he has now given the full names of the men in the UK  with
       whom he has had relationships.  The  appellant's  written  statement
       which, from her evidence, I understand was  put  together  with  the
       help of his friend Dr Barbara Harrell-Bond provides a very  detailed
       account of his life, development of his sexuality  and  motivations.
       There is also nothing  inherently  implausible  about  anything  the
       appellant has put forward, including his ability to trust two of his
       relatives with basic information about his  sexuality  as  he  could
       trust they were not going to take action against him,  due  to  them
       being better educated and of a more liberal outlook.  Whilst  it  is
       correct to say that the appellant  has  not  claimed  to  have  been
       persecuted in  Uganda  he  has  clearly  claimed  to  have  suffered
       discrimination, hostility and exclusion as a result of this, and  to
       have left Uganda because of fear  of  serious  harm  if  the  police
       obtained information he was gay as a result of their  investigations
       into another matter involving him.

   14. I accept that all the  witnesses  are  credible.  Mr  Nath  did  not
       suggest otherwise in any submissions. They all gave  evidence  which
       showed that they had listened to the questions carefully and were at
       pains to be entirely honest. Their oral evidence was consistent with
       their written statements.

   15. Dr Harrell-Bond is an emerita professor and  founding  director  and
       associate of the Refugee Studies Centre at the University of Oxford.
       She has meet and interviewed hundreds  of  refugees,  she  has  also
       spent three years living in Uganda but attends the Upper Tribunal as
       a personal friend of the appellant.  It  is  her  opinion  that  the
       appellant is a gay man because she  has  assisted  taking  his  full
       testimony, and has spent time with the appellant on a  very  regular
       (almost daily) basis since 2012, in which he had said he is gay, and
       she believes his history  to  be  true.  In  addition,  all  of  his
       friendships are with men and he had been brought to her  by  a  man,
       AK, who is a gay Ugandan who has been granted asylum on that  basis.
       She had not seen him with a current partner but  has  discussed  his
       past gay relationships with him. She is not a qualified psychologist
       but in a lay sense she finds the appellant extremely depressed.  She
       observes that the appellant would not attend places like gay bars as
       he does not drink; and also that he is a shy  person  who  finds  it
       hard to ask people to put themselves out  to  assist  him  with  his
       claim. She believes him to be a  moral  and  honest  person  who  is
       telling the truth.

   16. Mr PS is a gay man from Uganda who has been granted  refugee  status
       in the UK on the basis of his sexuality. He  met  the  appellant  in
       2016. He believes that the appellant came to the UK to  find  safety
       as he is a gay man and would be in danger in Uganda. He has met  the
       appellant very frequently as he come to Dr Harrell-Bond's flat  very
       regularly, and because he, Mr PS, shares a  flat  with  Dr  Harrell-
       Bond. He is certain the appellant is gay because  both  Dr  Harrell-
       Bond and the appellant have told him this is the case.

   17. Ms Yvonne Tyno is an American citizen who is visiting  the  UK.  Her
       daughter has a flat in Oxford in the UK, and the appellant has  been
       her house-sitter caring for the flat whilst she is not there for the
       past year. Ms Tyno got to know the  appellant  through  Dr  Harrell-
       Bond, and spent 12 weeks working with him on his English language in
       the summer of 2016. Through this work she learned of his  sexuality,
       about which he was open, telling her the history of his relationship
       at school with BT, and also about  the  help  he  gives  to  various
       families in Oxford such as caring  for  an  autistic  child  and  an
       elderly lady. Ms Tyno says she has witnessed that he has  no  sexual
       attraction to women, and finds his sexual orientation history to  be
       true. She notes that he was initially reticent with  her  about  his
       sexual history until they had a trusting relationship, and  that  he
       is not willing to impose on others to assist him. She  has  come  to
       the UK particularly to give evidence at the  appellant's  appeal  as
       she believes he is telling the truth about his sexuality and that he
       will be persecuted if returned to Uganda. She observed  that  he  is
       not currently involved with LGBT organisations, and although this is
       partly because he is not that interested to  do  so,  this  is  also
       because he has no money for socialising or for any  membership  fees
       so it is not really a possibility in his current economic position.

   18. The witness evidence is of a very high quality.  It  comes  from  Dr
       Harrell-Bond who has decades of experience with refugees and who has
       known the appellant for five years and had very regular contact with
       the appellant and detailed discussions of his past; from Mr  PS  who
       is himself a gay Ugandan man, recognised as a refugee as such by the
       respondent, and who also has had over a year's  close  contact  with
       the appellant; and Ms Tyno who has tutored the appellant intensively
       for three months and had detailed personal discussions with him, and
       an opportunity to observe that he is generally a very  reliable  and
       honest person. This witness evidence contends that the appellant  is
       a reticent but openly gay man.

   19. When considering whether the appellant is an openly gay man  I  must
       weigh against him the fact that he delayed in making  the  claim  he
       now says is true for a very long period of years and the  fact  that
       the he initially told an  untruthful  story  to  attempt  to  obtain
       asylum in the UK.  He has also not been able to  provide  a  history
       which has a totally consistent timeline with full names, or  witness
       evidence from previous partners, although this  is  possibly  simply
       reflective of his psychological state/ personality disorder  as  set
       out by Dr Chisholm.

   20.  I  must  also  consider  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  on   International
       Protection  No  9:  Claims  to  Refugee  Status  based   on   Sexual
       Orientation or Gender Identity dated 23rd October 2012. I note  that
       it  is  important  not   to   make   culturally   inappropriate   or
       stereotypical assumptions, and that it is not a factor  to  be  held
       against  the  appellant  that  he  does  not  attend  gay  bars   or
       campaigning  organisations  which  for  reasons  of   his   reticent
       character, lack of funds and not  having  an  interest  in  drinking
       alcohol would not appeal to him. I also note from this guidance that
       his history of experiencing homophobia in Uganda would be likely  to
       cause difficulties and delays opening up  to  immigration  officials
       about his sexual history and trusting the  asylum  system  prior  to
       having the excellent social support system he  now  has  in  Oxford,
       particularly given his psychological issues, and  that  having  such
       difficulties in opening up and making the claim is not  inconsistent
       with having a correct objective understanding that  gay  people  are
       safer in the UK than in Uganda, which the appellant  says  motivated
       his move here. These guidelines also draw attention to the fact that
       an understanding of sexual orientation is a process that may  emerge
       over  time,  particularly  in  societies   hostile   to   same   sex
       relationships, and  thus  any  difficulties  the  appellant  had  in
       explaining when precisely he understood he was gay are not a  factor
       which is an indicator he is being untruthful.

   21. I conclude, having considered all of the  evidence  before  me,  and
       particularly that of the witnesses who gave oral testimony,  that  I
       am satisfied that the appellant has  shown  to  the  required  lower
       civil standard of proof that he is an openly gay man from Uganda. It
       is conceded by the respondent that in these  circumstances  that  he
       has a well founded fear of persecution in the light of  the  country
       of origin evidence, and I find this to be the case too.

 Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

   3. I remake the appeal allowing it on asylum and human rights grounds.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.



Signed:     Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   13th  September
2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


Annex A: Error of Law Decision



                            DECISION AND REASONS

       Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born in 1971. He arrived in  the
       UK in 1999 as a visitor with entry clearance, he  claimed  asylum  on
       the basis of having been kidnapped by rebels which he  said  led  the
       Ugandan authorities to believe he had assisted those rebels, which in
       turn led to a fear on his part of persecution from  the  authorities.
       He was granted temporary admission. His asylum claim was  refused  in
       April 2000, and the appellant did not attend  his  appeal  which  was
       subsequently dismissed.

    2. In 2010 the appellant  instructed  Lincolns  Solicitors  who  made  a
       legacy application which was rejected  in  2013.  At  this  point  he
       instructed his current solicitors, and in April  2016  the  appellant
       made a statement which set out that he is an openly gay man  who  had
       left Uganda originally for this reason as he feared serious harm, and
       that this fear continues and is why he now claims asylum in  a  fresh
       claim. This claim was investigated by the respondent, who interviewed
       the appellant in November 2016, and refused it in January 2017.   His
       appeal against the decision was dismissed by Designated Judge of  the
       First-tier Tribunal McCarthy in a determination  promulgated  on  the
       8th March 2017.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law in ignoring  an  important
       strand of the appellant's evidence and misunderstanding other points,
       so that the decision that he is not gay is unsound.

    4. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law

       Submissions - Error of Law

    5. The grounds of appeal contend that firstly  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       failed  to  look  at  the  detailed  account  of  how  the  appellant
       discovered his sexuality and of being  gay  in  Uganda.  This  was  a
       failure of anxious scrutiny, and could have led to it being  believed
       that he was gay. It was a material part of a fair hearing  that  this
       evidence be properly considered.

    6. Secondly the evidence  of  the  witnesses,  Dr  Harrell-Bond  and  Mr
       Sserugo, was rejected for unfair and irrational reasons. It  was  not
       safe to reject Dr Harrell-Bond's evidence just because she  expressed
       a view that the appellant may be depressed. It was not safe to reject
       the evidence of Mr Sserugo because he  could  not  provide  documents
       confirming the basis he was granted asylum or because of  a  mistaken
       belief that he and the appellant gave inconsistent  account  of  when
       they last met.

    7. In a Rule 24 notice the  respondent  maintains  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal has made a legally valid determination which  looks  at  the
       main issues in dispute. It is said that there was: "no need to  refer
       to  every  material  consideration".  Full  reasons  are  given   for
       rejecting the claim. It was a matter for the  judge  to  decide  what
       weight to give to the evidence of the witnesses, and in any  case  he
       found that they were acting in good faith and honestly  believed  the
       appellant was gay. A further letter  from  Ms  Alice  Holmes  of  the
       Presenting Officers Unit did however clarify that the evidence  going
       to what the appellant and  his  witness,  Mr  Sserugo,  said  at  the
       hearing was broadly similar in that it clarified that both Mr Sserugo
       and the appellant had said he was not there on the last  Sunday  when
       Mr Sserugo tried to visit the appellant.

    8. I indicated to Mr Tufan that my initial view was that the grounds  of
       appeal  were  well  made  out  relating  to  the  treatment  of   the
       appellant's own evidence and that of Dr Harrell-Bond, and so I  would
       ask him to commence with a reply to those grounds. At this  point  Mr
       Tufan conceding that there were errors by the First-tier Tribunal  in
       dealing with the appellant's statement and the  witness  evidence  of
       the two key witnesses, and added that  Mr  Sserugo  had  indeed  been
       given refugee status on grounds of his sexual  orientation  according
       to the respondent's records. In this context I informed  the  parties
       that I found the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law materially  and
       that I would set aside the decision in its entirety.

    9. The parties agreed that the matter should be adjourned and remade  in
       the Upper Tribunal before me, and a date of 12th September  2017  was
       fixed with a hearing time of 3 hours.

       Conclusions - Error of Law

   10. The First-tier Tribunal start from the position that: "I am satisfied
       that if I find the appellant is telling the truth about his sexuality
       then he would have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  because  of
       being an openly gay man."

   11. In considering whether the appellant is an openly gay man  the  Judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal consider that he must "exercise caution in
       accepting his claim to  be  gay  at  face  value"  due  to  his  poor
       immigration history, delay in making  a  fresh  claim,  admission  he
       exaggerated his initial account and his admission  he  lied  when  he
       said he was married and had children. The  First-tier  Tribunal  then
       goes on to look at the evidence of the witnesses at paragraphs 28  to
       47 of the decision, and finds that none of them  establish  that  the
       appellant is gay to the lower standard of proof.

   12. The records  of  the  evidence  of  both  the  respondent's  and  the
       appellant's representatives is that Mr Sserugo and the appellant gave
       consistent evidence about the appellant not being  at  home  when  Mr
       Sserugo came around to visit him on the previous  Sunday.  There  are
       other points however on which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
       evidence should not be given weight which I find were rationally open
       to that Tribunal.

   13. However, I find that the First-tier Tribunal sets out no good reasons
       to reject the evidence of Dr Harrell-Bond  at  paragraph  46  of  the
       decision as "superficial and assumed" simply because it was based  on
       what the appellant had told her over a period of  time,  and  in  the
       context of her evidence being found to be given in  "good  faith"  at
       paragraph 41  of  the  decision.  Further,  it  is  not  rational  to
       criticised Dr Harrell-Bond  for  believing  the  appellant  might  be
       depressed simply because he has  not  gone  to  a  doctor  when  from
       paragraph 89 of the appellant's own statement there is evidence  that
       others have also  believed  that  might  be  the  case.  It  is  also
       abundantly clear from her statement at paragraph 11 that this was not
       meant as a medical diagnosis.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal considers the  appellant's  own  evidence  at
       paragraphs 48 to 51 of  the  decision.  It  is  rejected  because  of
       inconsistencies with the witnesses, however there are  no  identified
       inconsistencies with the evidence of Dr Harrell-Bond.  Other  reasons
       for rejecting the appellant's evidence include that he did  not  seek
       support from the gay community in the UK or put forward a claim to be
       gay sooner despite the lead the  case  in  HJ  (Iran)  which,  it  is
       contended,  would  have  been  known  to  his  previous   solicitors,
       Lincoln's, whom he says he told about his sexuality in 2010, and whom
       it could be assumed would have advised him that he could advance that
       ground.

   15. I find it was an error of law however not to have considered in  this
       context the nature and quality  of  the  appellant's  statement,  and
       indeed his oral evidence to the First-tier Tribunal. He has  provided
       an 18 page 94 paragraph statement giving a very detailed  description
       of the development of his sexuality and the issues he has had with it
       which has not been considered at all in the decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. I find this was a material consideration which was not
       placed in the balance, and that combined with the material  error  in
       the lack of valid reasons for rejecting the evidence of  Dr  Harrell-
       Bond, means that I conclude that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially
       erred in law in the assessment  of  the  key  issue  of  whether  the
       appellant is an openly gay man.

       Decision:

   16. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

   17. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

   18. I adjourned the re-make hearing.


Directions:

   1. The matter is to be relisted before me on 12th September 2017  with  a
      time estimate of 3 hours.
   2.  Any new evidence to be relied upon by either party  should  be  filed
      with the Upper Tribunal and served on the other side 7 days  prior  to
      the hearing date, so by 5th September 2017.


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  13th June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley








