
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00699/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral judgment given at hearing       |On 31 January 2020                   |
|On 9 January 2020                    |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     L M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1969.  He arrived  illegally
    in the UK in 2002 but at that point claimed to be an Iraqi citizen.  He
    maintained that pretence for some period of time until, ultimately,  he
    made a protection claim as a citizen of  Iran.   That  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 10 January 2019.

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Barrowclough at a hearing on  23  July  2019.
    Judge  Barrowclough  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,   humanitarian
    protection  and  human  rights  grounds.   Permission  to  appeal  that
    decision having been granted by a Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    appeal came before me.

 3. It was not contended on behalf of the  appellant  in  relation  to  the
    grant of permission, notwithstanding how the grant is phrased, that  it
    was anything more than a grant of permission and a  decision  that  the
    grounds are arguable, although the grant of permission does on one view
    suggest that the judge who granted permission had concluded that  there
    were errors of law already made out.

 4. It is not necessary for me to set  out  in  detail  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's claim or the detail  of  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings because it was accepted on behalf of the appellant that in the
    light of my expression of a provisional view that the appeal fell to be
    allowed in the light of the country guidance  decision  of  HB  (Kurds)
    Iran CG  [2018]  UKUT  00430  (IAC),  the  complaints  in  the  grounds
    concerning  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  need  not  be
    pursued.

 5. It was similarly agreed on behalf of the respondent that in  the  light
    of the findings made by Judge Barrowclough in terms of the  appellant's
    sur place activities, the appeal fell to be allowed notwithstanding the
    limited findings as to those sur place activities.

 6. In those circumstances, and having  canvassed  these  issues  with  the
    parties at the hearing in advance of  this  oral  judgment,  I  am  not
    satisfied that there is  any  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility findings, but on the basis of the positive findings set out
    in particular at [34] of Judge Barrowclough's decision supported by the
    documentary evidence in terms of the appellant's sur place  activities,
    I am satisfied that Judge Barrowclough erred in law in  dismissing  the
    appeal in the light of the country guidance decision of HB.

 7. Accordingly, and in the light  of  the  concession  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that the judge's decision must be  set  aside,  the  parties
    agreed that the appropriate outcome is for the decision to  be  re-made
    and for the appeal to be allowed  on  protection  grounds  (asylum  and
    Article 3).

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  I  re-make  the
    decision allowing the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 29/01/2020
