
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00337/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 4th October 2018                  |On 24th October 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 Odjola [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Jonrose, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on  29th  April  1984.   The
    Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK on  1st  November  2014  and
    claimed asylum on 8th December 2014.  Her method of travel from Albania
    to the UK is recited in her immigration history.  The Appellant's basis
    for asylum is that of membership of  a  particular  social  group  -  a
    female victim of trafficking for the purpose  of  sexual  exploitation.
    The Appellant's application for asylum was refused by Notice of Refusal
    dated 27th December 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Lloyd-Smith sitting at Manchester on 20th June 2018.   In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 28th June  2018  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 5th  July  2018.
    Those grounds contend that the  judge  had  placed  undue  reliance  on
    evidence which was not before the Tribunal and that that  approach  was
    unsafe and prejudiced the Appellant.  Further it was contended that the
    judge had not engaged at all with the identified errors made  by  those
    assessing her claim relating to her claim for trafficking  and  it  was
    submitted that by relying on omitted evidence the judge had fallen into
    legal error so as to render the findings unsustainable.

 4. On 23rd July 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted  permission
    to appeal accepting that it was arguable that the judge had  materially
    erred in law by placing reliance on evidence which was not  before  the
    Tribunal.

 5. On 24th September 2018 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response submits that  the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal directed herself appropriately and  that  it
    is clear from paragraph 10 of the  determination  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  was  given  handwritten  notes  from  the  Immigration
    Officer's notebook and that that was also reflected in  the  Presenting
    Officer's Record of Proceedings.  Consequently, the Secretary of  State
    submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  not   considering
    information that had not been before her.  The Rule 24 response  points
    out that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had disbelieved the  Appellant's
    claim in its entirety (regardless of  the  dispute  about  whether  the
    Appellant told the Immigration  Officer  that  she  was  expecting  her
    husband's child) and that she had given detailed reasons for  rejecting
    the account in the decision.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    legal representative Ms Jonrose.  Ms  Jonrose  is  familiar  with  this
    matter.  She appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and I believe  she
    is also the author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by his Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Ms Jonrose starts  by  referring  to  the  Rule  24  response  and  the
    reference made therein by Mrs Pettersen on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State that the judge had been handed the  handwritten  notes  from  the
    Immigration Officer's notebook.  She points out that  whilst  it  would
    not have been known to Mrs Pettersen  when  considering  the  Rule  24,
    those notes were not the notes which the Grounds of  Appeal  refer  to.
    She submits that the key issue in  this  matter  is  paternity  of  the
    Appellant's child and that the issue in question goes to whether or not
    the Appellant had been trafficked.  She submits that at  paragraphs  16
    and 25 the judge relies on evidence that has  not  been  placed  before
    her.  As a result she contends that the judge went on to conclude  that
    the Appellant's husband is the father of her child.  She  submits  that
    at paragraph 28 there is a reliance placed by  the  judge  on  evidence
    that was not before her and that the judge has actually omitted to look
    at  the  evidence  that  was.   She  contends  that   there   were   no
    inconsistencies  on  the  documentary  evidence  that  was  before  the
    Tribunal but that the judge failed to give  due  consideration  to  it.
    She takes me to the two final sentences of paragraph  28  stating  that
    whilst the Judge may have rejected her account she has failed  to  give
    reasons and that that in itself constitutes a material  error  of  law.
    She asked me to find that there are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision, to set aside the decision and to remit the matter back to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Mr Bates starts by taking me to paragraph  28  pointing  out  that  the
    manner in which the judge had addressed this matter was  based  on  the
    fact that she had already made findings  of  negative  credibility  and
    that it was the Appellant's oral testimony that led to the judge making
    such findings.  Further he points out that at paragraph  18  the  judge
    had set out  the  issue  in  question  relating  to  the  provision  of
    documents and comments that  in  her  view  the  issue  was  still  not
    adequately addressed.  As far  as  the  Appellant's  contact  with  the
    Immigration Officer is concerned, he points  out  that  the  judge  has
    dealt with this in some considerable detail at  paragraph  19  and  has
    made findings thereon relating to the Appellant's credibility that  she
    was entitled to.   He  reminds  me  that  credibility  was  effectively
    assessed without reference to documentation or to whether any documents
    were missing and that he has mentioned on more than one  occasion  that
    documents were not before her.   He  asked  me  to  find  there  is  no
    material error of law and to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

 9. Ms Jonrose points out that the decision is not based on oral  testimony
    alone and it is  necessary  to  look  at  the  evidence  in  the  round
    including what was said by the Appellant on her arrival in the UK.  She
    takes me to paragraph 25 of the decision.    The judge has  noted  that
    there is missing the account given to the NRM that form part  of  their
    assessment and the basis of their comparison in  the  asylum  interview
    accounts.  Whilst she accepts that the judge has rejected the claim set
    out in the skeleton argument, she contends that  the  judge  failed  to
    have access to that documentation and therefore has failed to  actually
    look at the evidence that is before her.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. The basis upon which Ms Jonrose puts the Appellant's arguments is  that
    the judge had reached her conclusion based on  documentation  that  was
    not before her.   She  insists  that  it  is  essential  following  the
    principles of  Tanveer  Ahmed  to  look  at  everything  in  the  round
    including documents.  This is, of course, correct.  However, it has  to
    be noted that the judge  has  made  a  substantial  number  of  adverse
    findings of credibility based entirely on the oral testimony  that  the
    judge heard from the Appellant.  The  judge  has  followed  the  proper
    approach to credibility, i.e. she has assessed  the  evidence  and  the
    claim generally and thereafter has looked at relevant factors, i.e. the
    internal consistency, the inherent plausibility and the consistency  of
    the claim with external factors of the sort typically found in  country
    guidance.  She has made overall findings of fact that she was  entitled
    to.

13. It is important to look at how the case has been developed.  The  judge
    has assessed credibility without reference to the documentation.  There
    are references within the  decision  that  the  documentation  was  not
    before her and her findings on credibility are well  reasoned.   Within
    paragraph 23 where the judge concludes that the  Appellant  was  not  a
    credible or truthful witness, the  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
    claimed actions on escaping from her captors lacked credibility.  There
    is no suggestion therein that  the  judge  has  made  any  findings  on
    missing documents and  the  conclusions  that  the  judge  reaches  are
    unrelated to the documents.  Further the judge has set  out  the  basis
    upon which she has made, and reached, her conclusions on  these  issues
    in considerable detail and with a considerable  number  of  reasons  at
    paragraphs 17 to 22.

14. The findings made by the judge were ones that were all open to her  and
    she has set out throughout the decision a whole raft of reasons for her
    findings on  credibility  even  if  it  were  to  be  conceded  (and  I
    appreciate that it is not) that there  are  any  discrepancies  in  the
    documentary evidence provided by the Secretary of State.

15. For all the above  reasons  I  am  not  satisfied  that  this  decision
    discloses any material error of law.  The judge  has  made  a  reasoned
    decision based on findings from the testimony that she had heard.   She
    has made reference to missing documentation but that has not in any way
    prejudiced her findings on the testimony that was  before  her.   Quite
    simply she does not believe the Appellant's account and she  has  given
    her reasons.  There is nothing perverse in the decision  that  she  has
    reached.  In such circumstances I find that the decision  discloses  no
    material err of law and the appeal is dismissed and the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law.

The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 19 October

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 19 October

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



