
[pic]

Upper Tribunal      Appeal no: PA/00573/2017
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                   |Decision signed:   04.05.2017        |
|on    04.05.2017                     |Sent out: on  10.05.2017             |
|                                     |                                     |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                               NGUYEN The Hiep
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Soraya Pascoe (counsel instructed by KM Solicitors Ltd,
Manchester)
For the respondent: Mr P Nath

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ian Howard), sitting at Harmondsworth on  13  February,
    to  an asylum and human rights appeal by a citizen of Vietnam, born  in
    1987. The appellant had given  an  account  of  being  recruited  by  a
    trafficker in Vietnam to come here and work to pay off a debt  owed  by
    his parents. The appeal turns  on  the  judge's  way  of  deciding  the
    credibility of that account.

 2. The appellant said he had arrived in this country in June 2016, to find
    himself put to work in a cannabis 'farm', where his job  was  to  water
    the plants; but at one point he had also been  involved  in  harvesting
    them. His description of his work is clearly set out by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 19, to which I shall return: at paragraph 20 the judge  noted
    that this was a commercial operation, involving  forced  labour  by  an
    illegally-trafficked worker; but  at  paragraph  21  he  gave  reasons,
    relying on his own knowledge of such operations, for concluding,  again
    very clearly, at paragraphs 22 - 23 that the  appellant  had  not  been
    involved in anything of the sort.

 3. The grounds of appeal took various points on credibility, but not  what
    may already be the obvious one: was the judge entitled in law to decide
    it on the basis of his own knowledge as he did? This point did not pass
    unnoticed by the judge who  permission in the First-tier Tribunal,  who
    alluded to it, on the basis that it was unclear where  the  information
    in paragraph 21 had come from. However, I considered it desirable  that
    the point should be explicitly taken and dealt with, since it  involves
    a not uncommon problem, on which neither the parties nor I  were  aware
    of any recent authority in this field. Miss Pascoe amended her grounds,
    and I granted permission accordingly.

 4. The appellant's account of events at the 'farm' had  him  hand-watering
    the plants, all kept in one room of the house in  question:  there  was
    constant lighting, but no tent or heating. As for the harvesting,  that
    had simply involved him in cutting the plants off as they stood,  about
    half-way up the stem. The judge however noted that there were  none  of
    the features he  considered  typical  of  a  commercial  operation:  no
    hydroponic system, heating, nor a tent to preserve  heat  or  humidity.
    The lighting was neither  intensified  nor  timed  to  produce  maximum
    growth, and the harvesting was not of the  flowering  heads,  the  only
    part of commercial value; nor were they bagged or dried.

 5. The judge gave other reasons for his conclusions on credibility, but it
    is quite clear that those referred to  were  central  to  them.  Again,
    other challenges were made to those conclusions; but,  as  Miss  Pascoe
    realistically acknowledged, if the judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusions set out in paragraphs 21 - 23 on the basis he did, then the
    appeal could not succeed. Certainly it could not have done  so  on  the
    grounds originally pleaded, not by Miss Pascoe.

 6. At Mr Nath's invitation, I looked at the judge's handwritten record  of
    proceedings to see what had happened before him. As I made clear to the
    parties, the appellant had not been cross-examined about what the judge
    saw as the unusual nature of the cannabis operation  in  which  he  had
    been involved; nor had anything been said about that in the  presenting
    officer's closing remarks. The judge himself  does  not  seem  to  have
    raised the point at the hearing, so far as can be seen from his  record
    of proceedings. It has  to  be  assumed  that  it  came  from  his  own
    knowledge, and remained in his head till he wrote his decision.

 7. The general rules on this question are as follows:  they  are  set  out
    more fully in AM (fair hearing) [2015] UKUT 656 (IAC) (McCloskey P  and
    UTJ Canavan) at paragraphs (i) and  (ii)  of  the  judicial  head-note,
    dealing with a different situation; but the principles are the same.

        a) where the judge's knowledge involves special expertise  in  some
           non-forensic  area,  it  cannot  be  relied  on  without  expert
           evidence to support it; on the other hand

        b) where it relates to something within the  general  knowledge  of
           most reasonably well-informed people, then it will be enough  to
           put it, in suitably neutral terms, to the  party  against  whose
           interest it may go, or at least their  advocate,  so  that  they
           have an opportunity to deal with it at the hearing (needless  to
           say, this is also necessary where expert evidence is relied on).

 8. Returning to the particular facts  of  this  case,  Miss  Pascoe  again
    realistically accepted that the typical features of a  cannabis  'farm'
    were as described by the judge at paragraph 21. Most  reasonably  well-
    informed people in this country are no doubt aware of this; and  anyone
    involved, as judge or advocate, in criminal cases cannot  fail  to  be.
    While not all of them may be present in any particular operation,  that
    was not the basis of the judge's disbelief, as expressed  at  paragraph
    22: his point was that this appellant had mentioned none of them.

 9. However, the judge clearly needed to draw this point to the appellant's
    attention, preferably by asking him neutrally-phrased questions of  his
    own, following cross-examination and any re-examination;  or  at  least
    raising it with the appellant's representative in closing, so  that  he
    could apply to recall the appellant, if he wished. Given its importance
    to the judge's credibility findings, it was equally  clearly  wrong  in
    law for him not to do either of these things.

10. The question then  arises  of  what  should  be  done  about  that.  My
    jurisdiction comes from the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007:

       12     Proceedings on appeal to Upper Tribunal

         (1) Subsection (2) applies if the Upper Tribunal, in  deciding  an
            appeal under section 11, finds that the making of the  decision
            concerned involved the making of an error on a point of law.

         (2) The Upper Tribunal-

            (a) may (but need not) set aside the decision of the First-tier
            Tribunal, and

            (b) if it does, must either-

               (i)  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   with
               directions for its reconsideration, or

               (ii) re-make the decision.

11. The alternatives are clearly set out at s. 12 (2) (a). Miss Pascoe took
    her stand on the basis that something had clearly  gone  wrong  at  the
    first-tier hearing, which had directly affected the result. While  that
    is certainly true, I had to ask her what difference it could make if  I
    were either to remit the case, or re-make the decision?  Both  she,  Mr
    Nath and I were agreed that the judge was  right  about  the  essential
    features of a cannabis 'farm'; and the evidence which the appellant for
    his part had put forward as true had been clearly recorded by him. Miss
    Pascoe suggested that the appellant might not have had  an  opportunity
    to explain the 'global operation' of the 'farm';  but  it  was  on  the
    points in which he claimed to have been involved himself that the judge
    had disbelieved him.

12. I see no useful purpose in setting  aside  the  judge's  decision,  and
    decline to do so. This is not in any way  to  encourage  him  or  other
    judges to decide cases before them without going through the  procedure
    set out at 7 and 9, which is designed, not only to  reach  a  realistic
    result, but to do so in a way which is visibly fair to both sides.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
