
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA000482017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th July 2017                      |On 03rd August 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                              Abdullah Al Mamun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born on  15th  May  1992.
    The Appellant first arrived in the UK via  Dubai  and  Cyprus  on  24th
    December 2015 when he was given leave to enter as a visitor until  24th
    June 2016.  The Appellant applied for asylum on 22nd June  2016.   That
    application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  the  Respondent's
    letter of 21st December 2016.  The Appellant appealed, and  his  appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  I  Taylor  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Stoke-on-Trent on 1st February 2017.  He decided to  dismiss
    the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds for the reasons given  in
    his Decision dated 5th March  2017.   The  Appellant  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision and on 9th May 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that he was a  member  of
    the Bangladesh National Party (BNP) and feared both the Government  and
    members of the Awami League (AL).  He also feared a man named  Faiz  Ul
    Koyes with  whom  the  Appellant  had  been  in  business.   The  Judge
    dismissed the appeal because he found the Appellant's  evidence  to  be
    lacking in credibility.  At the hearing, Mr  Khan  submitted  that  the
    Judge had erred in coming to that conclusion.  He argued that the Judge
    had failed to consider and make findings upon  some  material  evidence
    such as a  certificate  from  the  BNP,  a  collection  of  photographs
    contained  in  the  Appellant's  Bundle,  and  also  various  newspaper
    cuttings.  These items and other evidence showed the Appellant to be  a
    leading member of the BNP and to have a  high  political  profile.   He
    would therefore be a target for persecution.   Further  the  Judge  had
    failed to give adequate reasons for his finding that the Appellant  was
    not credible.  The Judge had also failed to  give  due  weight  to  the
    objective evidence showing that political violence in Bangladesh  since
    the elections of 2014 had increased.

 4. Finally, Mr Khan submitted that the Judge had made a  procedural  error
    in declining to hear evidence from the Appellant's brother  present  at
    the hearing.  The Appellant had been unrepresented at the hearing,  and
    the Judge had not considered  ordering  an  adjournment  to  allow  the
    Appellant to prepare his case more fully.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    the grounds of application amounted to no more than a disagreement with
    the decision of the Judge.  The Appellant was trying  to  re-argue  the
    appeal.  There had been no procedural unfairness.  As the  Judge  noted
    at paragraph 3 of the Decision, the Judge had  afforded  the  Appellant
    every  assistance  at  the  hearing   as   the   Appellant   had   been
    unrepresented.  There had been  no  application  by  the  Appellant  to
    adjourn.  The  Judge  had  not  declined  to  hear  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's brother.  On the contrary, it was apparent  from  paragraph
    31 of the Decision that the Judge had invited the Appellant to consider
    calling his brother to give evidence.

 6. Mrs Aboni went on to argue that the Judge had adequately considered all
    the evidence before him.  He  had  given  sufficient  reasons  for  the
    weight he had attached to each part of the Appellant's  evidence.   The
    Judge had been entitled to draw an inference  from  the  lack  of  oral
    evidence from the BNP in the UK.  Again, the Judge had dealt  with  all
    the documentary evidence and sufficiently  explained  why  he  had  not
    attached weight to  most  of  it.   Although  finding  the  Appellant's
    evidence unreliable, the Judge had considered in  the  alternative  the
    Appellant's claim that he feared Faiz Ul Koyes and  concluded  that  it
    was reasonable by way of being not unduly harsh for  the  Appellant  to
    relocate in Bangladesh.

 7. I find no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  Judge  which
    therefore I do not set aside.  The Judge  decided  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that he did not  believe  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant,  and
    therefore it  follows  that  the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was a member of the BNP.  As Mrs Aboni argued, at  paragraphs
    30 to 42 inclusive of the Decision the Judge carefully  and  thoroughly
    analysed all the evidence before him and made a finding open to him  as
    to the credibility of the  Appellant.   The  Judge  identified  various
    discrepancies in the evidence of the Appellant which  he  found  to  be
    neither plausible nor credible.  The Judge found the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant to be damaged by virtue of the provisions of Section 8 Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.   As  part  of
    his analysis of the evidence,  the  Judge  dealt  at  length  with  the
    documentary evidence  before  him.   He  gave  cogent  reasons  why  he
    attached little or no weight to it. He also  considered  the  objective
    evidence.  There were  no  procedural  irregularities.   As  the  Judge
    stated in the Decision, he treated the Appellant as  unrepresented.   I
    have read the statements of the Appellant and his brother submitted for
    the hearing, but I am not satisfied that the Judge prevented in any way
    the Appellant from calling evidence from his brother by virtue of  what
    the Appellant wrote at paragraph 31 of his Decision.   Considering  all
    the arguments of Mr Khan, I find  that  I  am  in  agreement  with  the
    submission of Mrs Aboni that the grounds of application  amount  to  no
    more than a disagreement with the decision of the Judge and an  attempt
    to re-argue the appeal.  For these reasons I find no error  of  law  in
    the decision of the Judge.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Dated   2nd August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
