
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00314/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 19th October 2018                   |Heard on 12th November 2018   |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                    [L B]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                 REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Guyana  born  on  8  October  1966.  She
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Buckwell
    sitting at Hendon Magistrates Court on 25 April 2016. That decision was
    to dismiss the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the  Respondent
    dated 5 June 2015 to refuse  her  international  protection  and  human
    rights claims. The Appellant is subject to a deportation  order  signed
    on 9 January 2014 following a sentence of 18 years imprisonment imposed
    on 27 February 2006  at  Snaresbrook  Crown  Court  for  conspiracy  to
    produce a controlled drug of class A and money-laundering in  what  was
    described by the sentencing Judge as "a global conspiracy".  An  appeal
    against the deportation order was dismissed and  permission  to  appeal
    was refused in July 2014. On 21 August 2014 the Appellant  applied  for
    asylum and was interviewed by the Respondent arguing that  she  was  at
    risk upon return because she was suspected by her co-defendants in  the
    2006 trial of giving information about them to  the  authorities.  They
    had threatened her with violence if she were to return to Guyana.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  18  December  2001  on  a
    visitor's visa and was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2004.  The
    Appellant's claim was summarised by the Judge at [9]  to  [36]  of  the
    determination. In or about 1994 she was  abducted  and  ill-treated  by
    gangsters searching for her brother. She managed to  escape  to  French
    Guyana where she had no problems but decided to leave for a holiday  in
    the United Kingdom. Here, the Appellant began a  relationship  in  2003
    with a drug dealer called [BC], a leading figure in the conspiracy. The
    Appellant gave the name of [BC]'s supplier to the police. The Appellant
    was prosecuted for her involvement with the drug dealing activities  of
    [BC]'s gang. The other defendants came to know what  had  happened  and
    threats in writing were made to the Appellant  during  the  trial.  The
    threats were handed via a woman who worked  for  Serco.  [BC]  and  the
    others were all from the capital Georgetown as she was and  would  know
    if she were deported to Guyana.

 3. The Respondent did not accept the Appellant had been threatened by [BC]
    because she had not mentioned any  such  threats  until  she  made  her
    asylum claim on 21  August  2014.  They  were  not  raised  during  the
    deportation appeal in 2014. The Appellant's credibility was  undermined
    by reason of section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc) Act 2004. Importantly, the Respondent  did  not  accept
    that an employee of Serco would have passed threatening messages to the
    Appellant from [BC]. Although there were  deficiencies  in  the  police
    service there was sufficient protection available to the  Appellant  in
    Guyana.

The Decision at First Instance

 4. The Appellant submitted to Judge Buckwell that  the  key  question  was
    whether the Appellant was telling the truth  (see  [87]).  Due  to  the
    abuse the Appellant had suffered in the past documented  in  a  medical
    report by Dr Lohawala the Appellant might not be able to deal with  the
    risk she might face on return. The presence of the Appellant in  Guyana
    would be discovered as the gangs there were powerful.

 5. The Judge noted at [107] that the  Respondent  was  not  relying  on  a
    certificate under section 72 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002, this was thus an asylum appeal. The Appellant did not rely on
    her claimed experience of kidnap in or around 1993 in relation  to  her
    present fear of return to Guyana. The Judge accepted that that incident
    had occurred but "some 20 years later, any individuals  who  then  took
    the Appellant and her sister in order to attempt to exert  pressure  on
    them in relation to their late brother would  have  [no]  relevance  or
    connection with or interest in the Appellant on her return", see [109].
    The Appellant feared the threat from other Guyanese nationals  who  had
    been deported or otherwise removed to Guyana following  the  conclusion
    of their sentences for the drugs conspiracy.

 6. At [112]  the  Judge  gave  his  principal  finding  on  the  issue  of
    credibility. That paragraph was the subject of the main attack  by  the
    Appellant in this appeal and I will therefore set it out in full:

         "I find it critical to the account of the Appellant that she claims
         that during the process  of  the  court  appearances  threats  were
         received in written terms by way of notes which were given  to  her
         by "a black employee of Serco".  It  appears  that  this  may  have
         happened on more than one claimed occasion. I do not find  this  to
         be credible. Whilst in any organisation there  may  be  individuals
         who do not perform to the level which is expected  of  them,  Serco
         are  a  trusted  organisation  whose  employees,  in   transporting
         individuals to and from proceedings within the judicial  system  of
         our country, are required to act to a high level of responsibility.
         The claim by  the  Appellant  that  an  employee  of  that  company
         effectively acted as messenger for one or more of her co-defendants
         is  not  an  account  which  I  believe.  Additionally  I  find  it
         surprising that if the Appellant had received  written  notes,  she
         would not either have  disclose  that  fact  to  others,  including
         officials at the premises where she was being detained, or to other
         friends or family. In  addition,  [PB],  from  WISH  [a  Voice  for
         Women's Mental Health for whom the Appellant had been working since
         February 2013],  was  not  able  to  confirm  that  there  was  any
         substantiated account which she had heard  from  the  Appellant  in
         relation to the  past  receipt  of  threats.  That  I  find  to  be
         significant because clearly the Appellant has enjoyed a  close  and
         fruitful relationship with [PB]."

 7. The Judge summarised the evidence of [LB],  at  [66]  to  [70]  of  the
    determination. At [113] the Judge concluded that he did not believe the
    account of the Appellant in  terms  of  threats  she  claimed  to  have
    received. Even if section 8 of the 2004 Act had not applied the Judge's
    findings on credibility would have been the same. As there had been  no
    specific threats from [BC] or any other of the co-defendants there  was
    no particular or specific risk to the safety of the  Appellant  if  she
    were removed to Guyana. At [117]  the  Judge  did  not  find  that  the
    Appellant had discharge the burden of demonstrating  that  her  medical
    conditions met the threshold in the case of N and dismissed the appeal.



The Onward Appeal

 8. The Appellant's appeal argued that the Judge had  failed  to  determine
    the risk to the Appellant upon return to Guyana as a mentally ill  lone
    woman having accepted that the Appellant had been a victim of  violence
    in the past. Whether Serco was a trusted organisation was not a  matter
    of evidence before the  Judge.  Prison  guards  did  pass  messages  to
    detainees and Serco's impropriety  regularly  featured  in  the  public
    domain. The grounds also complained that the Judge misdirected  himself
    in relation to article 8 by failing to consider properly or at all  the
    award-winning community work undertaken by the Appellant through WISH.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Parkes on 15 June 2016. He wrote "the  finding  in  [112]  was
    based in large part on the Appellant's failure to raise the issue  with
    others or to mention  it  to  friends  or  family.  The  reasoning  was
    appropriate and open to the Judge and the grounds do  not  address  the
    paragraph read as a whole (my emphasis). The  grounds  in  relation  to
    article 8 overlook the fact that the Appellant  is  the  subject  of  a
    deportation order and  different  considerations  apply.  There  is  no
    error. The Appellant's mental health was considered from [117] and  the
    case of N considered, the Judge was entitled to find a  high  threshold
    had not been met."

10. The Appellant renewed her application for  permission  to  appeal  over
    four months late the delay having  been  caused  by  an  error  by  the
    Appellant's solicitor. Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor granted permission
    on 1 August 2018 stating "in particular, I find it to be arguable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred  in:  (i)  failing  to  engage  with,  or
    provide adequate reasons for rejecting  if  it  did  engage  with,  the
    submission that the Appellant  would  be  at  risk  upon  return  as  a
    "mentally ill lone woman" and (ii) failing to provide lawfully adequate
    reasons for its conclusion that the Appellant's evidence regarding  the
    passing of messages by a Serco employee was  implausible.  All  grounds
    may be argued".

11. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by  letter  dated  20
    September 2018 noting that the argument that the Appellant would be  at
    risk as a lone woman with mental health difficulties did not appear  to
    have been canvassed as a Convention reason  before  the  Tribunal.  The
    Judge had made "clear findings that the Appellant was not at risk  from
    gang members on return. The finding in relation to whether or  not  the
    Appellant had received threats from her co-accused many years  ago  was
    not just based on Serco being a trusted organisation  (with  which  the
    grounds take issue). The Judge also had regard to the  late  disclosure
    by the  Appellant  of  the  existence  of  the  threats  and  that  her
    supporting witness from WISH had made no mention of this. The Judge was
    entitled to make little mention of the  Appellant's  charity  or  other
    community work in the context of her deportation as this  was  unlikely
    to bring her within having a protected private life".

The Hearing Before Me

12. At the outset of the hearing counsel indicated that there was agreement
    between the Appellant and the Respondent that grounds 1 and 2,  failure
    to determine risk on return as  a  mentally  ill  lone  woman  and  the
    finding that it was not credible  that  a  Serco  employee  would  pass
    messages between the Appellant and her co-defendant were made out.  The
    Presenting Officer agreed  because  the  finding  regarding  the  Serco
    employee was based on an assumption that it was not plausible  that  an
    employee of Serco would pass threatening  messages  to  the  Appellant.
    Counsel argued that that it was not enough for the Judge to assume that
    no Serco employee would pass notes. If the Judge was proposing to  make
    such a finding the Appellant should have been given an  opportunity  to
    adduce evidence that a number of Serco employees had been  involved  in
    serious criminality in other cases.

13. I commented that at [112] the Judge had given two separate reasons  why
    he did not accept the passing of the  threatening  messages,  his  view
    about Serco employees and the late  disclosure.  Counsel  replied  that
    that 2nd part of the reasoning was only 50% of the reasoning as a whole
    the other 50% being pure speculation. In any event  the  passing  of  a
    note between co-defendants was not necessarily failing to  comply  with
    the standards expected of contractors such as Serco. It was the  agreed
    position of the Appellant and Respondent that the Judge  was  wrong  in
    law and it was a material error. The risk as a lone woman had not  been
    dealt with in the decision. The matter should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal. The Appellant would wish  to  produce  evidence  in  due
    course of the death of the Appellant's son who was murdered.

14. In response the Presenting Officer said that the Judge  had  found  the
    Appellant to be credible in relation  to  her  previous  experience  in
    1993. Of the two reasons why he did not accept the claim of threats one
    was not a safe finding. It was impossible for the  Respondent  to  ring
    fence the first reason  for  disbelieving  the  Appellant  (that  Serco
    employees would not pass threatening messages) from the  reason  to  do
    with delay. The Judge had not dealt with the  Appellant's  claim  about
    the difficulties as a mentally ill lone woman but had  focused  instead
    on the international protection claim. Both grounds  were  conceded  by
    the Respondent. I indicated at the conclusion of  the  hearing  that  I
    would consider the matter and either direct that the appeal be  reheard
    or the decision at first instance would stand. I would not, if  I  were
    minded to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, proceed to
    deal with the rehearing there and then.

Findings

15. The Respondent wrote a detailed refusal letter rejecting the claim that
    the Appellant had been threatened by [BC] during  the  court  hearings,
    see (12) to (20) of the refusal letter. At (17)  it  was  not  accepted
    that an employee of the prison or  of  the  courts  would  act  in  the
    unprofessional and irresponsible manner described by the Appellant,  in
    passing on threats. The Respondent's position has now reversed and  the
    Respondent no longer wishes to stand by that part of the refusal letter
    which the Judge relied upon in the first part of  [112].  Arguably,  if
    the Respondent was going to take that view he  should  have  written  a
    third refusal letter in this case withdrawing that  argument.  However,
    that did not happen. Instead at a very late stage  in  the  proceedings
    the Presenting Officer indicated that the Respondent no  longer  stands
    by his refusal letter.

16. What the Respondent did indicate in replying to the grant of permission
    by letter dated 20 September 2018 was to point out that the  Judge  had
    given two reasons why did not  accept  the  claimed  threats,  the  2nd
    reason being the delay in notifying the  existence  of  those  threats.
    Before me the Presenting Officer sought to resile  from  that  position
    indicating that as she put it the 2nd  reason  for  not  accepting  the
    threats, the delay in passing on the information, could  not  be  "ring
    fenced". It is not entirely clear why at  the  hearing  before  me  the
    Respondent fundamentally changed his position in this case and  appears
    no longer to be standing by his own refusal letter.  Without a coherent
    refusal letter, it is tempting to consider whether the appeal should be
    allowed outright.

17. I do not consider it appropriate in this case to do that in view of the
    very serious nature of the Appellant's offending and  consequently  the
    significant weight to be given to the public interest. I  indicated  to
    the parties I would not re-hear this appeal myself. I have considerable
    sympathy for the position that the Judge found himself in having  heard
    the  evidence  and  having  written  a  careful  determination  largely
    agreeing with the reasoning of the Respondent having exercised his  own
    judgment in the matter.  Nevertheless,  in  view  of  the  Respondent's
    refusal to support the contents of his own refusal  letter  I  have  no
    option but to find a material error of law in the Judge's determination
    and remit it back to the First-tier for a rehearing. I  would  strongly
    urge the Respondent  to  review  his  position  in  this  case  and  if
    necessary write a further refusal letter rather more coherently setting
    out the Respondent's position which at present is confusing.

18. The Respondent gave two reasons for not accepting the existence of  the
    threats, that a Serco  employee  would  not  be  involved  in  the  way
    described by the Appellant and because of the substantial delay by  the
    Appellant in revealing the existence of the threats. If the  Respondent
    is now right in the submissions to me that the  Judge  could  not  ring
    fence the two separate reasons for rejecting the Appellant's claim,  it
    is difficult to see  how  the  Respondent  could  ring  fence  the  two
    separate  reasons.  If  the  Judge's  upholding  of  probity  in  Serco
    employees is such a glaring error that it infects all  other  findings,
    the same must be said of the Respondent's own remarks  in  the  refusal
    letter.

19. The Respondent's reply to the grant  of  permission  is  understandable
    given that the extract from counsel's skeleton argument  cited  in  the
    grounds of onward  appeal  (which  were  settled  by  counsel  who  had
    represented the Appellant both before Judge Buckwell and before me) did
    not refer to the Appellant being mentally ill. The grounds did refer to
    the Appellant suffering from  moderately  severe  PTSD  and  depression
    citing [111] although those  words  do  not  in  fact  appear  in  that
    paragraph of the determination. They appear to come from the report  by
    Doctor Lohawala dated 10 March 2016. The Judge's view  of  the  medical
    evidence was that the Appellant's condition did not meet the  threshold
    in N and that there were potential medical facilities available for the
    Appellant in Guyana.

20. The refusal letter had considered medical facilities in Guyana at  (43)
    and (44) concluding that Guyana had  a  healthcare  system  capable  of
    assisting the Appellant if necessary. It is not entirely understandable
    why the Respondent in submissions to me appeared  to  resile  from  the
    contents of the refusal letter by not supporting the determination. The
    refusal  letter  had  clearly  been  approved  by  the  Judge  who  had
    considered both the further medical evidence produced by the  Appellant
    and  the  background  information  supplied  by  the  Respondent.   The
    Respondent's stance  should  be  clarified  before  the  next  hearing.
    Because of the muddled approach of the Respondent in this case I cannot
    be satisfied that a determination, not supported by the  Respondent  is
    free from material errors.

21. The Judge's conclusions were understandable on the basis  of  what  was
    then the Respondent's case but as this appears no longer  to  be  so  I
    find there is a material error of law and allow the Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  direct  that  the
    matter be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for the appeal to be
    re-heard de novo. The Appellant has indicated  she  wishes  to  produce
    further evidence regarding the death of her son. This evidence and  any
    other material should be produced at least 28 days before the  remitted
    hearing. Importantly the Respondent should clarify what his position in
    this appeal is and  whether  he  does  or  does  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant is entitled to international protection on the basis  of  her
    claim of threats and/or the need for medical treatment (which she  says
    she would not obtain in Guyana). I make no anonymity order as there  is
    no public policy reason for so doing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I set it aside. The  appeal  will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be reheard with no findings of fact preserved.

Appellant's appeal allowed to the limited extent stated


Signed this 1 November 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 1 November 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
