
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00642/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 August 2020                            |On 7 September 2020           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S A]
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy, instructed by S Satha & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of a
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who allowed the appeal of Mr [A] against
the respondent's decision of 6 January 2020 refusing to grant asylum and
humanitarian protection.

2.   I shall hereafter refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent,
as she was before the judge, and to Mr [A] as the appellant, as he was
before the judge.

3.   It is not necessary to say a great deal about this appeal.  Having had
a helpful discussion with Mr Tufan and Mr Paramjorthy, and having also the
benefit of a skeleton argument drafted by Mr Deller, it is common ground
that this appeal is to be remitted for rehearing in the First-tier
Tribunal.

4.   The difficulty with the judge's decision is that the Article 8 element
did not contain a proper assessment of the position of the appellant's
partner and daughter under the Immigration Rules, as set out at paragraph 6
of Mr Deller's skeleton argument.  As was noted there, any consideration of
Article 8 required consideration and application of the relevant
Immigration Rules and section 117B of the 2002 Act.  That was not done by
the judge, who in effect allowed the appeal under Article 8 (the appeal
under the Refugee Convention and Articles 2 and 3 of the European
Convention on Human Rights not being pursued at the hearing before the
judge) on the basis of the grant of limited leave to remain to the
appellant's partner under Appendix EU to the Immigration Rules.  It was
common ground that the judge had erred, not so much in taking into account
the position of the appellant's wife under Appendix EU and the grant
referred to above, but in not considering the matter in the round in a
proper evaluation of Article 8.  The findings of fact by the judge on the
durability of the relationship and the fact that Ms Pushparajah is a worker
as defined by Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations are maintained, but other
than those findings of fact the matter is to be listed for a full rehearing
at Hatton Cross before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 27 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



