

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: PA/00622/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 September 2017                        |On 12 October 2017             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     RAA
                         (Anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk          (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson       (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of  the  First-tier Tribunal  (hereinafter  "the  tribunal")  whereupon  it
dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's   decision   of
6 January 2016 refusing to grant him international protection.

2.    The tribunal granted the claimant anonymity.  That was presumably,  at
least in part, because of an assertion  made  by  him  (which  the  tribunal
ultimately disbelieved)  that  he  is  a  minor.   Nothing  was  said  about
anonymity before me but I have considered it  appropriate  to  continue  the
status quo.

3.    The claimant, it is  accepted,  is  a  national  of  Iran  of  Kurdish
ethnicity.  It is recorded that he entered  the  United Kingdom  ("UK")  on
28 August 2015 and claimed asylum on arrival.  In seeking asylum he claimed
to have been born on 28 May 1999.  That, if correct, would  mean  that  he
was, on arrival, aged 17 years albeit that it would make  him  18  now.  He
also said that he had had to flee Iran, with the assistance of an uncle  and
an agent because his father was seeking to make him go to  Syria  and  fight
for the ruling regime there.  That was something which he says  he  did  not
wish to do.

4.    There have  been  three  different  age  assessments  carried  out  in
relation to the claimant.  One of  those,  prepared  on  behalf  of  Bedford
Borough Council and dated 2 September 2015, contained the  view  that  the
claimant was over 18 years of age.   However,  the  full  content  of  that
report was not before the tribunal because, it was said,  the  claimant  had
not given consent for it to be "shared".  Another report had  been  prepared
by BDP Social Care Limited and was dated 17 September 2015.  A view  was
expressed therein that he was thought to be  "in  his  early  twenties"  but
would be given "the benefit of the doubt" and treated as being  aged 18  as
at the date it was prepared.  A third report, carried out by  the  Doncaster
Children's Services Trust on 31 October 2016, contained the view that there
was "sufficient doubt to afford the appellant the benefit of the doubt  over
his age" such that he would be regarded as being  "17 years old".

5.    The Secretary of State took the view that the  claimant  was,  at  all
material times, an adult rather than a minor.  The Secretary of  State  also
thought that he had given an untruthful account of being  pressed  to  fight
in Syria.  So, the application for international protection was refused.

6.    The claimant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
on 24 November 2016.  He gave evidence at that hearing and was represented
(indeed by Mr Schwenk who represented him  before  me).  The  Secretary  of
State was also represented.  The tribunal concluded that  the  claimant  was
not a minor as claimed and  also  concluded  that  he  had  not  come  under
pressure to fight in Syria.  So it dismissed his appeal.  As to  his  claims
about his age and the other credibility issues the tribunal said this:

      "     27.  The case of A v London Borough of Croydon and SSHD [2009]
      EWHC 939 (Admin) determines the correct approach  for  the  court  to
      adopt in age assessment cases.  In his judgment,  Collins J  reviewed
      the previous cases including the guidance given by Stanley Burnton J
      in R (on the application of B) v Mayor & Burgesses  of  the  London
      Borough of Merton [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin).

            28.  It is helpful  to  set  out  the  guidance  of  Mr Justice
      Stanley Burnton in the 'Merton' case,  which  can  be  summarised  as
      follows:

                 The assessment of age in borderline cases  is  a  difficult
           matter, but it is not complex.  It does not require a trial, and
           judicialisation of the process is to be avoided.  It is a matter
           which may  be  determined  informally,  provided  safeguards  of
           minimum standards are adhered to [paragraph 36].

                  ... except  in  clear  cases  the  decision-maker  cannot
           determine age solely on the  basis  of  the  appearance  of  the
           applicant.  In general, the decision-maker must seek  to  elicit
           the  general  background  of  the  applicant,  including  family
           circumstances and history, educational background and activities
           during the previous few years.  Ethnic and cultural  information
           may also be important.  If there is a reason to doubt the  given
           age, the decision-maker will  have  to  make  an  assessment  of
           credibility  by   questions   designed   to   test   credibility
           [paragraph 37].

                 I do not think it is helpful to apply concepts of  onus  of
           proof  to  the  assessment   of   age   by   local   authorities
           [paragraph 38].

                 There  should  be  no  predisposition,  divorced  from  the
           information and evidence available to the  local  authority,  to
           assume that an applicant is an adult, or conversely that he is a
           child [paragraph 38].

                 Of course, if an applicant has previously  stated  that  he
           was  over 18,  the  decision maker  will  take  that  previous
           statement into account, and in  the  absence  of  an  acceptable
           explanation it may, when  considered  with  the  other  material
           available, be decisive [paragraph 38].

                 Similarly, the appearance and demeanour  of  the  applicant
           may justify a provisional view that he is indeed a child  or  an
           adult.  In an obvious case,  the  appearance  of  the  applicant
           alone  will  require  him  to  be  accepted  as  a  child;   or,
           conversely, justify his being determined to be an adult, in  the
           absence of compelling evidence to the contrary [paragraph 38].

                  However,  the  social  services  department  of  a   local
           authority  cannot  simply  adopt  a   decision   made   by   the
           Home Office.  It must decide whether an applicant is a child in
           need ... A local authority may take  into  account  information
           obtained by the Home Office; but it must make its own decision,
           and  for  that  purpose  must  have  available  to  it  adequate
           information [paragraph 39].

                 A local authority is obliged to give adequate  reasons  for
           its decision that an applicant, claiming to be a child, is not a
           child [paragraph 45] and

                 The court should not be  predisposed  to  assume  that  the
           decision-maker  has  acted  unreasonably   and   carelessly   or
           unfairly:  to the contrary, it is for the claimant to  establish
           that the decision maker has so acted [paragraph 50].

             29.   It  is  recognised  in  all  of  the   cases   that   the
      determination of an applicant's  age  is  rendered  difficult  by  the
      absence of any reliable anthropometric test; for someone who is  close
      to the age of 18, there is no reliable medical  or  other  scientific
      test to determine whether  he  or  she  is  over  or  under 18.   Age
      determination is an inexact  science  with  a  significant  margin  of
      error.

            30.  In this particular case,  which  I  am  considering,  there
      were three documents, which were stated to be 'Age Assessments'.

            31.  There is an Assessment carried out  on  behalf  of  Bedford
      Borough  Council  dated  2 September 2015.   It  is  headed  'Merton
      Compliant Assessment of Age' and provides the names, although not  the
      qualifications of the assessors.  The Assessment  concludes  that  the
      Appellant is stated to be 'Over 18 years'.  The consent form, attached
      to the document, indicate that only the conclusion of  the  assessment
      would be shared, and the full report would not be shared  without  the
      written consent of the Appellant.  That consent has not been  provided
      and  accordingly  the  full  report   was   not   available   for   my
      consideration.

            32.  There is an Assessment conducted on 17 September 2015  by
      BDP Social Care Limited.  The age assessment did not form part of the
      Respondent's bundle of documents.  It was referred to in an assessment
      conducted by Doncaster Children's Services  Trust  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant (see below).  The Respondent relied on the  Bedford  Borough
      Council assessment and that was  the  one  quoted  in  the  letter  of
      refusal.  The BDP Social Care Limited assessment was produced by the
      Respondent at my request from the Respondent's file of  papers.   That
      was conducted on the 17 September 2015 and in it, it indicated that,
      'No other assessment of the Appellant's age had taken place  that  the
      assessors were aware of.'  There is no explanation as to why they were
      not aware of the Bedford Borough Council assessment.

            33.  The BDP Social Care Limited Assessment document is headed
      'Merton  Age  Assessment'.   The  detail  and  qualifications  of  the
      Assessors  were  provided.   In  the  course  of  the  assessment  the
      Appellant  was  provided  with  a  face-to-face  interpreter  and   an
      experienced advocate  from  Bedford  Borough  Council  acting  as  his
      independent person.  The assessors concluded that  the  Appellant  was
      older than the age he claimed based on the information he shared,  his
      physical presentation/demeanour, manner and maturity, which is that of
      an adult male.  The Appellant, in the Assessor's opinion, had  reached
      majority was of average build and stated he began shaving  around  two
      years ago.  He was said to have scaring to his  face  which  resembled
      healed acne and has a tattooed 'S' on his right wrist which he says is
      the initial for his sister's name.  He could not explain why that  was
      in English and not Arabic script.  The Appellant was advised  that  if
      he was able to make contact with his family to gain  his  national  ID
      card that might prove beneficial to him  in  firmly  establishing  his
      age.   The  Assessor's  concluded  that:   'based   on   the   overall
      assessment, the way the Appellant presents himself,  his  interaction,
      physical presentation,  level  of  maturity  and  demeanour  we  would
      believe his age to be in his early 20s'.  The Appellant  was  informed
      that experience led assessors to believe him to be in  his  early  20s
      but would provide him with the benefit  of  doubt  and  place  him  at
      18 years now.

             34.   There  is  an  Assessment  conducted  by  the   Doncaster
      Children's Services Trust on 31 October 2016.  That was conducted at
      the request of the Appellant's solicitors.  It was  conducted  by  two
      qualified social workers.  There was an  interpreter  and  a  personal
      adviser acting as independent person  for  the  Appellant.   The  lead
      social worker had obtained a copy of the BDP assessment but  not  that
      of Bedford Borough Council (presumably because of the absence  of  the
      consent of the Appellant).  The conclusion of this assessment was that
      the assessors were satisfied  that  there  was  'sufficient  doubt  to
      afford the Appellant the benefit of the doubt  over  his  age'.   They
      concluded that the Appellant 'could be his  stated  age  of  17 years
      old'.  The Assessors stated that account had been  taken  of  the  BDP
      assessment which, it was noted, was unequivocal in its conclusion that
      the Appellant was an adult.  The assessors said:  they 'do not dispute
      that this may have been a reasonable finding at the time, I  have  had
      the opportunity to observe [the  Appellant]  in  differing  situations
      which indicate that stress factors can  impact  upon  his  ability  to
      interact with others ... the assessor was not in agreement  that  his
      physical appearance alone was sufficient to conclude he is an adult  -
      indeed my colleague ... was of  the  view  his  skin  has  a  teenage
      appearance due to the spots/pimples, viewed as healed  acne  scars  by
      BDP assessors.

            35.  That material needs to  be  considered  together  with  the
      evidence of the Appellant in support of his claim.

            36.  The Appellant claims that he lived in Dezley, near  Mariwan
      with his parents and younger sister.  The Appellant states he grew  up
      in a Muslim family and his father was very strict forcing him to go to
      the mosque with him, even if he did not want to.  The Appellant claims
      his father worked as a Sarhang  (which  equates  to  Colonel)  in  the
      Iranian army.  He claims that his father was also a landowner.

            37.   The Applicant claims that he only attended school for  one
      year because he has a speech impediment, and stopped going because  he
      was bullied.  He claims that his father wanted him to go to Syria  and
      fight against ISIS, saying that if he died in  the  fighting  then  he
      would be a martyr.  The Appellant claims that his father was  actively
      encouraging all the young men in the family to go and fight in Syria.

             38.   The  Appellant  claims  that,  when  his  father  started
      encouraging him to go to Syria, he did not say no to him,  as  he  was
      afraid of his father.  The Appellant claims that his  father  was  not
      afraid of being violent towards him and that he had been beaten by him
      many times.  The Appellant claims that, although he  said  nothing  to
      his father, he did not want to go and fight in Syria.   He  claims  he
      was too afraid, but knew that his father would make him go and  so  he
      told his mother that he was scared and did no want to go.

            39.  The Appellant says, however, that his mother was unable  to
      help him as she was very scared of his father  who  was  very  violent
      towards her as well.  He claims that his mother was upset by what  his
      father was suggesting and so she called her brother to help.

            40.  The Appellant claims that he  knew  his  father  would  not
      back down and would make him go, and that he was too scared  to  stand
      up to him and say no.  He claims his father had a really  bad  temper,
      and he knew that he would have been beaten severely and sent to  Syria
      to fight.

            41.  The Appellant claims his uncle came  for  him,  whilst  his
      father was at work, and took him to Mariwan which is about a 40-minute
      drive away from the village  where  the  Appellant  was  living.   The
      Appellant states that he left home with 'nothing at all'.   He  claims
      that his uncle took him to an agent, who then  made  arrangements  for
      the Appellant to leave Iran.

            42.  The Appellant said that his uncle had provided him  with  a
      telephone number at which he could be contacted but that the piece  of
      paper on which it was written was damaged in the journey  to  the  UK.
      He claims, however, that he met someone  from  Mariwan  who  knew  his
      family and he asked him to let his uncle and mother know that  he  was
      safe.  He claims that he met the man, named G, in a Kurdish Tea House
      in Doncaster.  He said that G told him that he had been able to make a
      phone call and had spoken to the Appellant's mother who had  been  'so
      happy that she started to cry'.

            43.  The Appellant said that he had identification documents  in
      Iran but has not obtained them, nor did he ask G to seek to obtain the
      documents when G is said to have made contact with his family.    This
      was despite the fact that he met  G  some  months  ago  and  had  been
      advised  by  BDP  Social  care  of  the  benefit  of  obtaining   such
      documentation.

            44.  The Appellant claims to have met G in a  Doncaster  Kurdish
      tea caf�.  Despite that meeting having  said  to  have  occurred  some
      three months before the Appellant submitted a witness statement  there
      is no mention whatsoever in the witness statement of the meeting.  The
      Appellant states that G telephoned the appellant's mother but for some
      unexplained reason the Appellant did not speak to his  mother  himself
      nor was there any request for documentation to be sent  regarding  the
      Appellant's age or any other material which might have  supported  his
      case.  There is no evidence from G either by attendance at the hearing
      or by way of a witness statement.

            45.  I find it significant that the Appellant has not sought  to
      obtain the identification documents or  other  evidence  of  his  age,
      knowing that is an area of dispute.

            46.  I have read the Age Assessments, noting that the  Appellant
      did not give consent for the disclosure of  the  full  Report  of  the
      Assessment conducted by Bedford Social Services.   Taking  account  of
      the content of those reports and  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  I
      conclude that he is, at the date of hearing, an adult.  His  claim  to
      be otherwise is damaging to his credibility.

            47.  The  Appellant  stated  that  his  father  worked  for  the
      government and that he was a 'Pasdar'.   The  Respondent  stated  that
      there was no evidence to substantiate his claim of  the  existence  of
      the 'Pasdar' within the Iranian government, however external  evidence
      confirmed that the Iranian  Revolutionary  Guards  Corps  (IRGC)   are
      commonly known as the 'Pasdaran' (see paragraph 13 of the  letter  of
      refusal).

            48.  When the Appellant was asked what specific role his  father
      undertook, the Appellant said 'Sarhang'.   External evidence confirmed
      that that rank within the IRCG equates to 'Colonel'. (see paragraph 14
      of the letter of refusal).

            49.  The Appellant was asked, at  question 50:   'What  exactly
      did he want you to do in Syria?  And to confirm who did he want you to
      fight for? to which the Appellant responded:  'To fight' and 'I  don't
      know'.  In his witness statement the Appellant now states that he  was
      being sent to fight ISIS.

            50.  The Appellant was asked to follow questions:

                        Question  91       -     'Is  it  correct  that   he
                                  received a letter from Pasdra  asking  him
                                  to send people to fight in Syria?'
                                        -    'Yes'

                       Question 92      -    'Why do  you  believe  that  he
                                  would want his only son to risk  his  life
                                  and travel to Syria and fight?

                                     - 'He preferred the Islamic  state  of
                                       Iran than me.'

                       Question 93      -    'Are you aware  that  he  asked
                                  any  other  individuals  to  go  fight  in
                                  Syria?'

                                             'No I don't'

                       Question 94      -    'Could he not  have  asked  any
                                  other youths in  the  area  or  have  gone
                                  himself to Syria instead of you?'

                                             'I don't know'

            51.  I found the Appellant was vague regarding the role  of  his
      father and his specific duties and in relation to why he would ask his
      son to go and fight in Syria.  The answer that  his  father  preferred
      the Islamic State of Iran might be credible if the Appellant was being
      asked to fight for Iran rather than in Syria.  The Appellant  gave  no
      information that would not be widely known.

            52.  The background information confirms that there is, and  has
      been Iranian involvement  in  the  Syrian  Civil  War.   However,  the
      support referred to relates to 'logistical,  technical  and  financial
      support, as well as training and some combat troops' (page 27) and 'In
      mid-September 2015, the first reports of  new  detachments  from  the
      Iranian revolutionary guards arriving in Tartus and  Latakia  in  west
      Syria were made. There  were  also  further  reports  of  new  Iranian
      contingents being deployed to  Syria  in  early  October 2015.'   The
      evidence does not  support  an  assertion  that  there  has  been  the
      despatch of young, untrained boys without any particular skills.

            53.  I did not find it credible that the  Appellant  would  flee
      Iran a week after his father stated that he wanted him to go to  Syria
      to fight.  I do not find it credible that the Appellant's mother would
      have not made some attempts, supported by her brother to persuade  the
      Appellant's father to change his mind.  I do not find it credible that
      she would immediately defy her husband by making arrangements for  the
      Appellant to flee Iran.

            54.  I conclude that the Appellant is not  a  credible  witness.
      I conclude that the Appellant has not  established  even  to  the  low
      standard required that he would face  any  risk  from  his  father  on
      return."

7.    Permission to appeal was sought.  The  helpfully  concise  grounds  of
appeal asserted, in summary, that the  tribunal  had  erred  in  failing  to
adequately explain why it was preferring the conclusions  contained  in  the
BDP Social Care Limited report to those contained in the Doncaster  Social
Services Trust report; in allowing its erroneous preference  to  infect  its
other credibility conclusions and in failing to acknowledge or  factor  into
its conclusions the point that the claimant had offered  an  explanation  as
to why he had not sought documentation  from  Iran  regarding  the  disputed
question of his age.  Although permission was initially refused by  a  judge
of the First-tier Tribunal such was granted by an Upper Tribunal judge who
said this:

      "It is arguable the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to  have  regard
      to the age assessment  which  has  resulted  in  the  appellant  being
      treated as a child and  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  preferring  an
      earlier assessment over a final assessment which was Merton  compliant
      and does not appear to have been challenged and as  a  consequence  of
      which the appellant is being treated as a child  by  Social Services.
      It is arguable that the findings with regard to  the  appellant's  age
      significantly contaminated the credibility findings, even  though  the
      judge states he took account of the 'vulnerable' guidance."

8.    Permission having  been  granted,  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that consideration  could  be  given  to  the
question of whether or not the tribunal had erred  in  law.   Representation
at  that  hearing  was  as  stated  above  and  I  am   grateful   to   each
representative.

9.    Mr Schwenk, essentially, relied upon his written grounds.  He  argued
that too much had been made of  the  question  of  refusal  of  consent  and
pointed out that the claimant  himself  had  no  recollection  of  his  ever
refusing consent for the full report prepared on behalf of  Bedford  Borough
Council to be disclosed.  He  also  argued  that,  since  a  relatively  low
standard of proof is  applicable  in  international  protection  cases,  and
since one of three reports had been in the claimant's  favour  with  respect
to his age, it simply had to be concluded that that lower standard of  proof
(the real risk test) had been met.  Mrs Petterson  highlighted  aspects  of
the tribunal's reasoning and argued that that  reasoning  was  adequate  and
complete.

10.   I reserved my decision and, having considered matters, I have  reached
the conclusion that the tribunal did err in law albeit not for  all  of  the
reasons Mr. Schwenk argues it did.

11.   The first thing I would like to say is  that  the  tribunal's  written
reasons are, in general terms, most thorough.  It is readily  apparent  that
the tribunal has diligently considered the evidence before it.  But  I  have
decided that it has erred through failing to give adequate reasons  for  its
ultimate conclusion as to whether or not the claimant is a minor.

12.   In reaching this view I would  accept  that  the  tribunal  has  taken
considerable care over reviewing the content of the  three  reports  bearing
in mind that it only had an incomplete version of one of them before it.   I
accept that it was not just its view  of  the  report  but  also  its  other
credibility concerns which led it to the conclusion that  the  claimant  was
not  a  minor.   But  obviously  what  it  made  of  those  reports  was  of
considerable importance.  Having thoroughly reviewed all  three  and  having
made some comments about them and having then made some  findings  regarding
other aspects of the claimant's case, it stated its conclusion as to age  at
paragraph 46 of its written reasons.

13.   In my judgment the tribunal's consideration as to age was holistic  in
the sense that it did not base its conclusion solely  upon  the  content  of
the three reports and its view about that content.  So, I do not  think  its
conclusion as to age can be characterised as Mr. Schwenk suggests  it  can,
as a decision to prefer one report to another.   Further,  I  do  not  agree
that the tribunal was bound to conclude that the claimant had made  out  his
case as to age solely because the standard of proof is a  low  one  and  one
report out of three was in his favour.  What the tribunal  was  tasked  with
doing was undertaking an assessment of the evidence  as  a  whole  and  then
reaching a view on the basis of the applicable standard of proof.   That  is
what it did.  To take Mr. Schwenk's submission to its logical conclusion it
would be necessary for  decision makers,  including  tribunals,  to  accept
assertions as to age made by a claimant wherever a single  report  supported
that assertion whatever the quality of that report and whatever the  quality
of any evidence pointing the other way. It does not seem  to  me  that  that
can be right.

14.   But having said all of that, what  the  tribunal  made  of  the  three
reports was a crucial consideration in its ultimate conclusion  as  to  age.
The written reasons do not, in my judgment, make it clear what the  tribunal
did make of the content of the reports.  That is because it  simply  offered
a description of the content of the reports (albeit a  commendably  thorough
one) and then, at paragraph 46, a statement of its conclusion  as  to  age.
What was lacking, in my judgment, and what therefore  makes  the  tribunal's
reasoning incomplete and consequently legally inadequate, was some  form  of
clear evaluation of the content of the reports and an indication as to  what
weight was or was not being attached to each one and why.  The tribunal  was
right to say that it had to approach the age issue on the basis  of  all  of
the evidence as a whole but that  did  not  mean  it  was  not  required  to
evaluate the reports themselves.

15.   In light of the above I have concluded, with some regret  in  view  of
the overall quality of the written reasons that  the  tribunal  did  err  in
law.  I consider that the error I have identified is a material one  because
had the tribunal found the claimant to be a minor that might (I  do  no  say
would) have impacted upon its general adverse credibility assessment.

16.   Both representatives urged me to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for
a complete  rehearing  in  the  event  of  my  deciding  to  set  aside  the
tribunal's decision.  Given the need for a new  credibility  assessment  and
further findings I consider that  to  be  the  most  appropriate  course  of
action.  The significance of the claimant now being 18 years of age will be
a  matter  for  the  tribunal  conducting  the  rehearing  to  consider  and
evaluate.  No doubt it will receive submissions as to  the  significance  or
otherwise of that development.

17.   Finally, I have issued some directions in relation to the remaking  of
the decision.  There is, however, only limited content to  those  directions
because I do not wish to step on the toes of the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

For the remaking of the decision

      A.    There shall be a rehearing  of  the  appeal  before  the  First-
           tier Tribunal.  Nothing shall be preserved from the  tribunal's
           previous decision of 4 December 2016.

      B.    The rehearing shall take place at the Bradford  Hearing  Centre.
           The claimant will be provided with  a  Kurdish  Sorani  speaking
           interpreter unless his legal representatives advise otherwise.

      C.    The rehearing shall not involve the  tribunal  judge  previously
           involved in the making of the decision of 4 December 2016.

      D.    These directions may be supplemented, varied or replaced at  any
           time by any salaried judge of the First Tier  Tribunal  in  the
           Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
           law and is set aside.

The  case  is  remitted  for  a  complete  rehearing  before  a  differently
           constituted First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:                      Date: 11 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


Anonymity - rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and respondent.  Failure to comply could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings


Signed:                      Date: 11 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid and no fee is payable.  There  can,  therefore,  be  no
fee award.


Signed:                      Date: 11 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

