
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00318/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2018                            |On 15 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    K H I
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Iran,  aged  15  who  appealed  the
    respondent's decision dated 21 December 2017 to refuse the  appellant's
    protection claim.  In a decision  promulgated  on  28  September  2018,
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Geraint  Jones  QC  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the grounds:

         Ground 1: The judge erred in making a decision based on  errors  of
         fact in respect of the risk to the appellant's  uncle  and  contact
         with his family;

         Ground 2: Reliance on matters not put to the appellant;

         Ground 3:  Error in approach to Article 8.

Error of Law Hearing

 3. Ms Harvey submitted that the appellant fled in haste and has maintained
    he does not know what happened to his uncle.  At the appeal before  the
    First-tier Tribunal it was his evidence that  when  the  social  worker
    telephoned they were told  that  his  uncle  was  in  prison.   It  was
    submitted that the judge ignored the evidence before him including  the
    evidence of what was said by the social worker and what was set out  in
    the appellant's second witness statement.  It was submitted that  there
    were  insufficient  reasons  to  address  this.   It  was  Ms  Harvey's
    submission that either the judge has got the evidence wrong or  he  has
    drawn an inference not open to him.

 4. In respect of ground 2 it was Ms Harvey's  submission  that  the  judge
    relied on matters not put to the appellant; for  example  it  was  held
    that there was no suggestion that the  appellant's  mother  "could  not
    obtain an untraceable mobile  phone  of  the  type  routinely  used  by
    criminals involved  in  the  drug  trade  in  this  country".   It  was
    submitted that this came out of the blue and that it was material as it
    was relevant to credibility and also to the judge's findings on Article
    8.  The judge found that the appellant claimed not to be in touch  with
    his family whereas that was not what the appellant had said, rather  he
    said that he could not get in touch with them because of his fear.   In
    respect of the third ground, it was submitted that the  judge  did  not
    make adequate findings on Article 8.  Ms Harvey  that  particularly  in
    relation to a 15-year-old child and an ethnic Kurd that there  was  "no
    basis whatsoever" for finding  it  would  not  be  disproportionate  to
    return him.

 5. Ms Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the  issue  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's uncle and the evidence given  at  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (on 14  September  2018)  that  his  uncle  was  in
    prison, was not reflective of the appellant's evidence in general up to
    that point.  In the appellant's first witness statement,  at  paragraph
    30, the appellant referred to his uncle taking him to  meet  two  other
    people and then taking him on foot to somewhere in the village and then
    handing him on to two people and then telling the  appellant  to  hurry
    up.  At paragraph 43 of  the  first  witness  statement  the  appellant
    stated that on the journey he was talking to his mother and  his  uncle
    and that he checked if his uncle was ok and his mother said he was fine
    although the appellant also stated that he did not know if 'he was just
    saying this'.  At paragraph 44 of  his  first  witness  statement,  the
    appellant refers to his mother telling him  that  the  authorities  had
    come and raided his house twice.

 6. In the second witness statement, dated 5 September 2018, at page 314 of
    the appellant's bundle, the appellant addresses the issue of his  uncle
    (the core of the appellant's claim being that he is Kurdish  (which  is
    not disputed) and that he had been delivering leaflets  for  his  uncle
    and that the authorities found out about this and he had to flee) which
    the respondent had found to be speculative and inconsistent.   At  page
    315 where the appellant addresses the refusal letter  he  states:  "The
    Home Office have questioned why they would not arrest my uncle as well.
     I believe now that my uncle may not have been reported".  It was  only
    at the hearing, Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted, just a week  after  that
    witness statement, that additional evidence was submitted in respect of
    the contact from the social worker, [KS] which, in  a  letter  dated  6
    September 2018 refers to contact she had with  the  appellant's  mother
    suggests, at page 319 of the appellant's bundle, that  the  uncle  "has
    been a  victim  of  chemical  warfare  and  is  currently  a  political
    prisoner".   Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  this  evidence  was
    considered by the judge as part of the evidence considered at  [16]  to
    [18] of the decision and reasons.

 7. The judge considers the letter from [KS] and that the letter  addresses
    the contact with the appellant's mother.  At [27] the judge records the
    appellant being cross-examined in  relation  to  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's social worker [KS], including that "He said that  he  could
    not be specific about what had  happened  to  his  uncle  but  believed
    simply that 'something' had happened to  him".   It  was  Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe's submission  that  the  judge  had  before  him  contradictory
    evidence and the fact  that  the  judge  came  to  the  view  that  the
    appellant's uncle had not been arrested  was  a  finding  open  to  the
    judge.  It was further submitted that the judge's findings  had  to  be
    considered in the context of the credibility finding in relation to the
    fact that the appellant's uncle, who was with the  children  when  they
    were distributing leaflets, did not  have  any  difficulties  from  the
    authorities at the time when they did.

 8. The judge finds at [34(ii)]:

         "The allegation is that  all  three  were  somehow  identified  and
         arrested.  That allegation must be predicated on the basis that the
         authorities had somehow monitored those three accomplices so as  to
         know who to arrest.  And yet the  uncle  was  not  approached,  let
         alone arrested."

    Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that  the  judge's  findings  had  to  be
    considered in the context of all the evidence, including that prior  to
    6 September 2018 the appellant had confirmed in his witness  statement,
    of the previous day, that he was in  touch  with  the  family  and  his
    mother confirmed that nothing had happened to the uncle.  It  was  only
    at the very last minute that evidence was produced in  the  form  of  a
    letter from the social worker  reporting  a  telephone  call  with  the
    appellant's mother that it was alleged that  his  uncle  had  now  been
    arrested.

 9. At [34(ii), (iii), (iv)] the judge made  findings  on  the  appellant's
    account and found the appellant's evidence to be  fundamentally  flawed
    and untruthful because  at  the  time  the  children  were  caught  the
    appellant's uncle was not.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  those
    findings were open to the judge for the reasons he gave  and  the  fact
    that he did not go into every  point  did  not  undermine  his  general
    findings.

10. In respect of ground 2 and the issue in relation to the phone, this did
    not take the appellant's account any further  and  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    noted at paragraph 44  of  the  appellant's  first  witness  statement,
    respondent's bundle E(8), the appellant referred to his mother using  a
    sim card obtained illegally.  In any event however Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    submitted that at [34(ix)] there was no suggestion that  the  appellant
    could not use Facebook to keep in contact with  his  family.   Although
    the appellant says that he had been told  not  to  contact  his  family
    because of the risk, in the context where the appellant's  account  was
    not accepted as credible by the judge it was open to the judge to  find
    that the family were still in contact.  The judge had not accepted  the
    basis of the claimed fear and the  judge  has  to  weigh  this  in  his
    credibility consideration.

11. The judge at [34(x)] addressed SSH Iran CG [2016] UKUT 38 that  someone
    of Kurdish ethnicity who left the country  without  a  valid  departure
    visa may find that their ethnicity is  an  exacerbating  factor  for  a
    returnee otherwise of interest.   But  as  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant was not otherwise of interest the appellant did not fall foul
    of the country guidance.  In respect of ground 3 again  the  fact  that
    the judge had not found the appellant to be credible and found that  he
    was able to contact his family was relevant to the findings in  Article
    8 and the judge was entitled to find that it was proportionate for  him
    to return.

12. In reply Ms Harvey submitted that Ms Willocks-Briscoe  had  dealt  with
    the evidence and not with the findings.  The only way  that  the  judge
    had addressed  the  issue  of  the  uncle  was  with  the  single  word
    "seemingly", that  seemingly  the  name  of  the  uncle  had  not  been
    provided.  Either the judge  had  misread  the  evidence  or  given  it
    inadequate consideration.  The appellant's evidence is that his  mother
    had told him not to get in contact.  In relation to  the  contact  with
    the mother it could well have been that the mother was in Iran with  an
    Iraqi SIM card but none of this was in the  judgment.   In  respect  of
    Article 8 it was submitted that a bold assertion was made and the judge
    has not weighed the evidence.

Discussion

13. The decision does not disclose an error of  law.   In  respect  of  the
    appellant's uncle it is not the case that  the  judge's  findings  were
    limited to the word "seemingly" at [13].  The judge's findings at  [13]
    were as follows:

         'The appellant then claims that one (unspecified) day he went on  a
         family tip to Mirawe and upon returning to  his  home  village  his
         mother informed him that he had  done  something  very  bad  and  a
         problem had arisen.  He claimed that his uncle was also present and
         each of them informed him that the  authorities  had  been  to  the
         house and were looking for him.  He claimed that his uncle  was  in
         panic and said that the appellant must leave the country because if
         he was caught he would be executed.  The appellant went on to claim
         that his uncle informed him that his three  young  accomplices  had
         been arrested and the assumption was made that  they  had  provided
         the appellant's name, but, seemingly, not that of his  uncle,  with
         whom they had contact; from whom they obtained the materials to  be
         distributed; by whom they were directed concerning  the  houses  to
         which distributions were to be made; and to whom they then returned
         for payment.'

14.  It  was  the  appellant's  evidence  including  in  both  his  witness
    statements that there was no evidence of any  difficulties  experienced
    by his uncle at the time he  was  arrested.   Although  the  permission
    grounds rely on the fact that the appellant at interview said  that  he
    only stayed in the house for ten to fifteen minutes, as highlighted  in
    the witness statements the appellant was talking to both his mother and
    his uncle on the journey to the UK and was subsequently in contact with
    his family and there were no difficulties highlighted with  his  uncle.
    In the appellant's second  witness  statement  the  evidence  given  is
    contradictory.

15. At paragraph 10 of his second witness statement the  appellant  stated,
    in response to the respondent's questioning in the refusal  letter  why
    they would not arrest his uncle as well, that "I believe now  my  uncle
    may not have been reported.  I don't know why" and the appellant  gives
    a number of reasons including that the uncle was not in the  same  area
    and that he would tell us where to go.   However at paragraph 16 of the
    appellant's second witness statement, as recorded by the judge at [25],
    it is recorded that 'something has happened to my uncle but  I  am  not
    sure if he was shot at or had a landmine explode under his foot'.

16. The judge took into  consideration  all  the  evidence,  including  the
    letter from the social worker [KS], and the judge records some  of  the
    contents of that letter at [16] to [18].  Although not expressly  cited
    in the decision [KS] records that the appellant's mother told her  that
    the 'uncle has been a victim of chemical warfare  and  is  currently  a
    political prisoner' (which differs from the appellant's account that he
    may have been shot at or had a landmine explode)

17. It was open to the judge to reach the core findings he did that it  was
    not credible that the children were arrested and the uncle was  not  at
    the same time.  The judge addressed, including at  [25],  [27]  and  at
    [34(v)] that it is now "belatedly" suggested that "something"  happened
    to the appellant's uncle.  It was the judge's findings that:

         "The authorities would inevitably have been far more interested  in
         the person orchestrating the  distribution  of  leaflets  than  the
         street runners who were actually distributing them.   Perhaps  that
         is why, belatedly, it is said  that  'something'  happened  to  the
         appellant's uncle.  There has been no suggestion that  anybody  was
         able to provide any subsequent information to the authorities which
         would have led them to the uncle at a much later time.  If, as  the
         appellant  speculates,  his   alleged   teenage   accomplices   had
         identified him, it is beyond credence to think that they  initially
         desisted from identifying or giving details about  his  uncle,  but
         subsequently chose to do so."

18. It was the judge's findings, in essence,  that  the  appellant's  claim
    that he and the other children  who  were  distributing  leaflets  were
    wanted by the authorities, yet his uncle who was with them at the  time
    and who orchestrated the distribution, was not  arrested  at  the  same
    time, was fundamentally flawed, for the adequate reasons he  gave.   In
    rejecting that claim the judge also rejected (at [34(v)])  the  belated
    suggestion that something had happened to the appellant's uncle  (which
    was contained in the appellant's second witness statement).   At  34(v)
    the judge gave adequate reasons for disbelieving that  the  appellant's
    uncle had subsequently had trouble with  the  authorities  at  a  'much
    later time' whereas he did not at the time the appellant claims he  had
    to flee the authorities.

19. Those were findings which encompassed all the evidence  and  that  were
    available to the First-tier Tribunal.  It  was  not  incumbent  on  the
    judge to cite each and every piece of evidence considered, but to  give
    adequate reasons for the findings reached.  I have reminded myself what
    was said in MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 that adequacy means
    no more nor less than that. It is not a counsel  of  perfection.  Still
    less should it  provide  an  opportunity  to  undertake  a  qualitative
    assessment of the reasons to see if  they  are  wanting,  perhaps  even
    surprising, on their merits. The purpose of the duty to  give  reasons,
    is in part, to enable the losing party to know why he has lost.  Ground
    1 is not made out.

20. Equally in respect of contact with his family, although the  permission
    grounds assert that the judge erred as the appellant has never  claimed
    to be unable to get in touch with family but  rather  desisted  as  his
    mother told  him  it  was  dangerous,  the  judge  was  addressing  the
    appellant's case.  This included what was said in the skeleton argument
    (at paragraphs 52 and 53), that  in  respect  of  risk  on  return  the
    respondent  had  stated  that  they  had  been  unable  to  trace   the
    appellant's family and it was submitted in those  circumstances,  where
    the social worker had used an  Iraqi  code  to  reach  the  appellant's
    mother and it was said that the appellant's mother had moved  from  her
    home, it was contended that the appellant could not be returned to  his
    mother.

21. There was no error  in  the  judge's  finding  that  the  family  could
    continue to contact each other,  including  on  Facebook  as  they  had
    previously.   Any  error  in  the  judge  suggesting  that  an  illegal
    telephone could be obtained without putting such a  suggestion  to  the
    appellant (and as submitted by Ms  Willocks-Briscoe,  the  judge  would
    have been aware from the appellant's first witness  statement  that  an
    illegally obtained sim card had been used previously) although  perhaps
    not a finding that should have been made, is not therefore material.

22. Although the permission grounds assert that the judge  made  errors  in
    his assessment of the contact with the family, which were  material  to
    the assessment of the appellant's credibility, I disagree.   The  judge
    records details of the contact including at  [16]  and  [17]  including
    that an Iraqi telephone code was used.  This did not go to the core  of
    the judge's findings however and no adverse findings  were  made.   Any
    factual error therefore, for example  in  stating  that  the  appellant
    'chose' to use an Iraqi code  whereas  the  appellant's  social  worker
    tried the Iraqi code and his mother told her that she was in an Iranian
    border town and using an Iraqi sim card to avoid being traced,  is  not
    material

23. The judge took into consideration that the family had been  in  contact
    including through Facebook previously  and  found  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk and he  could  return  to  his  family  who  could
    receive him upon return  to  Iran.   The  judge  therefore,  in  terms,
    rejected the appellant's account that he could not contact  his  family
    as his mother told him it was dangerous as the judge had  rejected  the
    appellant's claimed account. Those were findings were available to  the
    judge and disclose no material error.

24. In respect of ground 3 and the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    Article 8, it was submitted that the judge erred, at  [37]  in  stating
    that  he  was  'far  from  persuaded  that  this   case   justifies   a
    consideration outside the Immigration Rules'.  The  permission  grounds
    concede  however,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  went  on   in   the
    alternative to  consider  the  key  question  of  whether  removal  was
    proportionate.  Albeit that such consideration was reasonably brief, it
    considered all the factors and in effect undertook the task required to
    conduct a 'balance sheet' approach (Hesham Ali (Iraq) [2016] UKSC  60).



25. I agree with Ms Willocks-Briscoe, that having made the findings he did,
    that the appellant's account was not  credible  and  in  rejecting  the
    argument  made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  (including   that   the
    appellant's family members move around and the respondent is unable  to
    trace any family members  and  therefore  the  appellant  would  be  an
    unaccompanied child) and in finding that the  appellant  could  contact
    his family and could return to his family in  Iran,  there  can  be  no
    material error in the judge's subsequent finding that it would  not  be
    disproportionate for the appellant to be returned.   Ground  3  is  not
    made out.

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
