
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00009/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 November 2018                  |On 03 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     S H
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Bukhari, solicitor with Bukhari Chambers
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms R Petterson, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity order,  despite  the  Presidential
Guidance given by the President of  the  FtTIAC  in  2011  that  all  asylum
appeals should be anonymised at case creation.  Pursuant to Rule 14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I make  an  anonymity  order
in this appeal.  The appellant will be  referred  to  in  these  proceedings
only as K G-K.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,  no
report of these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
identify the original appellant, whether directly or indirectly. This  order
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to refuse her international protection under the  Refugee
    Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on human  rights  grounds.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.

Background

 2. The appellant had family  visit  visas  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  4
    occasions between 10 August 2005 and 7 April 2010.    On  the  1  April
    2010 the appellant made an application for leave to  remain  on  family
    and private life grounds.  She had a full in-country right of appeal on
    which she was appeal rights exhausted in November 2010.  The  appellant
    did not embark, remaining unlawfully in the United Kingdom.

 3. In 2012, the appellant's partner was  granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain.  In May 2012, the parties entered into an Islamic marriage  but
    not a civil marriage under United Kingdom law.

 4. On 2 September 2013, the appellant made a  second  family  and  private
    life application, disclosing  the  relationship  but  not  the  Islamic
    marriage, because, it is said, she had been advised  that  her  husband
    would not be regarded as  a  GEN  1.2  partner.   Her  application  was
    unsuccessful  and  she  sought  judicial  review  of  the  respondent's
    decision.

 5. On 20 October 2015, the  appellant  made  a  family  and  private  life
    application  which  was  refused  on  14  December   2015.    In   that
    application, she disclosed the relationship.

 6. On 28 October 2016, she made her fourth attempt to seek leave to remain
    on family and private life grounds but the  respondent  refused  again.
    The appellant did not embark for Pakistan but  remained  unlawfully  in
    the United Kingdom.

 7. On 28 October 2016, the appellant made further submissions  which  were
    refused on 18 November 2016.

 8. On 6 June 2017, she made  the  present  asylum  claim,  which  she  now
    accepts had very little chance of success.  She endeavoured  to  revive
    the family and private life claim within  that  protection  claim.   At
    questions 8-17 of the asylum interview, the appellant said this:

         "Q8. It is also noted that  your  husband  resides  in  the  United
         Kingdom is that correct? Yes.

         Q9.  Where  did  you  first  meet  your  husband?  Like  understand
         Sheffield, I think Huddersfield, near to Bradford.

         Q10. How long had you been in a relationship with  him  before  you
         got married? 24 Months.

         Q11. Where did you get married?  In Huddersfield.   We  got  Islami
         Nikah there and that's how it started.

         Q12. Did you receive any documents after the  Nikah?   I  have  got
         Nikkah Namah which I have not brought it with me, it  is  with  the
         solicitor.

         Q13. Do you currently live together? Y.

         Q14. How long have you live together for? Got married in 2012,  and
         then since then.  Every now and then I go and see  my  siblings  as
         well.

         Q.15 Do you have any documents to provide that you have  both  been
         living together? This is the address to show we  live  together  at
         this time.

         Q.16 Just to clarify, does your  husband  have  status  within  the
         United Kingdom? He has got status.  He has got 3 years to stay  and
         then another 3 years to stay, I don't know what it is called but he
         has a valid visa.

         Q17. Where does your husband initially originate  from?   Pakistan,
         Faisalabad."

 9. At the end of the interview was the following statement:

         "We have agreed  that  you  will  send  me  the  following  further
         evidence within 5 working days (insert figure as appropriate).

         Requested evidence items:
           . Marriage documents
           . Marriage certificate
           . Doctors letters
           . The attack which took place, the police report for that.
           . My passport"

    The appellant did not provide those documents within 5 days or at  all.



10. At [82] in the refusal letter, the respondent noted that:

         "... Although you have provided no evidence of your marriage, it is
         considered that regardless of this  evidence,  your  partner  is  a
         national of Pakistan with  temporary  discretionary  leave  in  the
         United Kingdom.  Therefore there are no significant obstacles which
         stop you and your partner continuing your family  life  outside  of
         the United Kingdom in Pakistan. "

11. In January 2018, the appellant's husband was granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain. It is the appellant's case that  this  makes  a  significant
    difference to the weight to be placed on her family and private life in
    the United Kingdom.

First-tier Tribunal decision

12. For the appellant, Mr Bukhari recognised  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing and before me that the appellant's asylum claim is  very  weak.
    The appeal is posited only on her Article 8  ECHR  rights  outside  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).  The appellant accepted that she
    could not meet the GEN 1.2 requirements of the Immigration Rules HC 395
    (as amended) because of the newness of her relationship.

13. The First-tier Judge considered that the status of  the  appellant  and
    her husband as a married couple  was  a  'new  matter'  for  which  the
    consent of the Secretary  of  State  was  required.   The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer did not consent to its introduction and accordingly,
    the First-tier Judge  was  not  seised  of  the  marriage  question.The
    question of the marriage and the supporting documents is dealt with  at
    [15]:

         "15. At the outset of the hearing,  I  raised  the  fact  that  the
         appellant's  bundle  now  included  the  very  documents  that  the
         appellant had agreed, but failed, to submit to the respondent by no
         later than the 28th November 2017. ...I therefore asked  Ms  Hashmi
         [the appellant's Counsel] whether she was proposing to  argue  that
         the decision was unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention.  She confirmed that she was.   I  then  indicated  that
         this was a 'new matter' within the meaning of section 85(6) of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 because the  Secretary
         of State had 'not  previously  considered  the  matter'.   The  Act
         therefore required me not to consider it unless  the  Secretary  of
         State consented to my doing so. Ms Hashmi argued that  the  consent
         of the Secretary of State was unnecessary  because,  although  they
         had been refused, the appellant had  previously  made  applications
         for leave to remain on the basis of her family life in  the  United
         Kingdom.

         The problem with that submission is twofold.  Firstly,  I  have  no
         idea on what basis the appellant made  her  previous  applications.
         Secondly, and more fundamentally,  section  85(6)  defines  a  'new
         matter'  by  reference  to  the  Secretary  of  State  having   not
         previously considered it in  the  context  of  the  decision  under
         appeal or a statement made by  the  appellant  under  section  120.
         Having taken instructions, Mrs Brewer indicated that the  Secretary
         of State did not consent to my hearing the matter. Contrary  to  Ms
         Hashmi's later claim that I had decided not to hear the appellant's
         human rights claim I was in fact left with no choice but to  refuse
         to do so."    [Emphasis in the original]

14. Paragraph 15 concluded:

         "Ms Hashmi then asked to take instructions with a possible view  to
         the appellant withdrawing her appeal in the light of my 'decision'.
          I made it plain to Ms Hashmi that I would take a very  great  deal
         of persuading that such  a  course  was  in  the  appellant's  best
         interests.  After all,  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  her  from
         subsequently making a discrete human rights claim to the  Secretary
         of State.  Ms Hashmi decided not to pursue the matter."   [Emphasis
         added]

15. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

16. The appellant appealed, stating that she had always understood that her
    asylum claim was weak and that she  was  'not  able  to  ascertain  her
    credibility' before the First-tier Judge.   She  criticised  the  Judge
    for accepting as a fact that , having agreed at  interview  to  provide
    her marriage documents within 5 days, she had failed to do  so,  making
    the marriage a 'new matter'.  She argued, in  effect,  that  the  Judge
    should have assumed jurisdiction over the marriage question, relying on
    the Secretary of State's knowledge of the  relationship  with  her  now
    husband when they were unmarried. She argued that any  evidence  up  to
    and including the date of hearing should have been admitted.

17. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  had
    arguably erred in his approach to section  85(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended), given that there were two
    previous applications relying on family and private life.

18. The judge who granted permission directed the provision of a  statement
    from Ms Hashmi, Counsel who attended the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.
    None has been provided.

Rule 24 Reply

19. There was no Rule 24 Reply on behalf of the respondent.

20. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

21. For the respondent, Ms  Petterson  said  that  the  grounds  of  appeal
    amounted to no more than a disagreement.  This had been a  decision  on
    an asylum appeal and if the appellant wished to  make  a  human  rights
    claim, it remained open to her to make a  charged  application  on  the
    basis of her current circumstances, which she could have  done  at  any
    time. The appeal should be dismissed.

22. For  the  appellant,  Mr  Bukhari  said  that  the  appellant  had  not
    understood the need to provide the marriage  documents  within  5  days
    (they were in the bundle for the First-tier  Tribunal,  which  was  the
    first time they had been disclosed).  The Judge's approach  to  section
    85(6) was an error of law and the decision  should  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

Analysis

23. The bundle before me does not provide copies of  all  of  the  previous
    refusal letters on family  and  private  life.   It  is  not  possible,
    therefore, to know what facts had been considered by the respondent  in
    those decisions, but we do have  the  appellant's  own  statement  that
    having entered into an Islamic marriage in 2012, she withheld that fact
    until 2015.  She withheld the supporting evidence which  was  requested
    by the respondent to prove the marriage and  she  has  not  produced  a
    statement from her Counsel before the First-tier Tribunal.

24. There is nothing, therefore, to contradict  the  Judge's  summary  that
    having considered the matter, the  appellant's  Counsel  chose  not  to
    pursue the 'new matter'  of  the  appellant's  marriage  to  a  settled
    person.   The Judge's self-direction in [15] is sound and proper and it
    appears that the matter was explored with  both  representatives.   The
    decision under appeal was a protection appeal and  the  appellant  had,
    and has, the option of a paid application for leave to remain on family
    and private life grounds.

25. The Upper Tribunal has considered the approach to 'new  matters',  most
    recently in Quaidoo (new matter: procedure/process) Ghana  [2018]  UKUT
    87 (IAC), for which the judicial headnote is as follows:

         "1.  If, at a hearing, the Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  a  matter
         which an appellant wishes to raise is a new matter, which by reason
         of section 85(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002, the Tribunal may not consider unless the Secretary  of  State
         has given consent, and, in pursuance of the  Secretary  of  State's
         Guidance, her representative applies for an adjournment for further
         time to consider  whether  to  give  such  consent,  then  it  will
         generally be appropriate to grant such an adjournment, rather  than
         proceed without consideration of the new matter

         2.   If an appellant considers that the decision of the  respondent
         not to consent to the consideration of a new  matter  is  unlawful,
         either by reference to the respondent's guidance or otherwise,  the
         appropriate remedy is a challenge by way of judicial review."

26. These grounds of appeal raise no properly arguable  material  error  of
    law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  appeal  is
    therefore dismissed.



DECISION

27. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Date:         26 November 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


