
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA003742017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th August 2017                    |On 30th August 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            Mr AHMAD SIDIQI AHMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 20th September 1999.  He  is
    consequently a minor.  The Appellant left  Iraq  in  December  2015  or
    January 2016 and travelled to Turkey.  From  thereon  he  travelled  to
    Greece, Germany and then France before travelling to the UK in a  lorry
    arriving on 23rd May 2016.  The Appellant claimed asylum  on  5th  July
    2016.  The Appellant's claim for asylum, as set out in  the  Notice  of
    Refusal, was that if returned to Iraq he would face mistreatment due to
    his imputed political opinion, namely a fear of ISIS, fear of sectarian
    violence, and a fear of being forced  to  join  the  Peshmerga  by  his
    father.  The Appellant's claim was rejected by Notice of Refusal  dated
    29th December 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal J Bartlett sitting at Taylor House on 10th February 2017.
     In a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  20th  February  2017  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection and
    human rights grounds.

 3. On 2nd March 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  on
    20th June 2017.  Judge Ford noted that it was argued that the  Tribunal
    had erred in finding  that  the  Appellant  could  safely  relocate  if
    returned to Baghdad as a minor, particularly as it was conceded by  the
    SSHD that no efforts had been made to  trace  the  Appellant's  family.
    Judge Ford noted that it was accepted that the Appellant's home is in a
    contested area and that he could not safely return to his village.  The
    Tribunal found that the Appellant would be met at the  airport  by  his
    parents or other family members who would be able to arrange his travel
    to Badewa near Erbil.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  initially
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    his instructed Counsel, Mr Moriarty.  Mr Moriarty is familiar with this
    matter.  He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.  He  is  also  the
    author of a skeleton argument dated 10th August 2017 which is  produced
    to the Tribunal today.  The Secretary of  State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Duffy.

Submission/Discussion

 5. Albeit this is an appeal by the Appellant it was agreed Mr Duffy  would
    go first in  his  submissions.   He  points  out  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not find the Appellant's evidence credible and  that
    consequently, following the approach adopted by the Court of Appeal  in
    MA (Somalia),  the  general  situation  in  Iraq  did  not  "save"  the
    Appellant's appeal.  He submits that the Appellant's claim was based on
    a fear  of  his  own  family  and  that  that  had  been  rejected  and
    consequently it is not open to the Appellant to know where  his  family
    is and that if he is returned to Iraq it would be  incumbent  upon  the
    family to meet him at Baghdad Airport where they would have  CSIDs  and
    would then escort him back to his home area.  It is his submission that
    if the claim for persecution falls away, then the appeal does as  well.
    He accepts that  the  Secretary  of  State  does  not  know  where  the
    Appellant's family is and that the Appellant, he  believes,  must  know
    because he contends that his family are his agents of persecution.   He
    submits that the approach adopted by the judge was correct and that the
    appeal should be dismissed.

 6. Mr Moriarty refers me to his skeleton argument, pointing out that it is
    not in dispute that the Appellant is an unaccompanied minor,  born  and
    raised in a village on the outskirts of  the  Ninewah  Governate  in  a
    contested region of Iraq.  He further points out that in her  judgment,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett accepted that the Appellant  was  at
    risk on return to his home area for a  Refugee  Convention  reason  and
    that the Secretary of State  accepts  that  the  Appellant  is  not  in
    contact with his family.  He further points out that  other  facts  are
    accepted.  Firstly, that the Appellant is not from the IKR but from the
    disputed territory.  Secondly, that his family  fled  Mosul.   Thirdly,
    that it has never been suggested that the Appellant's  family  is  from
    Baghdad.  Against this background he submits that it cannot be  assumed
    that all will fall into place on the Appellant's return to Baghdad.  He
    refers me to the recent decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944, specifically referring  me  to
    paragraphs 9 to 11 of that decision, which emphasises that it  will  be
    necessary for the Tribunal to decide whether or not the Appellant has a
    CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after  arrival  in
    Iraq and that his ability to obtain a CSID is  likely  to  be  severely
    hampered if he is unable to go to the Civil Status  Affairs  Office  of
    the Appellant's Governorate because it is  in  an  area  where  Article
    15(c) serious harm is occurring.  Further he submits that the  evidence
    does not  demonstrate  that  the  "Central  Archive"  which  exists  in
    Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need of them.



 7. Against that background  he  urges  me  to  make  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant is a refugee and that he cannot return to his home area for a
    Convention reason and therefore, in any event, could not be returned as
    he is an unaccompanied minor.

 8. He submits the judge has  gone  way  beyond  her  remit  and  has  made
    assumptions that family life will and can exist.  He submits  that  the
    Appellant was not given  an  opportunity  to  respond  to  the  judge's
    inferences that he is in contact with his  immediate  family  and  that
    there are adequate reception  arrangements  at  the  date  of  hearing.
    Further he contends that there is a fairness point in a  case  such  as
    this where a point is expressly conceded by one party  in  that  it  is
    unfair to decide the case against the other party on the basis that the
    concession was wrongly made unless the Tribunal indicates  that  it  is
    minded to take that course.

 9. He emphasises that no contact has been made with any of the Appellant's
    family in Iraq by the SSHD or other agents of the UK authority and that
    contrary to the  judge's  assertion  at  paragraph  32  that  there  is
    evidence upon which it can be reasonably inferred that  they  would  be
    able to assist  him  in  "obtaining  the  necessary  documentation"  in
    Baghdad, even assuming that they are able and willing to travel  there,
    in light of the volatility of the country conditions in  Iraq  and  the
    fact that his family originate from a contested area.  He submits  that
    even if the Appellant is returned to Baghdad on the  findings  of  fact
    that stand, the Secretary of State accepts that there are no  reception
    arrangements and therefore he  submits  that  the  assumptions  of  the
    Immigration Judge are not supported in law or in fact.  If the judge is
    going to depart from the accepted stance,  then  it  is  incumbent,  he
    submits, upon the judge to give reasons.

10. He further submits that it cannot  be  assumed  that  an  unaccompanied
    minor will be alright if returned to  Baghdad  and  that  there  is  no
    evidence to say that he will.  Therefore he invites me to say that  the
    Appellant cannot be returned  and  asks  me  to  re-make  the  decision
    allowing the appeal.

11. In brief response Mr Duffy advises that he agrees and that if I find an
    error of law, then it is appropriate for me to re-make the decision.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. Whilst in the Grounds of Appeal the Appellant does not agree  with  the
    credibility findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and maintains his
    fear of his father  is  genuine,  he  acknowledges  the  difficulty  in
    challenging those credibility findings and applies  for  permission  to
    appeal solely on the basis that the finding  that  he  can  safely  and
    reasonably be expected to relocate from Ninewah to Erbil,  having  been
    returned to Baghdad as an unaccompanied  minor,  is  irrational  and/or
    unlawful.  The Secretary of State has made concessions that  they  have
    made no effort to trace the Appellant's family and  has  conceded  that
    there are no adequate  reception  arrangements  in  Iraq.   It  is,  of
    course, Mr Duffy's submission that the reason that they  have  made  no
    effort to trace the Appellant's family is because, based on the  manner
    in which he presented his asylum application in the first instance, the
    Secretary of State was entitled to conclude  that  the  Appellant  knew
    exactly where his family was, bearing in mind that it  was  a  fear  of
    them upon which he placed reliance.  Having made that finding  and  the
    Appellant's testimony having not been found thereon to be credible, his
    submission is that the judge was entitled to  make  findings  that  she
    did.

15. However, I am satisfied that that alone does not mean that the decision
    is sustainable.  There are  other  facts  which  appear  to  have  been
    reached by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, in particular  on  the  basis
    that it was not in  dispute  that  there  are  not  adequate  reception
    arrangements for him in  Iraq,  and  I  agree  it  was  not  reasonable
    therefore for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to infer that there were at
    the date of hearing or that if the Appellant is returned to the airport
    at Baghdad as an unaccompanied minor, his  immediate  family  would  be
    waiting for him to take him safely to Erbil.

16. This case has to be looked at in the round  and  even  if  there  is  a
    finding of adverse credibility by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  which
    remains unchallenged,  it  does  not  infer  that  there  are  positive
    findings that the Appellant is going to be met at  Baghdad  Airport  by
    his family, all of whom would have valid CSIDs, and who would take  him
    by air back to their home.  There is not a shred  of  evidence  to  say
    that such a finding would take place.

17. Consequently I am satisfied that the finding of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge is unsafe and that had the judge considered all the other  facts,
    either agreed  or  outstanding,  other  than  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's testimony that he has a fear of  his  family,  then  it  is
    quite possible that the judge would have come to another decision  with
    regard to his ability to return to his  home.   In  such  circumstances
    there are material errors of law and I proceed to re-make the decision.



Findings on the Re-making of the Decision

18. It is not a matter in dispute following  AA  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) that the Appellant is at risk on  return  to  his
    home area for a Refugee Convention reason.  Had  the  Appellant's  case
    been put differently at first instance, then this appeal may never have
    taken place.  However, subsequent to the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944 has annexed amended country
    guidance, in particular with regard to the ability of an  Appellant  on
    return to Iraq to obtain a CSID. The law  therein  has  been  mentioned
    above, particularly in the submissions made by  Mr  Moriarty.   I  have
    already found that the Immigration Judge in part sought to replace  the
    concessions made by the Secretary of State by failing to apply relevant
    legal principles in the binding country guidance, in particular bearing
    in mind that the Secretary of State had not sought to put  forward  any
    evidence upon which the  Tribunal  could  properly  conclude  that  the
    Appellant's family in Iraq would be willing and  able  to  receive  and
    protect him.

19. This is an Appellant who would be returning to Iraq as an unaccompanied
    minor.  There is no evidence to say  that  he  has  parents  who  would
    welcome him or even in the alternative, be in a position to  meet  him.
    There is no evidence that he would be in a position to obtain  a  valid
    CSID.  Whilst it is accepted that the Appellant cannot  return  to  his
    home area,  there  is  no  evidence  to  say  that  he  would  in  such
    circumstances even be able to fly to  the  IKR  or  that  he  would  be
    welcome there on return by his family.  In all such  circumstances  the
    country guidance makes it clear that it is not possible to return  this
    Appellant to Iraq through Baghdad.   In  such  circumstances  following
    country guidance  I  re-make  the  decision  allowing  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision is re-made allowing the appeal of the Appellant on both  asylum
and human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 24th August 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date 24th August 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

