
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00625/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 7 July 2021                   |On the 3rd August 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                 SULTAN ALI
                       (Anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L. Brakaj, instructed on behalf of the appellant.

For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant, a citizen of  Bangladesh,  appeals  with  permission
         against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Frantzis)
         (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")  who   dismissed   his
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         28 January 2021.

      2. The FtT made a direction regarding anonymity under Rule  13  (1)(b)
         of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (IAC) Rules 2014 in
         view of the appellant having made a protection claim.  However  his
         appeal on this basis was dismissed by the FtTJ for the reasons  set
         out at paragraphs 19-22 and the grounds  of  challenge  before  the
         Upper Tribunal do not seek to challenge that aspect of the  appeal.
         There are therefore no grounds to continue the anonymity  direction
         and no grounds have been advanced at the hearing for such an  order
         to continue. It is therefore discharged.

      3. The hearing took place on 7 July 2021, by means of Microsoft  teams
         which has been consented to and not objected to by the  parties.  A
         face-to-face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable,
         and both parties agreed that all issues could be  determined  in  a
         remote  hearing.  The  advocates  attended  remotely  as  did   the
         appellant so that he could  see  and  hear  the  proceedings  being
         conducted. There were no issues regarding sound, and  no  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

Background:

      4. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle.



      5. The appellant is a  national  of  Bangladesh  and  claims  to  have
         entered the UK in November 1998 and remained in the country since.

      6. On 3 September 2004 he applied as a spouse of a settled  person  to
         remain in the  United  Kingdom.  The  application  was  avoided  in
         February 2012.

      7. On 22 May 2009 the appellant was encountered and served with an ISO
         151 a for illegal entry; document abuse.

      8. On 26 March 2010 the  appellant  made  a  human  rights  article  8
         application and leave was initially refused in February 2012 but he
         was granted discretionary leave on 2 January 2013  with  an  expiry
         date of 12 March 2013. As  recorded  at  paragraphs  3  -4  of  the
         decision of Judge Lewis, the appellant was granted a  short  period
         of leave in the light  of  ongoing  family  proceedings  where  the
         appellant was seeking to secure an order for contact in respect  of
         his children. Those proceedings were  concluded  in  February  2013
         when his application for direct contact with  the  2  children  was
         refused and a direction was  that  the  mother  should  permit  and
         encourage indirect contact.

      9. On 11 March 2013 he made a further  application  for  variation  of
         leave to remain (on article 8 grounds)  which  was  refused  on  29
         April 2013 on which date the respondent  also  made  a  section  47
         removal decision. The respondent's position was that the  appellant
         had only been granted a variation of leave to remain  in  order  to
         pursue family proceedings which had now concluded and  the  outcome
         of the proceedings was that he was not have direct contact with the
         children but could exercise indirect contact from Bangladesh.

     10. The appellant appealed that decision and it came before FtTJ  Lewis
         initially on 14 January 2014. He  recorded  in  his  decision  that
         there was limited available  documentary  evidence  concerning  the
         exact nature of his application and supporting evidence in relation
         to the children and the judge further recorded at  paragraph  8  of
         his later decision that his concerns were informed "to some  extent
         by the uncertainty and vagueness on the part of the  appellant  and
         his representative". As a result the judge  adjourned  the  hearing
         and sought further evidence from the family Court. He set  out  the
         nature of that evidence of paragraph 10 which in essence the  judge
         found defeated his reliance on those proceedings.

     11.  On 10 October 2014 the appeal came again before Judge Lewis and at
         paragraph 12 the judge set out the basis of his claim and  that  in
         resisting removal from the UK sought to rely upon a combination  of
         factors under article 8; that he contracted  a  religious  marriage
         and resided with her 2  children  from  a  previous  marriage,  the
         length of time had been in the UK having arrived in  1998  and  his
         evidence, the presence of the system in the UK and that he suffered
         from kidney problems. Submissions were also made that removal would
         inhibit any future prospects of him developing a relationship  with
         the children.

     12. The FtTJ's findings and reasons are set out in paragraphs 16 -  47.
         For the purposes of this decision it is not necessary  to  set  out
         all of those findings and I only set out those which  are  relevant
         to the decision that this tribunal is required to consider.

     13. As to the position concerning  contact  with  children,  the  judge
         found that he  was in a position to comply with the  terms  of  the
         order in Bangladesh as he  was  anywhere  else  in  the  UK   (  at
         paragraph 27).

     14. In terms of length of residence in the UK  the  FtTJ  recorded  the
         following:

          1) it is the appellant's case is the entered the UK  in  November
             1998 with the aid of an  agent  and  has  remained  here  ever
             since.. (at [29]).

          2) There is no supporting documentary evidence of the appellant's
             claim of arriving in November 1998.  However  the  appellant's
             sister provided supporting testimony that he  had  resided  in
             the UK since November 1998 (at [30]).

          3)  At  paragraph  [32]  the  FtTJ  stated,  "whilst  I  have  my
             reservations as to the appellant's  credibility,  particularly
             in regard to his motives in pursuing the 2nd  set  of  contact
             proceedings, and also in respect of his evidence  relating  to
             his more recent marriage - I am prepared  to  proceed  on  the
             assumption that his sister is  truthful  in  stating  that  he
             arrived in November 1998 and  has  remained  in  the  UK  ever
             since. However for the same reasons given by the respondent, I
             find this does not avail the  appellant  under  the  rules  in
             respect  of  private  life.  Nor,  in  my  judgement  has  the
             appellant  offered  any  documentary  evidence  or   testimony
             concerning his private life (as distinct from  his  claims  in
             respect of family life) that would warrant  a  departure  from
             the rules.  He  has  provided  very  little  evidence  of  his
             activities in the UK: essentially has made reference  to  some
             recent employment, but otherwise relies upon his  relationship
             with his sister and his 2nd wife."

          4) As to the relationship with his  sister,  the  judge  recorded
             that the appellant had stated he had built up  close  ties  to
             his sister and family members but that "he  does  not  provide
             any particulars in either  of  his  witness  statements".  The
             judge referred to his sister's witness statement which had  an
             assertion in it that she had been supporting  him  financially
             and emotionally since his arrival but the judge  noted  "there
             is otherwise no particularistion of the  relationship  between
             her and the appellant, or between her and  family  members  in
             the appellant. Nor is there any other supporting  evidence  in
             this regard." (at [36]) .

          5) At [37]  the  FtTJ  stated,  "in  my  judgement  there  was  a
             vagueness in the oral  testimonies  of  the  witnesses  as  to
             exactly where the appellant has been living and exactly how he
             supports and has been supporting/himself. I  do  not  consider
             that I have been  given  a  full  and  frank  account  of  the
             appellant's circumstances either currently or  throughout  his
             considerable time in the UK: for example, I do not accept that
             more that the appellant was supported by his sister during the
             pendency of his 1st marriage."

          6) At [38] the FtTJ stated "I accept that the appellant sister is
             loyal  to  him  as  demonstrated  by  her  support  in   these
             proceedings. Nonetheless, there was no  amplification  in  the
             oral testimony as to the nature and quality  of  the  supposed
             interrelationship between the appellant's sister, and with her
             family.

          7) The FtTJ recorded  that  at  paragraph  39  onwards  that  the
             appellant sought to place very significant reliance on  having
             established a family life with B to whom he had married in  an
             Islamic ceremony in 2013. At paragraphs 40 - 42 the  FtTJ  set
             out a number of adverse credibility points which included  the
             evidence concerning the relationship between the appellant and
             that the evidence as to the contracting of  the  marriage  was
             unsatisfactory in a number of material aspects. The judge also
             noted at paragraph 41 that  B's testimony was  not  consistent
             with the appellant's evidence and that the judge  reached  the
             conclusion that "the appellant, with  the  assistance  of  his
             sister identified a potential  person  with  whom  a  marriage
             could  be  arranged  for  the  sole  purpose  of  securing  an
             immigration advantage. I also conclude that it is more  likely
             than not that B was complicit in the matter..."

          8) At [43] the FtTJ stated as follows "I find that the  appellant
             has been an untruthful witness. I do not accept that he  is  a
             genuine  marital  relationship  with  B.  I   find   that   he
             deliberately set out identifying a suitable person  who  would
             be prepared to be a party to  a  non-genuine  relationship  in
             order to assist him in securing an immigration advantage;  and
             further that  he  determined  to  keep  such  a  marriage  "in
             reserve" in the event that his  contact  proceedings  did  not
             achieve the  desired  result  of  securing  further  leave  to
             remain. I find that both the appellant's sister,  and  B  have
             been complicit in this matter." The judge went on to find that
             the  appellant  had  only  pursued  the  2nd  set  of  contact
             proceedings with a view to securing an immigration advantage.

          9)  The  judge  concluded  that  he  had   not   identified   any
             difficulties that he might face in returning to  Bangladesh  (
             at [44]), that there was no family life and that is  not  been
             shown that the decision of the respondent was in breach of the
             appellant's human  rights  (  at  [48]).  The  FtTJ  therefore
             dismissed the appeal.

     15. The appellant remained in the UK. It is recorded in a letter  dated
         11 December 2020 that from the respondent's records, the  appellant
         reported in person to the Home Office on 19 October 2015 and  every
         2 weeks thereafter until  4  January  2016.  The  computer  records
         reveal that on 16 January 2016 and 15 February 2016 the Home Office
         received a telephone call saying that the appellant was too  unwell
         to report. Nothing more was heard from the  appellant  and  he  was
         considered to be an absconder.

     16. On 30 August 2018  the  appellant  was  encountered,  arrested  and
         detained.

     17. On 24 September 2018 he made a claim for asylum.

     18. The application was refused on the 8 January 2020.

     19. The appellant appealed that decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

     20. The appeal came before the FtT on 12 January 2021. The FtTJ set out
         the issues at paragraphs 9- 10. Paragraph 10 set out a  summary  of
         the issues relevant to his protection claim and at  [10]  the  FtTJ
         stated:

             "In respect of his appeal under Article 8 ECHR, the  Appellant
             argues that:

               a. He arrived in the United Kingdom in November 1998;

               b. He has continuously resided in the  United  Kingdom  since
                  that time;

               c. Despite relying on the length  of  his  residence  in  the
                  United Kingdom from the point he claimed protection  (24th
                  September 2018), it was not until 6th November  2019  that
                  the Appellant made a specific application under  paragraph
                  276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules by which point  he
                  had been living in the United Kingdom for over 20 years;

               d. The Appellant was not required to make a valid application
                  under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) (ie a fee paid  application
                  on a specified form) because he had made  his  application
                  on 6th November 2019 as part of his ongoing  asylum  claim
                  (paragraph 276AO Immigration Rules refers).

             Ms Brakaj confirmed that the appeal was brought  on  no  other
             factual or legal basis".

     21. The FtTJ set out her analysis and conclusions as to the  protection
         claim at  paragraphs  at  22-23  and  reached  the  conclusion  the
         Appellant was not  entitled  to  international  protection  because
         there he has not established that there  is  any  risk  to  him  on
         return to Bangladesh.  It is not necessary to set out that analysis
         as there has been no challenge in the grounds to the  rejection  of
         his protection claim.  The  grounds  only  seek  to  challenge  the
         assessment of  whether  he  had  established  20  years  continuous
         residence.

     22. The FtTJ heard evidence from the appellant and a witness and had  a
         bundle of documentary evidence upon which the appellant relied. The
         FtTJ set out her analysis of the evidence at paragraphs [25]-  [38]
         which included the oral  evidence  of  the  appellant,  the  casino
         evidence, evidence from his solicitor, the telephone call logs  and
         the evidence of his witness after which she concluded  that  having
         stood back and considered all of the evidence before  her  "in  the
         round", she found that the evidence of the appellant's residence in
         the United Kingdom between January 2016  and  June  2018  (when  he
         contacted the solicitors) to be "unreliable and unsatisfactory".

     23. The FtTJ concluded that she was not satisfied  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities that on the evidence before her  that  the  appellant
         had shown that he resided in the  United  Kingdom  between  January
         2016  and  June  2018  when  he  re-established  contact  with  the
         solicitors. The judge also recorded that no other factual  features
         were relied upon in the article 8 appeal and at paragraphs 44 - 56,
         concluded  that  the  facts  of  the  appellant's  case  were   not
         sufficiently strong or compelling to outweigh the  public  interest
         identified  by  the  respondent  and  therefore  the  decision  was
         proportionate and not unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights
         Act 1998. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

     24. Permission to appeal was sought and permission was granted by  FtTJ
         Page on 3 March 2021 for the following reasons:

             "The appellant's sole ground of appeal identifies an  arguable
             error of law  by  the  judge.  The  appellant  complains  that
             evidence of attendance at a casino to show that he had been  a
             customer for 20 years was rejected unlawfully. The grounds  of
             appeal allege that in the appellant's previous appeal in  2015
             much of that evidence was accepted by the judge who  dismissed
             the appeal on other  grounds.  Consequently,  they  argue  the
             judge has misapplied Devaseelan in  not  taking  the  previous
             findings about the history of casino attendance as the judge's
             starting point.[ I note  from  paragraph  13  of  the  judge's
             decision that the respondent had accepted it was  likely  that
             the appellant had been resident in the  UK  between  1998  and
             2016 but did not accept that he had been  resident  from  2016
             until he was detained on 30 August 2018. He may have 20  years
             residence. The grounds of appeal say there was no evidence  to
             show the appellant had left the UK since 2016.] Permission  to
             appeal is granted on all grounds."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     25. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 20 May 2021, inter alia, indicating that  it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face-to-face hearing and that this could  take
         place  via  a  remote  hearing.  Neither   party   has   made   any
         representations as to the mode of hearing following the listing  of
         the appeal. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing  to  enable
         oral submissions to be given by each of the parties. I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

     26. Ms Brakaj, who had appeared before the First-tier Tribunal appeared
         on behalf of the appellant and relied upon the written  grounds  of
         appeal.

     27. Mr Bates, senior presenting  officer  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent.

     28.  I also heard the oral submissions of the parties and I am grateful
         for the clear and helpful submissions made by the advocates.

The submissions:

     29. Dealing with paragraphs 1-5 of the grounds Ms Brakaj submitted that
         the question before the judge was whether the appellant had resided
         in the UK for 20 years. A significant aspect  was  whether  he  had
         left the UK as this was the only  way  he  could  have  broken  his
         residence.

     30. The starting point to this conclusion was not challenged and  there
         was no dispute that it would be highly unlikely that he left the UK
         and that there was no  evidence  of  being  witnessed  in  any  3rd
         country or that he left and re-entered  any  country  illegally  or
         legally and he was not  fingerprinted  in  any  country.  Thus  the
         starting point must be that it was highly unlikely that he left the
         UK.

     31. At paragraph 40 the FtTJ found that the appellant had used an agent
         to gain unlawful entry into the United Kingdom  and  also  that  he
         been found by the judge in 2015  to  have  sought  to  deceive  the
         immigration authorities. However as paragraph 5 of the grounds sets
         out the judge failed to take  account  of  the  principles  in  the
         decision of Devaseelan. In the previous decision of Judge Lewis  at
         paragraphs  30-32  the  judge  made  reference  to  the  supporting
         testimony of his sister  that  he  had  resided  in  the  UK  since
         November 1998 and at paragraph 32 the  judge  stated  that  he  was
         prepared to proceed on the assumption that his sister was  truthful
         stating that he arrived in November 1998 and has remained in the UK
         ever since. Ms Brakaj submitted that when the judge considered  the
         appeal in 2014 the judge found that  he  had  been  in  the  United
         Kingdom from 1998 until the date of the decision and therefore  she
         submitted his decision could not be used to any negative degree  as
         the judge had already concluded in his favour. In other words,  the
         findings made by Judge Lewis could not be used to suggest  that  he
         may have left the UK would at the same time it had  been  concluded
         that he had resided continuously in the UK up to that point.

     32. Ms Brakaj submitted that the decision in Devaseelan  had  not  been
         applied and that in 2014 the appellant has no documentary  evidence
         of residence but the judge concluded on the oral residence based on
         the account that he was residing with the same family  members  the
         judge found for him on that  issue.  She  therefore  submitted  any
         questions raised in the documentary evidence did not point  to  him
         having left the UK.

     33. She submitted that the judge's approach was flawed for  failing  to
         apply the Devaseelan principles and it had been accepted that there
         had been a period of residence. She further  submitted  that  there
         had been no consideration of the fundamental  question  of  whether
         having resided in the UK if he had left other than at [40] that  it
         was highly unlikely that he did. Ms Brakaj therefore submitted that
         there was an incorrect approach adopted by  the  judge  to  require
         documentary evidence of residence when this was not the test.

     34. Ms Brakaj submitted that  when  looking  at  documents  the  FtTJ's
         assessment was flawed and in the context of the evidence  from  the
         casino. She submitted that it had been accepted that  he  had  been
         gambling and had lost money through this and that  the  records  at
         page 26 came from the same casino. The record showed  a  period  of
         attendance from 2000 onwards and therefore covers a  period  during
         which the appellant had been resident in the UK at a time  when  it
         was accepted he had attended a casino. She referred the tribunal to
         paragraph 27 of the FtTJ's decision and that it had been  submitted
         by the respondent that there was nothing to confirm the identity of
         the person using the account and photographic evidence  however  Ms
         Brakaj submitted that this related to a period when it was accepted
         that the appellant was resident in the UK.

     35. By reference to the records at page 33 of the  appellant's  bundle,
         the 1st entry was  7  March  2000  and  he  attended  with  greater
         frequency during those years in a period where it was  accepted  he
         was resident. Thus she submitted  it  was  difficult  to  see  what
         identity documentation would relate to  his  attending  the  casino
         during the time in dispute where there was no doubt that he'd  been
         attending there in the year 2000. Ms Brakaj  submitted  that  there
         will be no purpose in him opening account and a false ID.

     36. Ms Brakaj referred to paragraph 8 of the grounds which referred  to
         the decision at paragraph 31.  She  submitted  that  the  paragraph
         suggested his attendance  at  a  casino  was  not  consistent  with
         obtaining money from relatives and working  illegally  but  it  was
         unclear why this would be the case as money obtained  from  working
         illegally or legally could be used  at  a  casino.  In  his  asylum
         interview he stated he didn't attend frequently any more. This  was
         an interview which took place in October 2019 (see questions 132  -
         133) which demonstrated that his account was not inconsistent.

     37. Furthermore that evidence, she submitted showed that  he  had  paid
         money into the account in 2016 - 2018 and that  thereafter  it  was
         less frequent. Ms Brakaj further submitted there was no evidence of
         his attendance at the casino at the time that he was in detention (
         from 30th of August 2018 until a date  she  could  not  be  precise
         about either at end of September early October 2018) and that  this
         was indicative of him not using a third party. She  stated  in  his
         screening interview he gave an address in Newcastle.

     38. Ms Brakaj submitted that when looking at the  casino  visits  there
         were no visits in 2019 which was consistent with the SEF  interview
         that he was not attending at that time  and  there  was  a  limited
         number of visits when he had not gambled and no  evidence  that  he
         paid any money in and that the mounts that had been paying  in  had
         been significantly less. His answers interview do not detract  from
         the entries from January  2016  until  June  2018  that  he'd  been
         attending the casino during that period. His evidence that he  been
         attending a casino in Southampton was consistent with  his  sisters
         evidence that he was living in Southampton during that period.

     39. Ms Brakaj submitted that the effect of the  findings  made  by  the
         judge placed a burden on the appellant to  provide  evidence  of  a
         "certainty" but there was nothing  incredible  in  his  account  of
         attending the casino.

     40. As to the type of evidence to show residence  Ms  Brakaj  submitted
         that in other  applications  the  respondent  required  bills  with
         addresses on and with a named individual and that  was  sufficient.
         Here the appellant has produced evidence of him entering  a  casino
         but was being asked to go further and prove  that  this  could  not
         have been anyone else. Thus it placed a great burden on him  as  to
         what he was required to show.

     41. Finally dealing with paragraph 9 of the grounds, it  was  submitted
         that whilst there was a concerns raised by the judge  regarding  Mr
         R's evidence the judge reached no conclusions  as  to  whether  the
         witness had been truthful regarding the appellant staying with them
         during the period in time. His evidence was that he had seen him on
         occasions and using the home as a  base.  Therefore  she  submitted
         there was nothing to suggest the appellant left the UK and had  not
         accrued 20 years.

     42. Mr Bates on behalf of the respondent submitted that  the  FtTJ  had
         properly applied the decision in Devaseelan and that  the  decision
         in reality gave limited assistance in  determining  the  period  in
         dispute given that it occurred as a consequence of the  appellant's
         absconding and therefore whether he remained in the  UK  after  the
         previous decision made by Judge Lewis.

     43. Whilst the FtTJ accepted the appellant had entered the UK 1998, the
         judge addressed the issue at [40]  and  acknowledged  the  argument
         that it was highly unlikely that he had not left but did not accept
         that argument for the reasons given. The judge  took  into  account
         that during that period the appellant had no  direct  contact  with
         his child and that this reduced the likelihood of any stay  in  the
         UK. The judge further noted that in 1998 the appellant had  entered
         the UK without the knowledge of the  authorities  and  that  was  a
         relevant consideration to being able to re-enter  and  demonstrates
         an ability on his part to travel freely and  illegally.  The  judge
         also took into account the previous  tribunal's  adverse  findings.
         Thus  he  submitted  paragraph  40  set  out  significant   adverse
         credibility findings.

     44. Mr Bates further submitted  that  in  the  context  the  period  of
         dispute was not an inconsiderable period of time and that his  past
         conduct in entering and leaving illegally was  a  consideration  to
         take  into  account.  The  judge  was  not   required   to   obtain
         confirmation from another country. The judge was entitled  to  look
         at this on the balance of probabilities the  burden  being  on  the
         appellant and the judge was satisfied that the  appellant  had  not
         demonstrated that he was present in the UK and set out the  reasons
         for reaching that decision.

     45. As regards the evidence, he submitted the documentary evidence  was
         challenged as  set  out  at  paragraph  27  of  the  decision.  The
         presenting officer pointed out that the casino records  stated  the
         appellant's name but there was no evidence of the casino confirming
         which individual was using the identity on each occasion. Mr  Bates
         submitted that whilst the  evidence  purported  to  come  from  the
         casino, there was nothing from the casino  itself  in  terms  of  a
         statement to confirm its accuracy. The presenting officer therefore
         made the argument that the list of entries which  may  or  may  not
         related to the appellant  and there had been no other  evidence  to
         link him to it and there were no bank  transactions  showing  money
         withdrawn and  deposited  with  the  casino.  Therefore  the  judge
         properly applied the decision in Tanveer Ahmed as to the weight and
         reliability to that evidence. The judge did not  find  that  to  be
         reliable  evidence  for  the  reasons  that  she  gave.  The  judge
         considered the inconsistency in the appellant's  oral  evidence  at
         paragraph 32 about registering with the  casino  and  the  evidence
         given in re-examination. Even if the appellant attended in the past
         the judge was not satisfied that  it  was  others  using  the  same
         identity. There was nothing from the casino themselves  to  support
         his claim. Therefore the judge was considering it in the context of
         someone who had absconded and had been found to  be  an  untruthful
         witness in the past and during this appeal (given the rejection  of
         the protection claim) and  therefore  the  judge  was  entitled  to
         consider that the evidence from the casino  was  not  reliable  and
         therefore to attach less  weight  to  it.  This  was  not  evidence
         covered by the decision of Judge Lewis and the  judge  had  genuine
         concerns about that evidence. He submitted the grounds of therefore
         a disagreement with the assessment but not an error in law.

     46.  Mr  Bates  admitted  that  the  judge  looked  at   the   evidence
         holistically including the letter from the solicitor at  paragraphs
         34 and 35 and the telephone calls at paragraph 36.

     47. As regards the appellant's witness, the judge gave  reasons  as  to
         why his evidence was vague and contradictory. The judge  identified
         a significant inconsistency at paragraph 38. In the  light  of  the
         significant inconsistency is the judge was entitled  not  to  touch
         weight to the evidence of Mr R when the evidence  was  inconsistent
         with the appellant's own evidence.

     48. Mr Bates submitted there was nothing in the reasoning which met the
         high threshold to demonstrate perversity or  irrationality  (taking
         into account the Court of Appeal decision in Lowe  [2021]  and  the
         judge dealt with the argument of whether it was  unlikely  that  he
         had left the country and considered the  evidence  "in  the  round"
         apportioning weight as the judge saw fit. It was open to the  judge
         to find that the burden of proof upon him had not  been  discharged
         where the appellant was and abscond, who had in the past re-entered
         and exited illegally. There is a land border and the  option  of  a
         ferry.

     49. In summary, the judge had a wide scope to reach the  decision  that
         she did and there was no irrationality or perversity in the judge's
         reasoning which was adequate and  it  came  down  to  a  matter  of
         waiting reliability of the evidence applying Tanveer Ahmed and  the
         judge made sustainable findings of fact which were open to  her  on
         the evidence and  therefore  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  her
         decision.

     50. By way of reply Ms Brakaj submitted that at paragraph 40 the  judge
         failed  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  had  any  desire  or
         inclination to leave the UK and that anyone may have the ability to
         enter/exit  illegally  and  that  this  has  been  shown  to  occur
         regularly in the case of others but the question here  was  whether
         the appellant in the light of his history and desire to  remain  in
         the UK was likely or unlikely to have left the  UK.  That  has  not
         been considered by the FtTJ.

     51. As to the casino evidence, it pointed in the appellant's favour and
         that everything  about  his  history  suggested  that  it  was  the
         appellant in the casino during those dates.

     52. Ms Brakaj submitted that the grounds were not a  disagreement  with
         the decision but challenge the assessment of the evidence and  that
         if the judge had applied Devaseelan correctly his desire to  remain
         in the UK should have been  taken  into  account  and  the  judge's
         failure to address those  issues  amounted  to  a  legal  error  by
         failing to make findings on core  issues.  Ms  Brakaj  invited  the
         tribunal to set aside the decision for error of law.

Decision on error of law:

     53. I have carefully considered the grounds advanced on behalf  of  the
         appellant and in the context of the submissions made by the parties
         and the evidence that was before the FtTJ and her  decision.  I  am
         grateful to both advocates for their submissions.

     54. Having done so, I am not satisfied that there is any error  of  law
         in the decision of the  FtTJ.  I  shall  set  out  my  reasons  for
         reaching that conclusion.

     55. Both parties  identified  that  the  central  issue  in  this  case
         concerned paragraph 276ADE  (1)  (iii).  That  paragraph  reads  as
         follows:

             "Paragraph 276 ADE (1): the  requirements  to  be  met  by  an
             applicant to leave to remain on the grounds of private life in
             the UK are that the date of the application, the applicant:

             (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment)...

     56. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE the term  "lived  continuously
         and "living continuously" means "continuous  residence"  (see  276A
         (c)).  The  term  "continuous  residence"  is  defined  as  meaning
         "resident in the UK for an unbroken period.."

     57. The appellant's claim was that he had arrived in November 1998  and
         had lived continuously in the UK since that date and  therefore  he
         satisfied paragraph 276 ADE(1) (iii) having lived in the UK for  at
         least 20 years.  The  position  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  is
         reflected in the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  at  [13]  and  that  the
         appellant was likely resident in the UK between November  1998  and
         January 2016 but it was not accepted that he had  demonstrated  his
         continuous residence after January 2016 until he was detained on 30
         August 2018.

     58. The reason for this is apparent from the chronology that I have set
         out above and that  following  the  decision  of  Judge  Lewis  who
         dismissed his appeal, the appellant reported in person to the  Home
         Office on 19 October 2015 and every  2  weeks  thereafter  until  4
         January 2016. The computer records revealed that on 16 January 2016
         and 15 February 2016  telephone  calls  were  received  saying  the
         appellant was too unwell to report. From that date nothing more was
         heard from the appellant and he was treated as an absconder. It was
         not until 30 August 2018 that  he  was  encountered,  arrested  and
         detained (I refer to the Home Office letter dated 11/12/20).

     59. The FtTJ therefore set out the factual dispute between the  parties
         as to the appellant's residence in the UK as being between  January
         2016 - 30 August 2018 which was a period of  over  2  �  years)  at
         [24]). Whilst Ms Brakaj had made the submission that the respondent
         did not record the appellant as an absconder until April  2016  the
         judge reached  the  conclusion  that  that  was  not  the  same  as
         accepting residence in the UK and the judge took into  account  the
         evidence of the respondent taken from the Home Office records  that
         he failed to report in person after January 2016.

     60. As to the position in 2018, whilst the respondent relied  upon  the
         date of 30 August 2018 when he was arrested and detained, the judge
         had evidence in the form of letters from his former solicitors  and
         that the bill summary from them demonstrated that the appellant had
         instructed them in June 2018 (see paragraphs [34]-[35]).

     61. After considering all of the evidence, both oral  and  documentary,
         which the judge analysed at paragraphs [24 - 38] the judge set  out
         her final conclusion at [39]-[40] as follows:

             "39. Standing back and considering all of the evidence  before
             me in the round, for the reasons that I set out above, I  find
             the evidence  of  the  Appellant's  residence  in  the  United
             Kingdom between January 2016 and June 2018 (when he  contacted
             David Gray Solicitors) to be  unreliable  and  unsatisfactory.
             Whilst I note Ms Brakaj's point that the  Respondent  did  not
             record the Appellant as an absconder until April 2016 (see the
             bail summary in the Appellant's Bundle) that is not  the  same
             an accepting residence in the United Kingdom and I  note  that
             the Appellant, according to Home  Office  records,  failed  to
             report in person after January 2016. In any event,  I  am  not
             satisfied on the balance  of  probabilities  on  the  evidence
             before me that the Appellant has shown that he resided in  the
             United Kingdom between April 2016 and June 2018  when  he  re-
             established contact with solicitors to pursue contact with his
             children. For the reasons that I  set  out  above,  I  do  not
             accept that the casino records go far enough to satisfy me  of
             this to the appropriate standard of proof.

             I am acutely aware of Ms Brakaj's argument that it  is  highly
             unlikely that the Appellant would have left the United Kingdom
             after such a long period only to return but  I  remind  myself
             that the Appellant was to have  no  direct  contact  with  his
             children at this time, that he  had  used  an  agent  to  gain
             unlawful entry in to the United Kingdom in 1998  and  that  he
             has been found by this Tribunal in  2015  to  have  sought  to
             deceive the immigration authorities as to the  genuine  nature
             of his marriage. He thus has shown the means  and  inclination
             to flout immigration control."

     62. The judge therefore did not find that the appellant had  discharged
         the burden on him to satisfy paragraph 276 ADE(1) (iii) and that he
         had been living continuously in the UK for at least 20 years due to
         the period identified from January 2016 to June 2018.

     63. Ms Brajak on behalf of the appellant submitted that when  assessing
         the issue of residence in the UK, the judge firstly failed to  take
         into account the principles set out in the decision  of  Devaseelan
         [2002] UKIAT 00702 relating to the earlier findings made  by  Judge
         Lewis and secondly, the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
         submission made that it was  highly  unlikely  that  the  appellant
         having resided in the UK since 1998 would have left in January 2016
         and returned in June 2018.

     64. Dealing with the first issue, I am satisfied the  judge  took  into
         account the previous findings of  Judge  Lewis  and  thus  lawfully
         applied the principles in Devaseelan.

     65. The decision of Devaseelan relates to the factual findings made  by
         a previous judge when hearing an appeal by the same  appellant  and
         the circumstances  that  apply.  The  guidance  in  that  case  was
         referred to with approval by the Court of Appeal in Djebbar v  SSHD
         [2004 EWCA Civ 804. Judge LJ  said this about  the  application  of
         the guidelines at [30]: "perhaps the most important feature of  the
         guidance is  that  the  fundamental  obligation  of  every  special
         adjudicators independently to decide each new  application  on  its
         own individual merits was preserved." Having set out  the  guidance
         and consider the criticisms made of it  by  the  claimant  in  that
         case, Judge LJ said at [40] "the great value  of  the  guidance  is
         that it invests the  decision-making  process  in  each  individual
         fresh application with the necessary degree of sensible flexibility
         and  desirable  consistency  of  approach,  without  imposing   any
         unacceptable restrictions on the 2nd adjudicators ability  to  make
         findings  which  he  conscientiously  believed  to  be  right.   It
         therefore admirably fulfils its intended purpose." As  set  out  in
         SSHD v BK (Afghanistan) [2019] EWCA Civ 1358  the  authorities  are
         clear that the guidelines are not based on any application  of  the
         principle of res judicata or issue estoppel.

     66. It is plain from reading the FtTJ's decision that she accepted  the
         finding made by  Judge  Lewis  that  notwithstanding  the  lack  of
         evidence to demonstrate his arrival in the UK in November 1998 that
         this was the date from which the 20 year period would run (see [13]
         of Judge Frantzis's decision).

     67. Judge Lewis had found at [30] of his decision that whilst there was
         no supporting documentary evidence of his arrival, the  appellant's
         sister provided supporting testimony that he had resided in the  UK
         since November 1998.  At paragraph [32] Judge Lewis stated, "whilst
         I  have  my  reservations  as  to  the   appellant's   credibility,
         particularly in regard to his motives in pursuing the  2nd  set  of
         contact proceedings, and also in respect of his  evidence  relating
         to his more recent marriage - I  am  prepared  to  proceed  on  the
         assumption that his sister is truthful in stating that  he  arrived
         in November 1998 and has remained in the UK ever since. However for
         the same reasons given by the respondent,  I  find  this  does  not
         avail the appellant under the rules in  respect  of  private  life.
         Nor, in my judgement has  the  appellant  offered  any  documentary
         evidence or testimony concerning his private life (as distinct from
         his claims  in  respect  of  family  life)  that  would  warrant  a
         departure from the rules. He has provided very little  evidence  of
         his activities in the UK: essentially has made  reference  to  some
         recent employment, but otherwise relies upon his relationship  with
         his sister and his 2nd wife."

     68. Thus Judge Lewis was prepared to proceed on the assumption that his
         sister was truthful in stating that he arrived in November 1998 and
         that he had remained ever since. The judge  however  did  make  the
         observation [36] concerning the lack  of  particularisation  as  to
         their relationship and there being no supporting  evidence  and  at
         [37]  made  reference  to  the  "vague  oral  testimony"  from  the
         witnesses as to where the appellant had been living.

     69. Ms Brakaj submits that as Judge Lewis had accepted the evidence  of
         the appellant's sister that he had resided in the UK since November
         2018 this was evidence  which  the  FtTJ  should  have  taken  into
         account as demonstrating that he had continued to live  in  the  UK
         thereafter.

     70. Judge Lewis heard the evidence on 10 October 2014 and the  decision
         was promulgated on 9 February 2015. Whilst the judge  took  as  her
         starting point that the appellant had been resident in the UK  from
         November 1998, beyond the date  of  the  decision  of  Judge  Lewis
         (either October 2014 or February 2015) his findings did not  assist
         the appellant because it did not deal with the period  of  time  in
         dispute from January 2016 - June  2018.  The  assessment  of  Judge
         Lewis did not concern that period of time.

     71. Nor is it correct as the grant of permission appears to  take  into
         account that Judge Lewis made a finding about the previous  history
         of casino attendance. Judge Lewis made no finding in  his  decision
         about  the  1st  marriage.  His  consideration  concerned  the  2nd
         relationship/marriage.

     72. Ms Brakaj relied upon the point set out the  written  grounds  that
         the evidence relied on at the hearing before the present judge  was
         very similar to the evidence before  Judge  Lewis  and  that  as  a
         family member had given evidence  before  the  present  judge,  the
         evidence bore "the same characteristics of that evidence which  was
         previously accepted" and that the failure to consider the basis  of
         the previous decision and nature of  the  findings  as  a  starting
         point amounted to a legal error (see paragraph  6  of  the  written
         grounds).

     73. There is no merit in this submission. The  appellant's  sister  did
         not give evidence before this FtTJ nor did she provide any  written
         evidence in support. The judge was entitled to take  judge  Lewis's
         findings as her starting point that he had resided in the  UK  from
         November 2018 until at the latest February 2015 when  the  decision
         was  promulgated  and  thereafter  from  the  evidence   from   the
         respondent which supported a continuous period until January 2016.

     74. The judge however did hear evidence from the appellant's nephew  in
         support of his continuing residence and during the disputed period.
         The written evidence was sparse. It consisted  of  an  email  dated
         22/12/2020 of 8 lines and was to the effect that he confirmed  that
         the appellant was living with him and his mother from January  2016
         until he was detained in August 2018 at their  address  and  living
         downstairs in a spare room. There was also some evidence concerning
         how he obtained the information  from  the  casino.  There  was  no
         further description of the appellant's residence  nor  any  history
         provided with that statement or any evidence in support.

     75. Contrary to the grounds, the FtTJ did consider that evidence  given
         by  the  appellant's  nephew.  At   [29]   the   judge   identified
         inconsistencies with his evidence in  connection  with  the  casino
         evidence (to which I will return) and at paragraphs [36] - [38] the
         FtTJ addressed the evidence as follows:

             "36. The Lycamobile call logs,  which  it  is  said  show  the
             Appellant calling  various  numbers  between  April  2018  and
             September 2018 carry limited evidential weight  on  the  issue
             that I have to resolve. The oral evidence is that the phone is
             not registered to anyone as it is a Pay As You  Go  phone  and
             others had access to it. The Appellant's nephew  obtained  the
             call logs. It is not adequately explained why, if this is  the
             phone that the Appellant is said to have been using since July
             2016 ( nephews evidence), the call logs only go back as far as
             April 2018.

             37. Finally, I note the oral evidence of Mr (nephews evidence)
             a that the Appellant lived with him and his parents since  the
             time he split from his first wife. In his email evidence  sent
             on 22nd December 2020 Mr (nephew) provides that the  Appellant
             lived with him from January 2016 to the point of his detention
             in 2018. Whilst that apparent inconsistency can  plausibly  be
             explained by the fact that Mr  (nephew)was dealing  only  with
             the period in contention between the Parties, the fact remains
             that in light of the  issues  in  this  appeal  I  would  have
             expected a much more considered and detailed witness statement
             to have been provided by Mr ( nephew) who says he can speak to
             the entire issue in dispute. I find his written evidence to be
             lacking in detail.

             38.  In  terms  of  Mr  (nephew)  oral  evidence,  there  were
             inconsistencies that troubled me. The Appellant's case is that
             he now lives  with  his  wife  (paragraph  7  of  his  witness
             statement). In interview, the Appellant stated that  prior  to
             his detention in August 2018 he would travel between Newcastle
             (seeing his current wife) and Southampton  (staying  with  his
             sister). At question 199 the Appellant says he would stay  for
             one month at a time in Southampton, travelling back and  forth
             to Newcastle where he would also stay. His wife would come  to
             Southampton and bring the children (question 199). That is not
             consistent with Mr (nephew) oral evidence that  the  Appellant
             was always present at the property  and  no  one  visited  him
             there. I did  not  find  Mr  (  nephew)  explanation  of  this
             inconsistency to be satisfactory  and  I  was  left  with  the
             impression that he was seeking to adapt his  evidence  to  the
             questions being asked of him.

     76. Ms Brakaj did not seek to challenge those findings and acknowledged
         that there were inconsistencies in his evidence. In  the  light  of
         the inconsistent evidence  given  by  the  witness  the  judge  was
         entitled to find that  the  inconsistencies  between  that  of  the
         witness and the appellant undermined his evidence. It was  open  to
         the judge to give little evidential weight to that evidence in  her
         overall analysis.

     77. I also observed that the judge noted that the appellant's wife  was
         present at the tribunal but was not called to give evidence despite
         the claim that she had been in a relationship with him  since  2013
         and  he  had  been  seeing  her  adult  children   regularly   (see
         paragraph[25](iv)).

     78. The second issue Ms Brakaj relied upon is that the  judge  did  not
         properly consider that it was highly unlikely  that  the  appellant
         having resided in the UK since November 1998  would  have  left  in
         January 2016 and returned in June 2018.

     79. In her oral submissions she argued that "the starting point to this
         conclusion was not challenged and there  was  no  dispute  that  it
         would be highly unlikely that he left  the  UK".  She  argued  that
         there was no evidence of the appellant being in any 3rd country  or
         any evidence of him re-entering illegally or legally and  therefore
         as a starting point the judge should have  started  her  assessment
         from the point that it was highly unlikely that he had left the UK.

     80. I do not accept that the judge was required  to  have  started  her
         assessment from the viewpoint that it was highly unlikely  that  he
         had left the UK. Whilst Ms Brakaj appeared to argue that there  was
         no dispute that it was highly unlikely that he left the UK that  is
         not  reflected  in  the  decision.  At  [40]  the  judge  expressly
         addressed this issue and therefore it was  in  dispute.  The  judge
         took into account the submission made but gave reasons why she  did
         not accept such an argument.  Firstly  the  judge  found  that  the
         appellant was to have no direct contact with the children  at  that
         time (as the court order had been to  refuse  direct  contact)  and
         therefore the inference from this was that it did not  provide  any
         motivation or incentive for him to remain. Furthermore,  the  judge
         took into account that the appellant had  used  an  agent  to  gain
         unlawful entry into the UK in 1998 and that "and that  he  is  been
         found  by  this  tribunal  in  2015  have  sought  to  deceive  the
         immigration authorities as to the genuine nature of  his  marriage.
         He thus has shown the means and inclination  to  flout  immigration
         control." The  reference  made  at  paragraph  [40]  reflected  the
         earlier findings made by Judge Lewis at [43] and what he  described
         as the appellant's deliberate conduct in  securing  an  immigration
         advantage.

     81. It is also the case that those  findings  should  not  be  read  in
         isolation from the other factual findings made by the judge on  the
         evidence advanced by the appellant to  demonstrate  his  continuous
         residence for the period in dispute.

     82. The judge had the opportunity to hear the evidence of the appellant
         and for it to be the subject of cross-examination.  The  judge  was
         entitled to form a view of the  appellant's  credibility  from  the
         previous evidence and also the evidence that was before her.

     83. At [25] the FtTJ stated;

             "25. The following features operate  against  the  Appellant's
             credibility which I consider with the evidence  before  me  in
             the round:

               i. He has maintained a protection claim before  the  Tribunal
                  that I have found to lack credibility;

              ii. The Appellant was found to be  an  untruthful  witness  by
                  Judge Lewis (see paragraph  43  of  the  Determination  at
                  Annex D of the Respondent's Bundle);

             iii.  The  Appellant  was  found  by  Judge   Lewis   to   have
                  deliberately  secured  and  entered  into  a   non-genuine
                  marriage  to  assist  him  in  obtaining  an   immigration
                  advantage;

              iv. Despite my being informed  that  the  Appellant's  current
                  wife was present at the Tribunal, she was  not  called  to
                  give  oral  evidence  before  me  even   though   on   the
                  Appellant's case, he has been in a relationship  with  her
                  since 2013 (see paragraph 7 of his witness statement)  and
                  that he sees her  adult  children  regularly  (substantive
                  asylum interview record question 211). No such individuals
                  were called to give evidence;

               v. The Appellant stated in  cross  examination  that  he  had
                  attended hospital in Southampton owing to kidney problems.
                  This was in response to a question  in  cross  examination
                  about whether he  had  any  other  evidence  to  show  his
                  residence in the United Kingdom between January  2016  and
                  August 2018. The Appellant stated he had lost the relevant
                  letter. If accurate, then  the  Appellant  has  failed  to
                  obtain medical records that could have assisted  him.  His
                  failure to do so undermines his case."

     84. At paragraphs [26]-[35] the FtTJ set out her reasoning why she  did
         not place weight on the  casino  evidence  and  at  [36]  gave  her
         reasons as to why she gave  the  telephone  call  evidence  limited
         evidential weight and at [37-[38], the judge set out her  reasoning
         for reaching the conclusion that the  evidence  of  the  supporting
         witness was inconsistent, vague and lacking in credibility.

     85. In my judgement the FtTJ considered all the evidence "in the round"
         when addressing the issue of whether the appellant had  established
         on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  he   had   been   living
         continuously from November 1998 for a period of 20 years in the  UK
         and had given consideration to the submission that  he  was  highly
         unlikely to have left but was entitled to  consider  this  evidence
         not as a starting point but within the context of the evidence when
         viewed in its totality.

     86. I return to the evidence again as it is submitted on behalf of  the
         appellant  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  documentary
         evidence from the casino.

     87. I have carefully considered that submission in  the  light  of  the
         decision and the evidence before the judge but I am satisfied  that
         the judge gave adequate and sustainable reasons  for  reaching  the
         view that she took on that evidence as to its lack  of  reliability
         and provenance applying the decision in Tanveer Ahmed.

     88. The FtTJ addressed this evidence  at  paragraphs  [26  -  33].  The
         evidence from the casino is summarised at [26]  which  was  in  the
         form of a letter confirming that the appellant had been  registered
         as a customer since 6 March 2000. The appellant's bundle  contained
         evidence on sheets of paper recording entrance  to  the  casino  on
         various  dates  from  7  March  2000  until  24/9/2017,  14/5/2018,
         13/10/2018 and 3/2/20.

     89. The judge accepted that the appellant had gambled and had  incurred
         debt from this during his marriage from  2000/2009  (at  [30])  and
         took that into account in her assessment. However at paragraphs  26
         - 33, and also at paragraph 37, the judge found the evidence to  be
         lacking in reliability and provenance. The judge found as follows:

             "27. Ms Cornford submitted  that  the  casino  records  merely
                  state the Appellant's name but there is no  evidence  from
                  the casino confirming  which  individual  was  using  that
                  identity on each occasion. There is no evidence  regarding
                  what was used to register the  account  with  the  casino.
                  There is nothing to confirm what  identity  documents  the
                  casino hold,  no  photograph  for  example.  There  is  no
                  mention of the Appellant's Bangladeshi  passport  that  he
                  says he used to open the account. I find  that  these  are
                  all factually accurate points and there is force in  them.
                  There is a lack of evidence from the casino directly as to
                  how they open accounts, their identity  checks,  how  they
                  keep  their  records  and  whether  others  can   use   an
                  individual's membership and if not how that is prevented.

              28. There is an inconsistency in the Appellant's oral evidence
                  in respect of what documents he used to register with  the
                  casino. In oral evidence the Appellant stated it  was  his
                  Bangladeshi passport. When he lost that passport, he  said
                  he simply told the casino he didn't have it any longer. In
                  re-examination, the Appellant  told  Ms  Brakaj  that  the
                  person who initially brought him  to  the  United  Kingdom
                  took his passport. He then said that he did not  obtain  a
                  replacement. In response to questions about  how  then  he
                  used a Bangladeshi passport to open an  account  with  the
                  casino, the Appellant changed his evidence  and  responded
                  that he did in fact apply for a  Bangladeshi  passport  in
                  1999. This inconsistency undermines the Appellant's  claim
                  to have used his Bangladeshi passport to open  an  account
                  with the casino and his evidence on this point generally.

              29. Ms Cornford  also  submitted  that  the  evidence  of  the
                  Appellant's nephew was contradictory and vague in  respect
                  of how he obtained these records. I agree that in light of
                  data  protection  restrictions  it  remains   inadequately
                  explained by the Appellant and his nephew how the  records
                  at pages 26 to 33  of  the  Bundle  were  provided  to  Mr
                  Rahman.  On  the  Appellant's  case  he  did  not   recall
                  providing a letter of authority to his nephew: Mr Rahman's
                  evidence is that he showed a letter to the casino from the
                  Home  Office  that  contained  the  Appellant's  name  and
                  address and they then issued the records  to  him  without
                  more. That  would  suggest  that  the  casino  is  not  as
                  diligent as it should be in terms of providing data  about
                  individual members and  this  calls  in  to  question  how
                  diligent they are  about  securing  against  a  membership
                  number being used by more than one individual.

              30. I consider this evidence in the round with the  fact  that
                  it is  accepted  by  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant
                  gambled and incurred debt during the course of  his  first
                  marriage. In  his  substantive  interview,  the  Appellant
                  stated  that  he  used  to  gamble  with  a   company   in
                  Southampton from 2000 where he  had  membership.  That  is
                  consistent with and corroborates the  Appellant's  account
                  to have gambled at an establishment in Southampton  during
                  the course of his first marriage between 2000 and 2009 and
                  I consider this in the round.

              31. However, at questions 131-133 of  his  substantive  asylum
                  interview the Appellant's answers indicate that from  2012
                  he had no money and so was unable to  gamble  although  he
                  "would pop in at times". The  frequency  of  the  recorded
                  visits to the casino from 2012 (and  in  particular  after
                  2015 when the Appellant had no leave  to  remain)  is  not
                  consistent with use by an individual who is unable to take
                  up lawful employment and is therefore reliant  upon  money
                  from relatives and  working  illegally.  It  is  also  not
                  consistent  with  the  Appellant's  answers  at  interview
                  (questions 131-133 and 172). This calls in to question who
                  was using the membership taken out in the Appellant's name
                  and whether it was the Appellant at all times.

              32. I have considered the Appellant's oral  evidence  that  he
                  would initially gain entry to the  casino  by  giving  his
                  date of birth and they would "see my photo on  the  CCTV".
                  The Appellant also gave evidence, however,  that  after  a
                  while he could gain entry by simply  asking  reception  as
                  they recognised him which then begs the question  how  his
                  entry was logged. I do not find the  Appellant's  evidence
                  on this point to be clear  or  consistent.  The  Appellant
                  does not say that his photo  was  taken  as  part  of  the
                  initial application process to join the casino. Indeed, as
                  I have set out above the evidence about the documents used
                  by the Appellant to open the  account  at  the  casino  is
                  unsatisfactory.

              33. Considering the evidence from the casino in the round I do
                  not find that it can, alone, substantiate the  Appellant's
                  claim to residence in the United Kingdom  between  January
                  2016 and August 2018. That is because there are simply too
                  many inconsistencies and questions raised by  the  records
                  that have not been satisfactorily answered, as I have  set
                  out above. I remind myself that the burden in this  appeal
                  lies on the Appellant."

     90. Whilst Ms Brakaj sought to undermine the finding  at  [31]  on  the
         basis that his attendance at the casino was not  inconsistent  with
         obtaining the money from illegal employment or from relatives, that
         is simply a disagreement  with  the  findings  made  and  does  not
         identify why that finding was not open to the judge to make on  the
         evidence  that  was  before  her.  The  fact  that  there  were  no
         attendances during the period from August until September 2018 when
         he was in detention did not undermine the reasoning provided by the
         FtTJ who considered all of the evidence "in the round" for reaching
         her conclusions.

     91. Furthermore I do not accept the submission made that  the  findings
         made by the judge required the appellant to substantiate  his  case
         to a higher standard or burden. The judge was correct to proceed on
         the basis of the burden was on the appellant to demonstrate on  the
         balance of probabilities that he had been  living  continuously  in
         the UK for at least 20 years. In assessing the evidence  the  judge
         was  entitled  to  take  into  account   its   unreliability,   the
         appellant's lack of  consistency  and  the  witnesses  inconsistent
         evidence and also that there was evidence to be available which  he
         chose not provide (see paragraph [25] (iv) (v))

     92. The judge in my view was entitled to consider all of  the  evidence
         "in the round" and before reaching her overall conclusions which  I
         am satisfied that she did. Consequently there is no  error  in  her
         assessment of the evidence that was before the  tribunal.  I  agree
         with this submission made by Mr Bates that none of  those  findings
         can possibly be considered to be either perverse or irrational. The
         test of irrationality is an onerous one to meet.  It  requires  the
         Tribunal to be  satisfied  that  no  reasonable  Tribunal  properly
         directing itself could  have  reached  the  finding  or  conclusion
         challenged.  That test is not met on the  assessment  made  by  the
         FtTJ in this appeal. I also remind myself  that  the  according  of
         weight to evidence is a matter for the judge. It is not an arguable
         error of law for a judge to give too little or too much weight to a
         relevant factor, unless the exercise is irrational. Nor  is  it  an
         error of law for a judge to fail to deal with every  factual  issue
         of argument. Disagreement with a judge's factual  conclusions,  the
         appraisal of the evidence or assessment  of  credibility  does  not
         give rise to an error of law.

     93. Mr Bates cited the decision of Lowe v  SSHD  [2021]  EWCA  Civ  62,
         where McCombe LJ (with  whom  Asplin  LJ  agreed)  re-iterated  the
         importance of appellate courts  and  tribunals  exercising  caution
         before interfering with "evaluative judgments"  by  first  instance
         judges (see [29] citing Fage UK Ltd v Chobani UK  Ltd  [2014]  EWCA
         Civ 5 at [114]-[115] per Lewison LJ).

             "29. At [114] - [115], Lewison LJ explained the caution to  be
             exercised by appellate courts in interfering  with  evaluative
             decisions  of  first   instance   judges.   Para.   [114]   is
             particularly well known, but para. [115] is also of  relevance
             to the present case. The Lord Justice said this:

                  "114.    Appellate courts have been repeatedly warned,  by
                  recent cases at the highest level, not to  interfere  with
                  findings of fact by trial judges, unless compelled  to  do
                  so. This applies not only to findings of primary fact, but
                  also to the evaluation of those facts and to inferences to
                  be drawn from them. The best known  of  these  cases  are:
                  Biogen  Inc  v  Medeva  Plc [1997]  RPC  1;  Piglowska  v
                  Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360; Datec  Electronics  Holdings
                  Ltd v United Parcels Service Ltd [2007] UKHL 23; [2007] 1
                  WLR 1325; Re B (A Child) (Care  Proceedings) [2013]  UKSC
                  33; [2013]  1   WLR   1911   and   most   recently   and
                  comprehensively  McGraddie   v   McGraddie [2013]   UKSC
                  58; [2013] 1 WLR 2477. These are all decisions either  of
                  the House of Lords or of the Supreme  Court.  The  reasons
                  for this approach are many. They include

                      i.   The expertise of a trial judge is in determining
                           what facts are relevant to the legal issues to be
                           decided, and what those facts  are  if  they  are
                           disputed.

                      ii.  The trial is not a dress rehearsal.  It  is  the
                           first and last night of the show.

                      iii. Duplication of the trial judge's role on  appeal
                           is  a  disproportionate  use   of   the   limited
                           resources of an appellate court, and will  seldom
                           lead to a  different  outcome  in  an  individual
                           case.

                      iv.  In making his decisions  the  trial  judge  will
                           have regard to the whole of the sea  of  evidence
                           presented to him, whereas an appellate court will
                           only be island hopping.

                      v.   The atmosphere of the courtroom cannot,  in  any
                           event, be recreated  by  reference  to  documents
                           (including transcripts of evidence).

                      vi.  Thus even if it were possible to  duplicate  the
                           role of the trial judge, it cannot in practice be
                           done.

                  115. It is also important to have in mind the  role  of  a
                  judgment given after trial.  The  primary  function  of  a
                  first instance judge is to find  facts  and  identify  the
                  crucial legal points and to advance reasons  for  deciding
                  them in a particular way. He should give  his  reasons  in
                  sufficient detail to show the parties and, if need be, the
                  Court of Appeal the principles on which he has  acted  and
                  the reasons that have led him to his decision.  They  need
                  not be elaborate. There is no duty on a judge,  in  giving
                  his reasons, to deal  with  every  argument  presented  by
                  counsel in support of his case. His function is  to  reach
                  conclusions and give reasons to support his view,  not  to
                  spell out every matter as if summing up  to  a  jury.  Nor
                  need he deal at any  length  with  matters  that  are  not
                  disputed. It is sufficient if what he says shows the basis
                  on  which  he  has  acted.  These  are  not  controversial
                  observations:  see  Customs  and  Excise  Commissioners  v
                  A [2002] EWCA  Civ  1039; [2003]  2  WLR  210;  Bekoe  v
                  Broomes [2005] UKPC  39;  Argos  Ltd  v  Office  of  Fair
                  Trading [2006] EWCA Civ 1318; [2006] UKCLR 1135"

             30.  In this case, the FTT had determined the issues that were
             before it, being those which were regarded as being central to
             the question of whether the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  the
             relevant "very significant obstacles". It  was  not  necessary
             for the FTT to deal with a case that was not being made by the
             Respondent. The appeal to the FTT  was  "the  first  and  last
             night of the show", not a "dress rehearsal".

             31.  Equally, it is to be recalled  that  judgments  at  first
             instance are necessarily an incomplete  impression  made  upon
             the judge by the primary evidence. This FTT judge reached  the
             conclusion that he did on the issues raised and  he  expressed
             himself succinctly on them. This is what Lord Hoffmann said on
             the point in the well-known passage of his speech in the House
             of Lords in Biogen Inc. v Medeva plc [1997] RPC 1 at 45:

                  "The need for appellate caution in reversing  the  judge's
                  evaluation of the facts is  based  upon  much  more  solid
                  grounds than professional courtesy. It is because specific
                  findings of fact, even by the most meticulous  judge,  are
                  inherently an incomplete statement of the impression which
                  was made upon him by the primary evidence.  His  expressed
                  findings  are  always  surrounded   by   a   penumbra   of
                  imprecision  as  to  emphasis,  relative   weight,   minor
                  qualification and nuance (as Renan  said,  la  v�rit�  est
                  dans une nuance), of which time and language do not permit
                  exact expression, but which may play an important part  in
                  the judge's overall evaluation...".

     94. I remind myself that the suggestion on appeal is that the FtTJ  has
         misdirected herself in law. But it is not an error of law to make a
         finding of fact which the appellate tribunal might not make, or  to
         draw  an  inference  or  reach  a  conclusion  with  which  the  UT
         disagrees. The temptation to dress up or re-package disagreement as
         a finding that there has been an error of law must be resisted.  As
         Baroness Hale put it in SSHD v AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 [30]:-

             "Appellate courts should not rush to find  such  misdirections
             simply because they might have reached a different  conclusion
             on the facts or expressed themselves differently."

     95. And as Floyd LJ said in UT (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD [2019]  EWCA  Civ
         1095 [19]:

             "... although 'error of law' is widely defined, it is not  the
             case that the UT is entitled to remake the decision of the FTT
             simply because it does not agree with it, or because it thinks
             it can produce a better  one.  Thus,  the  reasons  given  for
             considering there to be an error of law really matter."

     96. When applied to the circumstances of this appeal I  agree with  the
         submissions made on behalf of the respondent that the  grounds  and
         submissions  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  are  no  more  than  a
         disagreement with the decision of the FtTJ and do  not  demonstrate
         an error either in fact or in  law.  The  FtTJ  gave  adequate  and
         sustainable reasons which were  evidence-based  for  rejecting  the
         evidence relied upon by the appellant and for reaching her  overall
         conclusions by considering the evidence "in the round".

     97. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on  a
         point of law and that the appeal should be dismissed. The  decision
         of the First-tier shall stand.



Notice of Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not not involve  the  making  of
an error on a point of law and therefore  the  decision  of  the  FtT  shall
stand.  The appeal is dismissed.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Dated 9 July 2021





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


    1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this  decision  must
    make a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application
    must be received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period
    after this decision was sent to the person making the application.  The
    appropriate period varies, as follows, according to the location of the
    individual and the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


    2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
    United Kingdom at the time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal is made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the
    appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of
    decision is sent electronically).


    3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under  the
    Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days  (5  working
    days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


    4.   Where the person  who  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    outside the United  Kingdom  at  the  time  that  the  application  for
    permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period  is  38  days  (10
    working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


    5.   A "working day" means any day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
    Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


    6.   The date when the decision is "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
    covering letter or covering email.

