
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00185/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 February 2020                  |On 17 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     AA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of A A who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Judge Siddall, who dismissed his appeal against the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal to grant him  international  protection  based  on  his
    sexual orientation.  He is a national of Albania, he is a child, and he
    is gay.  He will reach his majority in June 2020.

 2. This appeal was the subject of an earlier decision by First-tier  Judge
    Sweet on 6 February 2019 which was set aside in June 2019 and  remitted
    for rehearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  present  appeal  is
    against the remaking of that decision  by  Judge  Siddall  in  December
    2019.

 3. It is accepted that during his  journey  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    appellant was under the supervision and control of his mother and  then
    of the agent, such that he was not in a position to make an independent
    claim for asylum before reaching the  United  Kingdom.   Following  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom, the appellant made an asylum after  four
    days.   The appellant has  not  been  returned  under  the  Dublin  III
    Convention to Italy, France or Belgium, through which he passed on  his
    journey here, because he is a child.

 4. The undisputed facts are that the appellant recognised  early  that  he
    was attracted to boys.  He lived just outside Tirana with  his  father,
    mother and two brothers but when he was still  in  primary  school  his
    father left the family home and his mother brought him up with his  two
    brothers ,with the help of his maternal uncle who appears to have taken
    on a paternal role in the appellant's family.

 5. In primary school the appellant had a good male friend to whom  he  was
    very close and at around the age of 14/15 he began to develop  feelings
    towards this friend and  told  him  about  the  feelings.   The  friend
    replied that he felt the same.  They spent all of their  time  together
    but the relationship never became  physical.   The  appellant  says  he
    would not have used the term gay to describe that relationship although
    he was aware of what it meant.

 6. The two boys became noticed at school  and  name  calling  began.   The
    other children at his school would "tell us that we were sick  and  had
    no right to live  there  any  more"  (paragraph  19).   The  First-tier
    Tribunal decision continues thus:-

         "20. The appellant's mother heard about what was happening and  sat
             down to talk with him.  He told her that he loved [his friend]
             and that he was gay.  His mother was very upset.  She said  to
             him that he would get out of this phase and  become  'normal'.
             He would marry and have children.   She  called  his  maternal
             uncles for assistance.  One of them  beat  the  appellant  and
             headbutted him.  The appellant says 'I was told that  I  would
             be killed if I did not forget about dating boys and I had  not
             [sic] right to give my family a bad name'.   He  was  told  he
             should not leave the house.

         21.  After a few  days  the  appellant  spoke  to  his  mother  and
             explained that he could not change.  She told her brother that
             she would take the appellant to Italy for a while to stay with
             relatives.  They left Albania on 31 May 2018 and flew to Italy
             where they stayed for four days.  His mother  left  him  there
             and an agent took him first to France, then  Belgium  and  the
             UK."

 7. Once in the United Kingdom, the appellant  was  placed  with  a  foster
    family where he settled well and continued his studies at college.   He
    told his foster parents about his sexual orientation,  explaining  what
    had happened when he disclosed  that  he  was  gay  to  his  family  in
    Albania.  The appellant told his foster family that he was still coming
    to terms with the separation and rejection from his family in  Albania.



 8. The appellant said that if he returned to Albania he would not seek  to
    contact his mother because the family had wanted him to leave.  He  had
    not asked to trace his family since coming to the United Kingdom.

 9. The appellant was very careful whom he told of his  sexual  orientation
    outside his foster family:  he did not tell his friends in  the  United
    Kingdom.  As most of them were Albanians he suspected that  they  would
    react in the same way as his family had done.

10. The appellant is still very young.  In his oral evidence he  said  that
    he had reached out to the gay community in the United Kingdom  and  did
    not have any gay friends here.  He had not begun any relationship  with
    other gay men in the United Kingdom nor did he spend time  in  the  gay
    community here: he was still struggling  to  come  to  terms  with  his
    orientation.

11. The First-tier Judge accepted that the appellant  had  shown  that  his
    sexual orientation was gay and he purported to apply  the  guidance  of
    the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] UKSC 31.  The Judge accepted that the  appellant  had
    been assaulted  by  his  uncle  on  hearing  the  news  of  his  sexual
    orientation, and at [42],  accepted that  there  was  a  real  risk  of
    violence to the appellant if he were to return to his family  home  and
    live as an openly gay man.

12. The judge found as a fact that the  appellant  would  not  live  as  an
    openly gay man if returned to Albania because he is not  living  as  an
    openly gay man in the United Kingdom.  The judge also accepts that this
    was "largely due to the harsh response from his family".  At  [44]  the
    judge said this:-

         "I accept that the appellant  is  at  an  age  where  he  is  still
         reflecting on and coming to  terms  with  his  sexual  orientation,
         especially in view of his previous experiences.   It  seems  to  be
         something the he is still  struggling  with  and  feels  unable  to
         disclose to friends.  However if he has not  shared  his  sexuality
         with anyone outside his foster family in  the  UK,  it  seems  very
         unlikely that he would choose to  live  openly  as  a  gay  man  in
         Albania.  In this case I am not able to find that if he returned to
         Albania the appellant would live discreetly only in order to  avoid
         ill-treatment by the community.  The fact  the  he  feels  societal
         pressure from the Albanian community here and  has  not  made  even
         tentative steps to connect with the gay community in the UK,  which
         appears to be due to a strong element of personal conflict, lead me
         to the conclusion.  Therefore I find that the tests set out  in  HJ
         (Iran) are not met in this case."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had the benefit of expert evidence on the
    situation of gay men in Albania, in an expert report by Mr Vebi Kosumi,
    described as an independent expert on the Western Balkans with a  focus
    on Albania, Kosovo, Macedonia and  Montenegro,  which  deals  with  the
    history and treatment of the LGBT community in Albania.   At  paragraph
    29 of the report the Judge noted Mr Kosumi's evidence that:-

         "There is unlikely to be a place to return (Kamez) for a single 17-
         year old boy without family support, and his family would not  want
         to accept him back as it would be  a  financial  burden  and  bring
         shame to the family.  His family would not  accept  [him]  as  they
         would be humiliated that he is gay.   Besides  [his]  family  would
         consider that "they lost their honour as [he] is gay"."

14. Mr Kosumi's opinion was that state protection would not be available to
    the appellant in Albania and he would be unable to relocate outside the
    Tirana area as he would be subject to abuse and his family  could  find
    him.  The youth unemployment rate in Albania was just  under  25%:  the
    appellant would find it difficult  to  obtain  employment  without  any
    family or partner support and might end up being exploited  in  Albania
    or trafficked by gangs.

15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had regard to the country guidance in  BF
    (Tirana - gay men) Albania CG [2019] UKUT  93  (IAC)  on  the  risk  of
    violence to gay men and the  lack  of  sufficiency  of  protection  for
    openly gay men  outside  Tirana  (see  paragraph  (i)  of  the  country
    guidance).  I bear in mind  that  the  Tribunal  in  BF  (Albania)  was
    considering the situation of adult men and  that  the  situation  of  a
    minor is inevitably more precarious.  Where the judge fell  into  error
    was in the application of HJ (Iran), set out at [82] in the judgment of
    Lord Rodger, with whom Lord Hope, Lord Walker,  Lord  Collins  and  Sir
    John Dyson SCJ agreed,  as  to  how  the  appellant's  choice  to  live
    discreetly should be approached:

         "82. ...If the tribunal concludes that the applicant  would  choose
         to live discreetly simply because that was  how  he  himself  would
         wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not  wanting  to
         distress his parents or embarrass his friends, then his application
         should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them.  Such a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.

         If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted.  Such a person has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution.  To reject his application on the ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution.  By admitting him to asylum and allowing him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

16. It will be seen from that  the  HJ  (Iran)  test  is  not  whether  the
    appellant would live discreetly only in order to  avoid  ill-treatment,
    as asserted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at [44] of  his  decision,
    but rather whether a material reason  (but  not  necessarily  the  only
    reason) for the appellant living discreetly on his return  would  be  a
    fear of persecution which would follow if he were to live openly  as  a
    gay man.  The effect of the guidance in HJ (Iran) is that where" living
    discreetly" is at least partly the result of a fear of persecution,  an
    appellant must be treated as though he would live openly.

17. In this appeal, that is precisely the situation:  the  appellant  lives
    discreetly, even in the  Albanian  community  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    because he fears a repetition of the ill treatment he received  at  his
    family's hands when he came out to them in his home area of Tirana.  It
    is accepted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the appellant  cannot
    live in the Tirana area because his family lives there and  is  hostile
    to his sexuality.  If he lives  outside  Tirana,  the  decision  in  BF
    (Albania) indicates that even for adults there is a risk of violence as
    a result of sexuality for those who live openly as gay men and  a  lack
    of sufficiency of protection.

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding at [43]  that  the  appellant's
    failure to continue to explore his sexuality in the United Kingdom  was
    "largely due to the harsh response from his family"  which  included  a
    beating which meets the paragraph 339K test of past persecution,  is  a
    finding that a material reason for this appellant living discreetly  on
    return  would  be  a  fear  of  persecution.   That  taken   with   his
    vulnerability as a minor is more than sufficient to meet the HJ  (Iran)
    standard.

19. Accordingly, this appeal succeeds.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     6 March 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
