
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00887/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Video        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Conference On 12 August 2020 (V)     |On 12 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     L S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because the case involves protection issues. I find that it  is  appropriate
to make an order. Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:         Ms J. Blockley of Katani & Co. Solicitors
For the respondent:        Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 17 January  2020
    to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Prudham dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 20 March 2020.  The  judge  summarised  the  appellant's
    immigration history and noted that some aspects were  disputed  [9-12].
    He summarised the  case  put  forward  by  both  parties  [14-18].  The
    appellant said that he feared to return to China because he owed  money
    to loan sharks and practiced Falun Gong. The judge began  his  findings
    by reminding himself of the relevant burden and standard of  proof.  He
    went on to state:

         "32. The Appellant travelled through a number of countries  on  his
         way to the UK. He states he claimed asylum in Germany, however  the
         outcome of that application is unclear or why  the  Appellant  left
         before a decision had been made. There was a significant  delay  in
         his claim for asylum in the UK which was only made after his arrest
         in 2018. The Appellant has also absconded on more than one occasion
         and also claimed a false identity. I therefore find that Section  8
         of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)  Act
         2004 applies. All of this damages his credibility.

3.   The judge went on to  state  that  he  did  not  find  the  appellant's
    account credible [33]. Over the next five paragraphs he considered  the
    appellant's  varying  accounts  of  his  travel  to  the  UK  and   his
    immigration history. He concluded:

         "38. The findings that I make from these differing accounts is that
         the Appellant has not been open in his account of  his  immigration
         history and nor has he  been  co-operative.  He  has,  by  his  own
         account, misled officials over his arrival  in  the  UK.  This  all
         further damages his credibility. I am unable to make any finding as
         to whether he was deported back to China  in  2003  by  the  German
         authorities. However this is but one small part of  a  much  larger
         immigration  history  that  damages  the  Appellant's   credibility
         generally."

4.   Only after having  made  these  findings  did  the  judge  move  on  to
    consider the core aspects of the appellant's claim to fear  persecution
    in China. He did not accept the appellant's  claim  that  he  practiced
    Falun Gong because: "In addition to the general lack of credibility  of
    the Appellant there were inconsistencies in this account as  well."  He
    noted that the appellant did not mention Falun Gong when he  was  first
    interviewed.  In  his  initial  statement  he  said  that  his  brother
    practiced Falun Gong but did not claim to practice it himself.  It  was
    only at the main asylum interview that he claimed  that  he  could  not
    return to China because he practiced Falun Gong. Even then, his account
    was vague as to what persecution he might have suffered [39]. For these
    reasons the judge rejected his claim to be at risk of  persecution  for
    reasons of practicing Falun Gong.

5.   The judge then turned to consider the appellant's claim to be  at  risk
    as a result of money owed to loan sharks by his  brother  and  himself.
    The judge noted  that  the  appellant  had  been  inconsistent  in  his
    evidence as to whether it was his brother or him who owed money to loan
    sharks. There was also some evidence to show that the appellant had  at
    one point claimed to be an only child although the judge noted that the
    appellant's evidence was that  his  brother  died,  which  was  why  he
    claimed that the loan sharks began to target him for  his   debt  [42].
    The judge found the appellant's alternative  account  relating  to  the
    money he owed to loan sharks to be equally inconsistent.  He  gave  two
    different accounts as to why he borrowed money. First claiming that  he
    borrowed money to pay his brother's debt but at another  point  stating
    that it was to repay debts from  his  business.  The  judge  concluded:
    "Given these inconsistencies and the general lack of credibility of the
    Appellant I did not accept his evidence that he was at risk  from  loan
    sharks should he return to China." [44].

6.   In any event, the judge concluded that, even  if  this  aspect  of  his
    account were accepted, the appellant would not be at  risk  because  of
    the passage of time since he borrowed the money and  in  light  of  the
    country guidance in ZC & Others (Risk - illegal  exit  -  loan  sharks)
    China [2009] UKAIT 00028.

7.   The appellant does not seek to challenge the specific findings made  in
    relation to the appellant's claimed involvement  with  Falun  Gong  and
    loan sharks. He appeals the First-tier Tribunal decision  on  the  sole
    ground that the judge  placed  undue  emphasis  on  credibility  issues
    relating to section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc) Act 2004 ("AITCA 2004"). It is argued  that  the  judge
    treated it as a starting point in his assessment,  which  coloured  his
    other findings: SM (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116
    referred.  In that case the Upper Tribunal considered the effect of the
    'novel' provisions contained in the 2004 Act.

         "9.  Given the terms of  section  8,  it  is  inevitable  that  the
         general  fact-finding  process  is  somewhat  distorted,  but  that
         distortion must be kept to a minimum. There is no  warrant  at  all
         for the claim, made in the grounds, that the matters identified  by
         section 8 should be treated as the starting point of a decision  on
         credibility. The matters mentioned in section 8 may or may  not  be
         part of any particular claim; and their importance will  vary  with
         the nature of the claim that is being made, and the other  evidence
         that supports it or undermines it. In some  cases,  (of  which  the
         most obvious are perhaps those where there  is  contested  evidence
         about the journey to the United Kingdom)  it  will  simply  not  be
         possible to know whether section 8 applies until a preliminary view
         has been taken on  the  credibility  of  some  other  part  of  the
         evidence.

         10.  In our judgment, although section 8 of the 2004  Act  has  the
         undeniably novel feature of requiring  the  deciding  authority  to
         treat certain aspects of the evidence in a particular  way,  it  is
         not intended to, and does not, otherwise affect the general process
         of deriving facts from evidence. It is the task of the fact-finder,
         whether official or judge, to look  at  all  the  evidence  in  the
         round, to try and grasp it as a  whole  and  to  see  how  it  fits
         together and whether it is sufficient to discharge  the  burden  of
         proof. Some aspects of the  evidence  may  themselves  contain  the
         seeds of doubt. Some aspects of the evidence may cause doubt to  be
         cast on other parts of the evidence. Some aspects of  the  evidence
         may be matters to which  section  8  applies.  Some  parts  of  the
         evidence may shine with the light of credibility.  The  fact-finder
         must consider all these points together; and,  despite  section  8,
         and although some matters may go against and some matters count  in
         favour of credibility, it is for the fact-finder  to  decide  which
         are the important, and which are the less important features of the
         evidence, and to reach his view as a whole on  the  evidence  as  a
         whole."

Decision and reasons

8.   In SM (Iran) the  Upper  Tribunal  made  clear  that  it  will  not  be
    possible to know what weight should be given to the matters outlined in
    section 8 until after some assessment of the credibility  of  the  core
    aspects of the claim. In light of the decision in SM (Iran) it is  wise
    for a judge to avoid beginning a credibility assessment by  considering
    a person's immigration history and travel to the  UK.  After  all,  the
    central task of a decision maker  is  to  assess  whether  there  is  a
    reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the  person  is  at  risk  of
    persecution if returned to their country of  origin.  This  is  usually
    done with reference the appellant's account of  past  events  in  their
    country of origin and by assessing what is likely  to  happen  if  they
    return with the assistance of background and other evidence.

9.   The details of a person's journey  to  the  UK  and  their  immigration
    history on arrival might become relevant to the overall  assessment  if
    there are concerns about the credibility of the core account.  Lack  of
    clarity about a journey to the UK might be a means to hide the fact, as
    in this case, that a person might have been refused asylum  in  another
    country. A history of absconding or a lengthy delay in approaching  the
    authorities for protection in the host country might  indicate  that  a
    person does not have a genuine fear of return.

10.  However, a decision maker must always be conscious  of  the  fact  that
    the matters outlined in section 8 are peripheral to the  core  elements
    of a protection claim. A genuine asylum seeker  might  also  have  good
    reason to obfuscate about the exact nature of their journey to  the  UK
    given that they cannot always travel  by  legal  routes  and  may  have
    entered the UK illegally with  the  assistance  of  organised  criminal
    networks. They may fear prosecution or retribution by  criminal  agents
    if too much detail is revealed. A genuine asylum seeker might  also  be
    reluctant to approach the authorities in the host  country  because  of
    fear or mistrust arising from their experiences with the authorities in
    their country of origin.

11.  It is for these reasons that the factors outlined in  section  8  AITCA
    2004 must be considered in the context of the claim as a whole. In  one
    case those factors may be indicative of a lack of credibility if  there
    are other concerns about the core account given  by  an  applicant,  in
    another case the same factors may be of less consequence  if  the  core
    account generally is credible and  an  adequate  explanation  has  been
    given for any concerns that touch on section 8 issues.

12.  Turning to  this  case,  it  seems  clear  that  the  judge  began  his
    assessment of the appellant's overall credibility  by  considering,  at
    some length,  issues  relating  to  his  journey  to  the  UK  and  his
    immigration history. He clearly  placed  weight  on  these  matters  as
    damaging to the appellant's credibility. Structurally, this gives  this
    impression that he might have already concluded that the appellant  was
    not a credible witness based on these issues alone  before  turning  to
    consider the core elements of the claim relating to Falun Gong and loan
    sharks. Although the  judge  imported  some  element  of  his  findings
    relating to the appellant's immigration history into  his  findings  at
    [39] he went on to make clear that his  subsequent  findings  were  "in
    addition" the findings he had already made. He went  on  to  outline  a
    number of inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence relating  to  the
    two core elements. It was open to the judge to come to the findings  he
    did on both elements. His  findings  on  those  issues  have  not  been
    subject to direct challenge in the grounds of appeal.

13.  Ms Blockley argued that the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    findings in the psychological report of Alla Davis.  First,  the  point
    was not argued in the  grounds.  Second,  the  oral  argument  was  not
    particularised  with  direct  reference  to  the  report.   On   closer
    inspection of the report nothing suggested that the appellant's  mental
    health was likely to affect his recall in any meaningful way that might
    have explained some of the discrepancies identified by  the  judge.  At
    [9.4]  the  Consultant  Psychologist  stated  that  the  appellant  was
    oriented in  time,  place  and  person.  His  attention  and  level  of
    concentration were normal and his  long-term  and  short-term  memories
    were 'sensibly adequate'.

14.  Although it would have been preferable for  the  judge  to  follow  the
    guidance given in SM (Iran) to consider section 8  matters  after  some
    consideration of the substance of the claim this is not  a  case  where
    the judge's reasons relating to the Falun Gong or loan  shark  elements
    of the claim appeared to be  directly  affected  by  his  view  of  the
    appellant's  immigration  history.  The   judge   gave   separate   and
    sustainable reasons for rejecting  the  credibility  of  the  two  main
    elements of the claim "in addition" to the damaging credibility  issues
    arising from the appellant's immigration history. In  another  case  it
    might be apparent that a judge's view on section 8  issues  were  given
    undue prominence when the core claim was otherwise credible,  but  this
    is not one of those cases.

15.  I do not read SM (Iran) as setting  out  a  strict  legal  approach  to
    section 8. For the reasons given by the Upper Tribunal at [9]  of  that
    decision and for those I have given above at [8-11], it is  better  not
    to use section 8 as the starting point in a credibility assessment. The
    mere fact that the judge placed emphasis on section  8  issues  at  the
    start of his findings does not necessarily amount to an error of law if
    there is nothing to suggest that those findings improperly infected the
    judge's view of the core elements of the claim. In this case the  judge
    gave separate and sustainable reasons for rejecting the central aspects
    of the claim. I conclude that any error of approach in the structure of
    the decision was not material to the outcome of the appeal.

16.  The First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. The decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
law


Signed   M. Canavan    Date 10 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

