
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Number: PA/00366/2020     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 January 2021                |On 22 January 2021               |
|                                 |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                ZA (PAKISTAN)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr De Ruano, instructed by Goodfellows Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision which  was  issued  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Traynor ("the judge") on 20 May 2020.  On that date,  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  of
    his claim for international protection.


 2. The judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  is  an  Ahmadi  Muslim  from
    Pakistan.  That aspect of the claim was  not  in  dispute  between  the
    parties in any event, as the judge  recorded  at  [47].   For  detailed
    reasons he gave at [44]-[58], however, the judge did  not  accept  that
    the appellant had given a truthful account of his profile as an  Ahmadi
    or of the events which he claimed had precipitated his  departure  from
    Pakistan.
 3. In his grounds of appeal, Mr de Ruano submits that the judge fell  into
    legal error  in  reaching  the  findings  which  were  adverse  to  the
    appellant.  Mr  Jarvis,  who  represented  the  respondent  before  me,
    accepted with characteristic fairness that a number of these complaints
    were made out.  Mr Jarvis  submitted  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    careful and thorough in many respects but that he had fallen into clear
    error in the following respects:


      i) As contended at [5] of the grounds, the judge had reached a finding
         which could not readily be reconciled with the background  evidence
         on the situation in Rabwah.  The  judge  had  found  it  inherently
         unlikely that the Muslim  Student  Federation  would  venture  into
         Rabwah to attack the appellant, given the strong Ahmadi presence in
         that area.  That  finding  was  reached  without  reference  to  or
         consideration of the background material which  shows,  sadly,  the
         continuous  threat  to  Ahmadis  in  Rabwah  notwithstanding  their
         numbers  there.   The  judge's  finding  was  not  made  with  this
         background evidence in mind, as required by authorities such as Y v
         SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223.


     ii) As contended at [7] of the grounds, the judge had erred in  failing
         to take account of  uncontentious  background  material  about  the
         Ahmadiyya Association before deciding to attach no  weight  to  its
         correspondence in support of the appellant.  The  judge  had  found
         that the letter from the association was  based  'entirely  on  the
         appellant's unsupported assertions' and  that  it  was  significant
         that no one from the association had  attended.   The  respondent's
         background material  showed,  however,  that  the  association  was
         'extremely careful' to verify accounts given to it and that it  did
         not, as a  matter  of  policy,  attend  hearings  due  to  want  of
         resources.  Again, neither of these relevant matters had been taken
         into account by the judge before he reached the findings he did  at
         [60] of his decision.

    iii) As contended at [6] of the grounds, the judge had erred at [25] and
         [55] of his decision, in seizing upon the  appellant's  failure  to
         explain how his activities in the UK had amounted to  proselytising
         without considering how that activity  is  defined  in  the  Ahmadi
         faith.  The judge had noted, correctly, that proselytising is a key
         tenet of the Ahmadi faith but he had not informed his  decision  by
         considering the background material concerning the  ways  in  which
         Ahmadis might discharge that  obligation.   The  CPIN  showed  that
         proselytising was not limited, in the eyes of the Ahmadi community,
         to activity 'promoting his faith', as  the  judge  had  thought  at
         [55].

 4. Mr Jarvis noted that there were a number of other findings  which  were
    plainly open to the judge, and which represented cogent points  against
    the appellant's credibility.  Nevertheless, Mr Jarvis  felt  unable  to
    submit, in light of the failings which he was  constrained  to  accept,
    that the judge's decision could properly be sustained on the  basis  of
    those findings alone.  In the  circumstances,  he  submitted  that  the
    proper course was for the decision of the judge to be set aside and for
    the appeal to be remitted to the FtT for hearing afresh.


 5. I agree with the considered submissions  made  by  Mr  Jarvis.   It  is
    apparent that the judge fell into error for the reasons given above and
    that his decision  cannot  withstand  scrutiny.   The  error,  in  each
    respect, is that the judge made findings of  fact  without  considering
    the relevant background material.  I accept the submission made by both
    representatives that the proper course, in the  circumstances,  is  for
    the decision of the judge to be set aside and the appeal to be remitted
    to the FtT for hearing afresh before another judge.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  be  heard
afresh by a judge other than Judge Traynor.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
this direction because the appellant is an asylum seeker.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                            05 February 2021





















