
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00953/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 May 2017                                |On 15 August 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               M--- M--- S---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Counsel employed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order because there  is  a  risk  that  publicity
       about the case might of itself make  it  impossible  to  return  the
       Appellant safely.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He appeals with the  permission
       of the First-tier Tribunal a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Jones QC promulgated on 6  March  2017  dismissing  the  appellant's
       appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  him  asylum
       or ancillary protection.  The judge granting permission said:

  "It is arguable  that  the  Judge  went  behind  facts  accepted  by  the
  Respondent and in doing so sought evidence that was not in issue and that
  this undermined the factual matrix by which the risk assessment was to be
  undertaken.  All grounds may be argued."

    3. There are two decision letters to consider.  The first  is  dated  5
       July 2013 and the second is dated 17 January 2017.

    4. I begin by considering  the  first  letter.   This  shows  that  the
       appellant entered the United Kingdom  lawfully  with  a  visa  as  a
       student and during the currency of his leave he claimed asylum.   It
       was an important part of his case that he feared persecution because
       of work that he had done for the BBC and prayed in aid of his case a
       claim that a cousin had been detained by the authorities because  of
       work that the cousin had done for the BBC.  Importantly the  details
       of that part of the claim were not believed.

    5. However the respondent accepted some of the  appellant's  case.   At
       paragraph 6f of the Refusal Letter it is recorded that the appellant
       "began working for the BBC  in  September  2011  for  the  BB  World
       Service.  They have a dubbing section which you  work  for  and  the
       World Service refers  you  to  BBC  Farsi.   You  are  not  directly
       employed by BBC Farsi".  These answers are a summary of  answers  to
       questions the appellant gave at interview.

    6. At paragraph 10 of the letter there are bullet points  acknowledging
       the evidence in support of the appellant's claim to have worked  for
       the BBC.  These are identified as bank statements for the period  28
       June 2012 to 22 August 2012, two BBC World Service invoices  in  the
       appellant's name dated 9 September 2011  and  three  invitations  to
       dubbing sessions for BBC Persia dated February 2013.   At  paragraph
       13 there is the express finding that "your claim to have worked  for
       the BBC is accepted".

    7.  The  decision  letter  dated  17  January  2017  followed   further
       submissions made by the appellant shortly before his "student leave"
       came to an end.  For reasons that do not seem to be in  any  way  to
       his discredit the respondent took time to make the decision.

    8. Although the respondent made clear her view in that letter that  the
       appellant had been untruthful about the experiences  of  members  of
       his family in Iran and, the respondent clearly did not  accept  that
       the appellant had established that his activities had  come  to  the
       attention of the Iranian state, or were reasonably likely to,  there
       is nothing in the January letter to suggest that  the  Secretary  of
       State has resiled from her findings that the  appellant  has  worked
       for the BBC.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal.  Paragraph 22 of
       his decision is puzzling.  The judge said:

  "I find as a fact  that  the  appellant  has  done  minimal  work  as  an
  independent contractor for the BBC, limited to one occasion in  2011  and
  programmes mentioned in the pay advice for January 2011.   I  reject  the
  appellant's evidence that he has done any  other  significant  amount  of
  work for the BBC.  I reject his evidence that he had or  would  have  had
  any documents relating thereto issued to him  by  the  BBC.   It  is  not
  credible that such a vast and bureaucratic  Corporation  would  not  have
  generated, at the very least, pay advices of the type which  were  issued
  to the appellant dated 8 September 2011 and 17 February 2017."

   10. I do wonder if the judge has missed out the word "not" somewhere  in
       the above.  There were documents purporting to be pay documents from
       the BBC dated February 2017 showing payments to  the  appellant  for
       work done.  I cannot make any sense of paragraph 22 in  the  judge's
       decision.  He finds expressly that the appellant has  done  no  work
       since 2011 but then seems  to  approve  of  the  document  dated  17
       February 2017 as indicative of the kind of evidence  that  might  be
       expected to prove a claim that he has disbelieved.

   11. Earlier in the decision at paragraph 15 the judge said "I should say
       at once that it emerged during the appellant's oral evidence that he
       did not work for the BBC in the sense of being an  employee".   This
       is a troubling remark because, as far as I can see, it was never the
       appellant's case that he was an employee of the BBC.  He  had  never
       claimed to have done more than  a  certain  amount  of  work  of  an
       artistic nature that he did not think would cause him any trouble in
       Iran.  Whereas the judge refers to it  having  "emerged  during  the
       appellant's oral evidence" it seems to me that  that  is  a  finding
       that can easily be made without the sense of triumph by reading  the
       papers.

   12. I find Mr Hodson's submission that the judge's credibility  findings
       might have been polluted by obscure findings that, to some extent at
       least, disbelieved matters that had been accepted by  the  Secretary
       of State, irresistible.

   13. There is another point of concern.  At paragraph 28 of his  Decision
       and Reasons the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  appropriately,  asked
       himself if the appeal would have succeeded if the appellant's actual
       assertions had been made out.  The judge decided  this  question  in
       the negative.  He referred to passages in the appellant's bundle and
       said:

  "I have perused those passages relied upon  by  Mr  Gayle  which,  in  my
  judgment, go no further than supporting the proposition that somebody who
  works for the BBC or is perceived to have worked for the BBC  would  face
  nothing more than intimidation, harassment or temporary  detention.   The
  concept of persecution requires a high threshold to be reached."

   14. I find it concerning  that  a  judge  would  take  such  a  cavalier
       attitude to the prospects of being intimated, harassed  or  detained
       (even only temporarily), by the agents of the Iranian state.  I have
       looked at the documents relied upon by Mr Gayle  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  These are  documents  from  apparently  credible  sources
       showing the high  degree  of  suspicion  that  the  authorities  can
       exhibit towards the BBC  and  those  who  have  done  work  for  the
       organisation.

   15. At page 52 there is an extract from the Human  Rights  Watch  report
       "Iran: Free Journalists Swept Up in Raids", 29 January 2013:

  "Recently, Iran's Press TV broadcast a report  critical  of  BBC  Persian
  called 'Eye on the Fox'.  In the report,  several  prisoners  were  shown
  'confessing' to working for BBC Persian, an act the government sees as  a
  crime.  The footage, reportedly provided to Press TV by the Revolutionary
  Guards'  Intelligence  Unit,  was  filmed   secretly   in   Evin   Prison
  interrogation rooms."

   16. I have to say that this sounds rather like persecution to me.

   17. Mr Hodson submitted that I should allow the appeal without the  need
       for a further hearing  on  the  basis  that  the  accepted  evidence
       created a risk for the appellant.  With respect to  Mr  Hodson  that
       argument is not foolish or fanciful but, even allowing for  the  low
       standard of proof, I do see some difficulty  for  the  appellant  in
       showing that there is a real risk  of  his  actions  coming  to  the
       attention of the authorities. At the very least it  is  better  that
       that this  a  sound  credibility  finding  and  the  appeal  can  be
       determined in the light of what the appellant has shown that he  has
       done and might do.

   18. I have decided that it is fair to both  parties  that  the  case  is
       reheard in the First-tier Tribunal when there can be expected to  be
       proper findings on the appellant's case and certainly findings  that
       have not been spoiled by an adverse credibility finding that  should
       not have been made.  If on further consideration  the  appellant  is
       disbelieved, it is still open to the appellant to argue that  he  is
       at risk because of what he has already done and nothing I have  said
       above is intended to guide the outcome of that  argument  in  either
       direction.

   19. It follows that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and I set aside
       its decision and I direct that the appeal be  re-determined  in  the
       First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

   20. To the extent indicate above the appeal is allowed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 2 June 2017                    |




