
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00867/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 21st January 2019   On 4th February 2019


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     N L
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Aitken, of Counsel, instructed by Barnes
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in October 1991.  He  arrived
       in the UK in July 2016, and claimed asylum the day after  he  entered
       the UK. His asylum claim was refused on 10th January 2017. His appeal
       against the decision to refuse asylum  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  on  asylum  grounds  in  a   determination
       promulgated on the 15th March 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan  on
       23rd August 2017 on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-
       tier judge had erred in law in failing to make a  decision  based  on
       the report of Dr  Joffe  with  respect  to  whether  the  appellant's
       Kurdish ethnicity enhanced his risk of serious harm  if  returned  to
       Iran as a failed asylum seeker; and also on the  basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the credibility findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       were not reliable.

    3. For  the  reasons  set  out  in  my  decision  at  Annex  A  to  this
       determination I decided that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law
       in a decision sent to the parties on 23rd October  2017.  The  matter
       now comes back to me to remake  the  appeal.  At  the  start  of  the
       hearing I admitted, with the consent of Mr  Kotas,  further  evidence
       under Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
       2008. This consisted of recent Facebook posts by the  appellant  with
       certified translations and an updating  witness  statement  from  the
       appellant. I declined to admit a general report  on  Iran  and  Kurds
       written by Mr Joffe in 2017 as he had given expert  evidence  in  the
       country guidance decision of HB (Kurds) Iran  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00430
       after the date of this report.

    4. As set out in my error of  law  decision  the  remaking  takes  place
       within these parameters:

         . The finding that the appellant has not credibly shown himself to
           be a military service deserter and has not shown  to  the  lower
           standard of proof that he is at real risk of serious harm  as  a
           result of military service is preserved.

         . The findings that the appellant has done military service and is
           of Kurdish ethnic origin are preserved.

         . The question of the credibility of the events and whether a real
           risk of serious harm arising out of playing music on a  national
           day of mourning in approximately 2012, and being convicted of an
           offence for this, needs to be remade.

         . The question of the credibility of the appellant having  made  a
           political YouTube video and whether a real risk of serious  harm
           arises out of this, if it is found to have taken place, needs to
           be remade.

         . The question of whether the appellant is at real risk of serious
           harm if returned to Iran as a failed Kurdish asylum seeker needs
           to be remade.

Evidence and Submissions - Remaking

    5. In summary the appellant's evidence and  submissions  on  his  behalf
       seek to demonstrate that he would be  at  risk  of  serious  harm  on
       return to Iran for the cumulative risk arising out of  his  being  an
       undocumented  Kurdish  Iranian  combined  with  the  following  three
       factors.

    6. Firstly, it  is  contended  that  he  was  arrested  by  the  Iranian
       authorities for playing music in a car on a religious national day of
       mourning in 2012. He was sentenced to a fine of 20,000 Rials  or  six
       months imprisonment. His brother paid the fine  so  he  was  released
       from prison after one week. It is submitted that the appellant  gives
       a detailed description of this incident at his asylum  interview  and
       it should be found to have taken place. It  is  also  submitted  that
       having this criminal conviction would mean that he would be subjected
       to additional scrutiny by the authorities on return to Iran.

    7. Secondly, it is contended that he has made two political  rap  videos
       which were published on YouTube in May 2016, and  these  videos  have
       had 992 and 374 views, and these  would  put  him  at  risk  as  they
       express pro-Kurdish and anti-government views. It  is  said  that  he
       would be very likely to be asked about his  social  media  activities
       when he is questioned by the Iranian authorities, which will occur if
       he is forced to return to Iran  as  he  will  have  to  apply  for  a
       temporary travel document, and with such  a  document  will  also  be
       questioned on arrival at the airport in Iran. He will have  to  apply
       for a temporary travel document and return on  one  because  he  left
       Iran illegally without a passport in May 2015. As a result  he  would
       have to explain about these videos. Each video  has  the  appellant's
       name and a picture of him, and they might therefore  come  up  if  an
       internet search was made under the appellant's name.

    8. Thirdly, it is said that risk arises out of the appellant's sur place
       activities in the UK. The appellant has posted  comments  criticising
       the Iranian regime and supporting Kurdish  nationalist  organisations
       on his Facebook page over the past year having  learned  to  use  the
       internet since his asylum interview, and he has  also  attended  four
       protests outside of the Iranian Embassy in London in the  period  May
       to September 2018  and  posted  about  his  attendance  at  these  on
       Facebook with photographs.  For the reasons set out above it is  said
       that he would be very likely to questioned  about  his  social  media
       activities by the Iranian government. As a result, he is likely to be
       asked about Facebook and when he says  he  has  an  account  for  his
       Facebook password, and thus his return would lead to  the  disclosure
       of  the  content  on  this  site  to  the  Iranian  authorities.  The
       forwarding  of  material  hostile  to  the  regime  and   pro-Kurdish
       organisations, as well as posts about his own  sur  place  activities
       demonstrating against the Iranian government, will therefore come  to
       the notice of the Iranian  authorities  and  place  him  at  risk  of
       serious harm.  Although HB (Kurds) Iran CG does not  provide  country
       guidance on social media risk the appellant in that case was found to
       be at risk, in part at least,  as  a  result  of  forwarding  Kurdish
       political posts on Facebook.

    9. So, although the appellant accepts that the Iranian  authorities  may
       not be currently aware of his activities it  is  contended  that  the
       return process would lead to a real  risk  that  these  would  become
       known to them, and his Kurdish ethnicity would then be an aggravating
       factor which would amount  to  a  well  founded  fear  of  his  being
       persecuted as a result of his political beliefs particularly  as  the
       Iranian authorities are very sensitive even to mild criticism.

   10. The appellant relies upon HB (Kurds) Iran CG, which he asserts  means
       that being of Kurdish ethnicity is a risk factor given that  this  is
       combined with pro-Kurdish political activity attending demonstrations
       in the UK and making posts  on  YouTube  and  Facebook.  Reliance  is
       placed on SSH AND HR (illegal exit: failed  asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG
       [2016] UKUT 00308 which found that those who returned with a  laissez
       passer will be questioned by the Iranian authorities; and on  AB  and
       Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 00257
       which found that: "There is clear  evidence  that  some  people  were
       asked about  their  internet  activity  and  particularly  for  their
       Facebook  password."  The  conclusion  in  AB  and  Others  (internet
       activity - state of evidence) Iran being that returnees are likely to
       be asked about their internet activity and that if it  is  less  than
       flattering of the government that  would  lead  to  a  real  risk  of
       persecution.

   11. In summary the respondent's submission are that reliance is placed on
       the refusal letter and that the appellant is  not  at  real  risk  of
       serious harm on return to Iran for the reasons set out below.

   12. It is contended that he is not at  risk  due  to  the  incident  with
       playing music as it should not be accepted that  this  incident  took
       place as the appellant could not  explain  much  about  the  national
       mourning day in evidence to the Upper Tribunal; and even  if  it  did
       take place then he paid his fine and the matter is  over  and  of  no
       significance.

   13. Further it should not  be  accepted  that  anyone  could  access  the
       YouTube videos as there is no  evidence  that  they  come  up  on  an
       internet search particularly as they under a friend's name,  and  the
       appellant could not remember the lyrics of the raps,  and  the  first
       one is not really political anyway, so for all of these  reasons  the
       rap videos could not be seen as leading to a  real  risk  of  serious
       harm from the Iranian authorities.

   14. It should also not be accepted that the Facebook posts would  pose  a
       real risk to the appellant as the majority  of  them  are  forwarding
       other people's posts, particularly those of Ahmed  Abdulrahmani,  who
       is a person the appellant only knows through  the  internet  and  has
       never met in person. Some of the cartoons are not obviously  critical
       of the Iranian regime, although it is accepted some of them could  be
       seen this way.

   15. Mr Kotas submitted that HB (Kurds)  Iran  does  not  provide  country
       guidance on social media risk as this is clearly said to  be  outside
       the scope of the decision. Further there are big differences  between
       the profile of this appellant and that in HB as  the  posts  HB  made
       were very political and are affiliated  with  political  parties  and
       derogatory of the Ayatollahs, and there were additional risk  factors
       such as that appellant having  spent  time  in  the  KRI  and  having
       political parents. These issues do not apply to this appellant as  he
       accepts in evidence to the Upper Tribunal that his  parents  are  not
       political and has never contended he  lived  in  the  KRI.  Mr  Kotas
       accepts  that  opportunism  cannot  defeat  this  appellant's   claim
       (although he contended that the  posts  were  a  cynical  attempt  to
       create an asylum claim) and also accepted that there is no  need  for
       the appellant to be  a  high  level  Kurdish  political  activist  to
       succeed, but submits that in accordance with AB and Others  (internet
       activity - state of evidence) Iran that simply having  some  internet
       activity is also not enough. This appellant had not shown  sufficient
       political profile for this Facebook activity to put him at risk,  and
       instead he would just  be  seen  by  the  Iranian  authorities  as  a
       nuisance and a ne'er-do-well.

Conclusions - Remaking

   16. I am guided by HB (Kurds) Iran with respect to the issue of  risk  on
       return  for  ethnic  Kurds  being  forcibly  returned  to  Iran.  The
       conclusions in that case are that the evidence  does  not  support  a
       contention that the discrimination that Kurds face  in  Iran  is,  in
       general, at such a level as to amount  to  persecution,  and  neither
       does the fact of being a Kurd who left illegally create a  real  risk
       of serious harm on return either. However, it is found that those  of
       Kurdish ethnicity are reasonably likely to be subjected to heightened
       scrutiny on return to Iran. Further risk factors which may lead to  a
       real  risk  of  persecution  or  Article  3  ECHR  ill-treatment  are
       summarised as: a period  of  residence  in  the  KRI;  being  a  Kurd
       involved with political activity or groups which would  include  low-
       level activities such as leafleting supporting  Kurdish  rights;  and
       Kurds involved with welfare or charitable activities on behalf of the
       Kurdish community. The Iranian authorities are  described  as  "hair-
       trigger", meaning that: "the threshold for suspicion is low  and  the
       reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme".

   17. As set out at paragraphs 81 and 82 of HB (Kurds) Iran this case  does
       not provide guidance on the potential risk for those  whose  internet
       activity/social media use may attract the adverse  attention  of  the
       authorities. When determining the appeal of HB himself, for whom this
       was put forward as an issue,  the  Upper  Tribunal  relied  upon  the
       findings in the decisions in SSH & HR (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum
       seeker) Iran CG and AB and  Others  (internet  activity  -  state  of
       evidence) Iran, that a returnee without a passport will be questioned
       and that it was routine to look  at  the  internet  profile  and  any
       Facebook of a returnee.

   18. I have preserved the findings that the appellant is a Kurd, and it is
       accepted by all that he would face return as a person who  left  Iran
       illegally so would need to apply for  an  emergency  travel  document
       from the Iranian authorities were he to be going back.

   19. I am satisfied that to the lower civil standard  of  proof  that  the
       appellant was convicted of playing loud music on a  national  day  of
       mourning in Iran in 2012; that he features  in  two  raps  posted  on
       YouTube in 2016; and that he has the claimed Facebook page  which  is
       exhibited with translations in the appellants bundle. My reasons  for
       so finding are as follows.

   20. I find that the appellant's arrest and conviction for  playing  music
       in his car  in  2012  took  place  because  he  provides  a  detailed
       description of the event at  his  asylum  interview  in  response  to
       questions 65 to 81. There is no attempt to make the incident  out  to
       be one in which he was subject to torture  or  elements  which  would
       arguably appear exaggerated. I do not find it relevant  that  he  did
       not understand the details of the day of mourning which  he  explains
       to be an Iranian Shia rather than Kurdish Sunni event, which  I  find
       is in turn consistent with the fact that he was convicted of flouting
       the rules related to this event. I find this to  be  a  matter  which
       would not of itself be likely to cause any further problems  for  the
       appellant, but that cumulatively  it  is  of  relevance  to  how  the
       Iranian authorities might view the appellant at  the  point  when  he
       applies for an emergency travel document.

   21. I also accept that the appellant features on the two raps, which were
       made in Iran but  posted  on  the  internet  in  2016  under  another
       person's name, as his name and photograph appear on them. I find that
       they are political with reference to an  executed  Kurdish  activist,
       the Kurds and to  the  establishment  of  a  greater  Kurdistan,  and
       protests about injustice in Iran today. I  find  that  the  appellant
       does not have a good recall of the lyrics however, and  that  he  has
       not shown that they will be brought up by an  internet  search  under
       his name, as that  would  have  been  very  easy  to  demonstrate  by
       printing out a relevant search engine page.  Whilst  they  have  been
       viewed by quite a large number of people this does not mean that they
       would be found by the authorities conducting routine internet profile
       searches when he applies for an emergency travel document. As such  I
       find the appellant has not shown even to  the  required  lower  civil
       standard of proof that he would have to answer questions about  them.



   22. Mr Kotas did not seek to argue that the appellant was not the  author
       of his Facebook account or that he had not posted  or  forwarded  the
       posts that are contended to be on that account and  included  in  the
       appellant's bundle. I find that it is perfectly plausible that on 4th
       January 2017 at his asylum interview the appellant did not know  much
       at all about the internet but a year later having lived in the UK  he
       was able to discover how to set up and use  a  Facebook  account.   I
       find that the appellant does own this  account,  and  has  posted  or
       reposed the items included in the bundle.

   23. I do not find that there is any evidence that the appellant does  not
       genuinely agree with the views set out in the articles he reposts  or
       agree with the demands of the demonstrations he attended in London. I
       have accepted that he made the pro-Kurdish critical  of  regime  raps
       whilst in Iran (although these were only posted on the internet  once
       he had left Iran), and I find the posts are all consistent with  that
       political position. Further at his asylum interview in 2017  he  said
       that he did not believe in the Iranian regime and regarded  it  as  a
       dictatorship and filth, and gave examples of  discrimination  against
       Kurds. It follows that when questioned  by  the  Iranian  authorities
       this appellant cannot be expected to lie about his genuine  political
       beliefs which include supporting rights for Kurds and  against  being
       against the current Iranian regime, applying  RT  (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD
       [2012] UKSC 38.

   24.  I  find  that  the  posts  include  pictures  of  the  appellant  at
       demonstrations in the UK outside  the  Iranian  Embassy  against  the
       Iranian government's detention and execution of political  prisoners.
       He has also shared posts about the  execution  and  ill-treatment  of
       Kurds and raise the issue  of  cross-border  Kurdish  porters;  about
       protests against the Iranian bombing of the Kurdish  region  and  the
       occupation by the Iranian government of "eastern Kurdistan"; posts in
       support of the Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan  (PDKI)  and  of
       the  appellant  attending  the  anniversary  of  this   party   being
       established in London;  and  posts  and  cartoons  which  called  the
       Iranian army and government terrorists and dictators, with  one  such
       post stating the Iranian government is corrupt, a  thief,  the  worst
       government on earth and a dictatorship.

   25. As set out in all of the reported cases relied upon by both parties I
       am satisfied that the  appellant  will  be  at  real  risk  of  being
       questioned about his Facebook account if he  were  to  apply  for  an
       emergency travel document and on arrival in Iran, and  also  that  he
       would  be  required  to  provide  his  Facebook  password  to   those
       authorities. I find that the material that such a search would reveal
       in this appellant's case would be very likely  to  lead  the  Iranian
       authorities to conclude that the appellant is a  low-level  supporter
       of organised Kurdish political activity and that he opposes  and  has
       no respect for the current regime in Iran.  Following the guidance in
       HB (Kurds) Iran the fact that the reposts and pictures are indicative
       of peaceful dissent, opposing human rights violations  and  attending
       peaceful demonstrations, and the fact that the appellant's  level  of
       involvement is low does not mean that the appellant will not  face  a
       real risk of persecution on return. As stated  in  the  guidance  the
       Iranian  authorities  are  "hair-trigger",  so  their  threshold  for
       suspicion is low and the reaction of the authorities is likely to  be
       extreme. I also find that  the  fact  the  appellant  already  has  a
       conviction for behaviour disrespectful to the Iranian regime,  albeit
       a minor one, will be likely to be seen as confirmatory evidence  that
       he is an opponent and increase the likely he would face a  real  risk
       of serious harm.

   26. It follows that I conclude that the appellant has shown to the  lower
       civil standard of proof that he is entitled to refugee  status  as  I
       find he has a well founded fear of persecution if  returned  to  Iran
       based on his actual and perceived political opinions, and it  follows
       that his appeal should also be allowed on Article 3 ECHR grounds  for
       the same reasons.

  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision dismissing the appeal on  asylum  and  human
       rights grounds, but preserve some of the findings as set out above.

    3. I remake the appeal  by  allowing  it  on  asylum  and  human  rights
       grounds.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm  arising
to the appellant from the contents of his protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 22nd January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A: Error of law decision

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

     . The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in October 1991.  He  arrived
       in the UK in

     . July 2016 and claimed asylum the day after he  entered  the  UK.  His
       asylum claim was refused on 10th January 2017. His appeal against the
       decision to refuse asylum was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Devittie on asylum grounds in a determination promulgated on the 15th
       March 2017.

     . Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan  on
       23rd August 2017 on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-
       tier judge had erred in law in failing to make a  decision  based  on
       the report of Dr  Joffe  with  respect  to  whether  the  appellant's
       Kurdish ethnicity enhanced his risk of serious harm  if  returned  to
       Iran as a failed asylum seeker. Permission was also  granted  on  the
       basis that it was arguable that the credibility findings of the First-
       tier Tribunal were not reliable.

     . The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In his grounds of appeal the appellant contends that  inter  alia  he
       would be at risk on return to Iran because of his illegal  exit,  his
       length of time out of Iran and his Kurdish ethnicity. The  First-tier
       Tribunal was presented with this argument along with evidence from Dr
       Joffe, a country expert, going to the issue of risks  as  a  Kurd  on
       return and failed to make a decision on this  evidence.  The  country
       guidance case of SSH and HR (Illegal  exit:  failed  asylum  seekers)
       Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 did not deal  with  whether  being  Kurdish
       exacerbated risk on return. It is submitted  that  this  is  credible
       fresh evidence not considered in the country guidance  case  and  the
       First-tier Tribunal needed to engage with this, and erred by  failing
       to do so. In  his  further  submissions  Mr  Palmer  argued  that  at
       paragraphs 14 and 15 of the decision there is insufficient  reasoning
       to deal with Dr Joffe's report, and that reliance could not simply be
       placed on what was said in SSH and HR as the Upper Tribunal  did  not
       have full relevant information on this  issue,  and  indeed  was  now
       preparing to hear a new country guidance case which will consider the
       risks on return for failed Kurdish asylum seekers.

    5. The second ground of appeal  is  that  the  reasoning  is  inadequate
       relating to credibility, and that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to
       look at all the  documentation  before  coming  to  a  conclusion  on
       credibility and so did not look at all the evidence in the round.  Mr
       Palmer added in oral submissions that  the  decision  was  flawed  in
       relation to the credibility findings in the following ways. He argued
       it was not open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that  the  history
       of military service desertion was not credible due  to  the  dilatory
       fashion in which the Iranian authorities  pursued  the  appellant  at
       paragraph 10 of the decision. Further, it was  not  correct  to  find
       that the appellant had not been arrested for illegally playing  music
       on a day reserved for national  occasions  due  to  an  inconsistency
       about whether he was arrested by the military on the basis  that  the
       appellant could have  corrected  this  at  interview  as  the  asylum
       interview record would have been read back to the him. This was not a
       factually correct position as "read-backs"  had  not  been  the  Home
       Office practice for many years. The finding that  the  appellant  was
       not credible was therefore based on an error of fact  for  which  the
       appellant was not responsible.  He also argued that the finding  that
       the appellant's  YouTube  activities  would  not  have  come  to  the
       attention of the authorities at paragraph 11 was entirely  unreasoned
       and irrational.

    6. In a Rule 24 notice the respondent argues that the treatment  of  the
       report of Dr Joffe does not mean that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
       erred in law in following the relevant country guidance case as  this
       evidence was  not  strong  enough  to  justify  departing  from  that
       guidance.   Mr Kotas added that country guidance decisions were to be
       seen as authoritative and in some instances binding, see  Adam  (Rule
       45: authoritative decisions) [2017] UKUT 370. The First-tier Tribunal
       had followed what was said in SSH and HR, and that  sufficed  in  all
       the circumstances of this case. Mr  Kotas  also  submitted  that  all
       credibility findings relating to the appellant were open to the First-
       tier Tribunal and that they could only be  overturned  if  they  were
       irrational which, in his view, they evidently they were not.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. It is accepted by the respondent and  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
       appellant is of Kurdish  ethnic  origin,  and  further  that  he  did
       service in the military in Iran, see paragraphs 3(ii) and  8  of  the
       decision.

    8. I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  erred  in  failing  to
       sufficiently consider the additional evidence  from  Professor  Joffe
       regarding risk as a Kurd if the appellant was returned to Iran or  to
       give sufficient reasons for dismissing the appeal and finding no risk
       in light of that evidence.

    9. Material on this issue was  presented  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       Firstly, attention was drawn to the evidence of Dr Kakhi  that  being
       Kurdish is a societal disadvantage and can combine with other factors
       and be a factor of exacerbating  interest  to  the  authorities,  see
       Appendix 1 to SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG
       [2016] UKUT 00308.  Secondly, this was taken further by submission of
       expert evidence from Professor Joffe in the form of a report on Kurds
       in Iran dated August 2016. This evidence  had  not  been  before  the
       Upper Tribunal in SSH and HR . The conclusion  of  Professor  Joffe's
       report with respect to risk  on  return  for  failed  Kurdish  asylum
       seekers is that that there are at "significant risk of  persecution".
       Professor Joffe is an extremely well qualified expert to provide such
       evidence and confirms his  duty  to  the  Court  in  his  report.  He
       provides extensive reasons for  his  position  which  relate  to  the
       worsening security situation in part of Iran and increasing  domestic
       tensions, and also to the difficulties  in  obtaining  laisser-passer
       documentation.

   10. In the context of this evidence the  First-tier  Tribunal  needed  to
       look at the specific arguments and evidence of Professor Joffe in the
       context of the findings in SSH and HR and provide  reasons  why  that
       evidence did not change the conclusion reached at paragraph 34 of SSH
       and HR that being Kurdish did not show a real risk  of  ill-treatment
       on return for a failed asylum seeker. This is all the more  the  case
       because at paragraphs  17  to  23   the  skeleton  argument  for  the
       appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal  sets  this  argument  out,
       identifying the key parts of the Professor  Joffe  evidence  and  why
       this made the conclusion of that the appellant was not at risk  as  a
       failed Kurdish asylum seeker untenable. It is notable that the  Upper
       Tribunal has appreciated that there is more evidence to be considered
       on the issue than was before them  in  SSH  and  HR  as  there  is  a
       forthcoming further country guidance  case  which  will  specifically
       address this issue, although this is not of course the reason  why  I
       find that this First-tier Tribunal erred in law. The error of law was
       the failure to look in some detail at the evidence of Professor Joffe
       and to explain why it took the issue no further than  the  conclusion
       reached in SSH and HR if that was their view.

   11. With respect to the other contentions of errors of law in relation to
       the credibility findings I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal
       did not err in law in finding that the  appellant  had  not  deserted
       from the Iranian military and was not at real  risk  of  any  adverse
       attention from the authorities' due to his military service.  He  had
       not provided any country of origin evidence that suggested that these
       matters were pursued in a dilatory fashion, and it was  open  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal to find that the history of long periods of  lack
       of concern and failure to take action by the authorities showed  that
       this was not credible.

   12. However, I do find that it was erroneous to find that his history  of
       arrest for playing music was not credible  due  to  an  inconsistency
       which the First-tier Tribunal found would have been identified  on  a
       read back at interview, see paragraph 10(vi) of  the  decision,  when
       such read-backs do not (any longer) take place and  thus  basing  the
       conclusion on an error of  fact  for  which  the  appellant  was  not
       responsible. I also find that the conclusion that the YouTube  videos
       would not have come to the attention of the authorities errs  in  law
       for want of reasoning. It would appear it is accepted at paragraph 11
       that the appellant made the politically motivated YouTube video.  The
       conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal on this issue is not consistent
       with the findings in AB and Others  (internet  activity  -  state  of
       evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257,  and  whilst  this  is  not  country
       guidance and thus is not authoritative or an  error  of  law  not  to
       follow the decision, it is indicative that the lack of reasoning  can
       be seen as a material error of law

   13. In these circumstances the appeal must be remade with  the  following
       parameters and in the following respects:

         . The finding that the appellant has not credibly shown himself to
           be a military service deserter and has not shown  to  the  lower
           standard of proof that he is at real risk of serious harm  as  a
           result of military service is preserved.

         . The findings that the appellant has done military service and is
           of Kurdish ethnic origin are preserved.

         . The question of the credibility of the events and whether a real
           risk of serious harm arising out of playing music on a  national
           day of mourning in approximately 2012 and being convicted of  an
           offence for this needs to be remade.

         . The question of the credibility of the appellant having  made  a
           political YouTube video and whether a real risk of serious  harm
           arises out of this, if it is found to have taken place, needs to
           be remade.

         . The question of whether the appellant is at real risk of serious
           harm if returned to Iran as a failed Kurdish asylum seeker needs
           to be remade.

  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision dismissing the appeal on  asylum  and  human
       rights grounds, but preserve some of the findings as set out above.

    3. I adjourn the remaking of the appeal.

  Directions:

    1. There will be a CMR hearing to set a date for  the  remaking  hearing
       and for any other necessary directions at the  first  available  date
       after 21st March 2018.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm  arising
to the appellant from the contents of his protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 18th October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
