
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00400/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th July 2016                             |On 8th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                                   mrs n.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Wylie promulgated on 17th May 2016 in which he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal with regard to his claims for  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and on human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on [ ] 1965.  It is
    her case that she is of the Ahmadi faith, that her family have followed
    the Ahmadi faith for generations and that her husband and two sons have
    also been active within the Ahmadi faith.  It is the  Appellant's  case
    that she has suffered persecution as a result of  being  Ahmadi  within
    Pakistan  and  that  she  fears  further  persecution  upon  return  to
    Pakistan.

 3. The appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wylie  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 5th April 2016. She accepted that  she  was  an  Ahmadi
    Muslim as were her husband and son and made specific findings  of  fact
    between paragraphs 17 and 30 of his decision which included findings in
    paragraph 20 that the Appellant  had  encountered  difficulties  within
    Pakistan including being insulted by people  in  the  street,  shouting
    derogatory names and not being served in local shops. At  paragraph  22
    she went on to find that she had been harassed by neighbours and people
    from the KN, that her hair and clothing had been pulled  and  that  her
    husband had been assaulted, that the police  had  been  contacted,  but
    that the police had refused to do anything because they  were  Ahmadis.
    At paragraph 23 the judge found that the next day, whilst the Appellant
    was at home, unknown people came to the door and threw hot water at her
    and they said they would throw acid if she  went  to  the  police.   In
    paragraph 24 the judge found that the Appellant  and  her  husband  put
    their house up for sale and tried to move from the neighbourhood.   She
    found that they found it difficult to  sell  because  neighbours  would
    tell buyers that the family were Ahmadi and the house had to be sold at
    a low price sometime in 2014.

 4. The judge went on to find at paragraph 46 that the problems suffered by
    the Appellant in Pakistan  only  amounted  to  harassment  rather  than
    persecution.  She actually went on to find specifically that he did not
    consider that  the  Appellant  would  suffer  persecution  rather  than
    harassment and went on at paragraph  54  to  find  that  following  the
    incidents in 2012 the Appellant and her family remained living  in  the
    area, the husband continued to  work  and  the  daughter  continued  to
    study.  The Appellant's son said that  the  daughter  stopped  studying
    because of money problems and that is why  she  moved  from  Sheikpura.
    The judge found there was no  suggestion  that  she  moved  because  of
    harassment directed at them as Ahmadis and her husband continued to  be
    able to live and work in Sheikpura.  The judge therefore found that the
    Appellant only suffered from harassment rather  than  persecution.   He
    therefore found that she was not entitled to asylum.  The judge further
    went on to find that although she was an Ahmadi that she would only  be
    quietly practising her faith at home and that therefore, having  regard
    to the country guidance case of MN, that she  was  not  at  risk  as  a
    result of her religion upon return.

 5.  The Appellant had sought to appeal  against  that  decision  on  three
    grounds. In the first ground  is  it  is  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge materially misdirected himself in law in respect of  her
    findings in respect of persecution as to whether or not the findings in
    respect  of  the  problems  the  Appellant  encountered   amounted   to
    persecution rather than harassment.

 6. It is next argued in Ground 2 that although the judge made reference to
    the country guidance case of MN & Others (Admadis - country  conditions
    - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389, that the judge did not go on  to
    consider if she did practice her religion  in  private  or  with  other
    Ahmadis in a restricted way, why she practised her religion  privately.
    It is argued that in her statement the Appellant did say  she  did  not
    preach outside "due to the laws"  and  because  "preaching  the  Ahmadi
    faith is a criminal offence in Pakistan".

 7. The third Ground of Appeal follows on from the second Ground of  Appeal
    and again argues that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not  actually
    fully take into  account  material  facts  as  to  ways  in  which  the
    Appellant manifested her Ahmadi faith,  in  terms  of  propagating  her
    faith and also the fact that faith requires her to propagate her  faith
    publicly; how she addressed other  Muslims  in  the  customary  way  as
    Salaam Ali Kum;  how she would describe her religious faith to  someone
    as being an Ahmadi Muslim; and she refers to the  call  for  prayer  as
    being "Azan" and that she participated in public meetings  in  the  UK.
    She argued that the  judge  did  not  fully  take  these  factors  into
    account.

 8. Permission to appeal has been granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald on 10th June 2016.  He accepted that  it  was  arguable
    that there was a  material  misdirection  in  respect  of  the  country
    guidance and failure to take account of material facts, and that it was
    arguable that the Appellant's treatment crossed over  into  persecution
    and that it was arguable that the principles in HJ (Iran)  applied  and
    were not fully considered by  the  judge.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on all grounds.

 9. I am grateful to the submissions of Mr  Sellwood  of  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant and of Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer  for
    the Respondent.  Mr Tarlow initially relied upon the Rule 24 reply  put
    in by the Respondent in which it was argued, inter-alia, that the judge
    has directed herself appropriately and the judge was entitled  to  find
    that the Appellant did not openly practise her religion in the  UK  and
    will not do so upon return and that the judge was entitled to  find  on
    the specific facts of this case the Appellant would not be at risk upon
    return.

10. However, upon reflection, he then did quite properly concede  that  the
    Rule 24 notice did not fully deal with the matters  raised  within  the
    Grounds of Appeal and the grant of  permission  to  appeal,  and  quite
    properly conceded that he would have difficulty on the findings made by
    the Learned First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  arguing  that  the  problems
    encountered by the Appellant amounted simply to harassment, rather than
    persecution, and conceded that the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge had not been properly or adequately explained in that regard  and
    that this did amount to a material error of law and the case would need
    to be remitted back in his submission to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
    hearing.

11. Again, in respect of the second and third Grounds of Appeal, Mr  Tarlow
    quite properly conceded that in that regard that although the judge had
    made reference to the country guidance case of MN & Others  (Admadis  -
    country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012]  UKUT  00039  and  quoted
    from the head note in respect  thereof  and  that  she  makes  specific
    findings at paragraphs 43 and  44  that  the  Appellant  practised  her
    religion in private  or  with  other  Ahmadis  in  the  restricted  way
    described in paragraph 2(ii) of  MN  and  had  limited  involvement  in
    worship in the Ahmadi community in the UK and prayed and practised  her
    faith at home.  He conceded again  quite  properly  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the judge had  not  gone  on  to  consider  the
    question as to why the Appellant practised her faith in this way and as
    to the reasons why she practised her religion privately.  There  is  no
    consideration seemingly within the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision
    of the contents of a statement in this regard that she did  not  preach
    outside, due to the laws, and because of the fact  that  preaching  the
    Ahmadi faith was considered to be a criminal offence.

12. In that regard, the judge has not properly considered the  reasons  why
    the Appellant was restricted in her practising of religion  and  as  to
    whether or not it was because it was considered to be against the  law,
    by analogy with the HJ (Iran).  I do further accept that  the  evidence
    of the appellant's son  in  respect  of  the  way  that  the  appellant
    manifested her faith and will want to manifest her faith again has  not
    been fully considered by the judge, as she  has  not  considered  these
    aspects of his evidence in her decision.

13. I do find following the concessions properly  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State and for the reasons set out above that the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wylie therefore  does  contain  errors  of
    law, both in terms of the judge's consideration as to the  reasons  why
    the Appellant would not openly  manifest  and  practise  her  faith  in
    Pakistan, but also in respect of the lack of  adequate  and  sufficient
    reasoning  in  respect  of  the  findings  that  the   appellant   only
    encountered harassment as opposed to persecution.  These errors of law,
    I do consider amount to material errors of law in that  they  may  well
    have affected the outcome of the decision and cannot be said  that  the
    decision will  be  the  same  irrespective  of  the  errors.   In  such
    circumstances the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wylie I do find
    does contain materials errors of law and is set aside.

14. It has been agreed by both  legal  representatives  that  although  the
    Appellant is said to lack capacity and does have  a  Litigation  Friend
    that obviously again although she has given a  statement  it  would  be
    sensible for the decision of  Judge  Wylie  to  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety and for fresh findings to be made  by  another  judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in order that the extent of the problems  that  she
    faced in Pakistan can be fully  considered  in  terms  of  whether  she
    suffered from persecution or harassment, and so  that  reasons  can  be
    given for why she would practice her faith privately upon  return.   In
    such circumstances I do set aside the entirety of the judgment of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wylie and I find that given  the  amount  of  fact-
    finding required, it is appropriate for the case to be remitted back to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Wylie.

15. The First-tier Tribunal did, given the nature of  this  case,  make  an
    anonymity direction and I further find that it  is  appropriate  for  a
    continued anonymity direction in this case.   I  therefore  direct  the
    Appellant is entitled to anonymity and that any report or transcript of
    this decision the Appellant is entitled to and  is  granted  anonymity.
    No report or transcript may refer to the Appellant or to any member  of
    her family by name or other means that may identify  her.   Failure  to
    comply with this direction may lead to contempt of court.  I  therefore
    remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-hearing  before
    any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wylie.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wylie does  contain  material
    errors of law and is set aside in its entirety;

17. I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing  before
    any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wylie.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier Tribunal  did,  given  the  nature  of  this  case,  make  an
anonymity direction and  I  further  find  that  it  is  appropriate  for  a
continued  anonymity  direction  in  this  case.   I  therefore  direct  the
Appellant is entitled to anonymity and that  any  report  or  transcript  of
this decision the Appellant is entitled to and  is  granted  anonymity.   No
report or transcript may refer to the Appellant or  to  any  member  of  her
family by name or other means that may  identify  her.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction may lead to contempt of court.



Signed                                  Date 29th July 2016

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty





