
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00993/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2016                            |On 12 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   M A I A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration Asylum
                    Practitioners Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  Respondent  (MAIA).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal, for convenience I will refer to the parties
    as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was born on 6  June  1993.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 22 June 2015  and  claimed  asylum.   The
    basis of his claim was that he was a member of the Zhehawa  Tribe  from
    Darfur in Sudan and was, as a result, at risk on return to Sudan.

 4. On 12 August 2015, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    international protection claim.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 14 March 2016,  Judge  Powell  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds.  The judge accepted that  the  appellant  was
    from a non-Arab Darfurian tribe, namely the Zhehawa  and  that  on  the
    basis of AA (non-Arab Darfuris relocation) Sudan CG [2009]  UKAIT  0056
    his claim succeeded.

 6. The Secretary of State sought, and was granted, permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The Secretary of State did not  challenge  any  of
    the judge's findings in respect of the  substance  of  the  appellant's
    claim and which led him to allow the appeal.  Instead, the Secretary of
    State relied upon the fact that the Presenting Officer at  the  hearing
    had raised the issue as to whether the individual (claiming to  be  the
    appellant) in the hearing room was in fact the person  who  had  sought
    asylum and to whom the appeal related.

 7. The appeal initially came before me on 19 July 2016.

 8. In a decision dated 20 July  2016,  I  concluded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal on  asylum
    grounds on the basis that the judge had wrongly failed to deal with the
    identity issue raised at the hearing.  The appeal could only succeed if
    the appellant was who he claimed to be.

 9. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and directed that it  be
    relisted for a resumed hearing in order that the Upper  Tribunal  could
    remake the decision.

10. It was accepted that the only issue, at that resumed hearing, would  be
    the identity of the appellant.  It was accepted that if the  individual
    pursuing the appeal was, indeed,  the  individual  who  claimed  asylum
    initially, then his appeal should be allowed on asylum grounds.  It was
    acknowledged  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had,  on   record,   the
    fingerprints of the individual who applied for asylum.  It  was  common
    ground that it would be sensible for the Secretary of State to obtain a
    report comparing the fingerprints of the asylum seeker and those of the
    individual pursuing the appeal.

11. Subsequently, the  two  sets  of  fingerprints  were  examined  and  Mr
    Richards, at the resumed hearing, informed me that they were  a  match.
    He accepted that the individual pursuing  the  appeal  was  the  asylum
    seeker and that, therefore, his identity was established and his appeal
    should be allowed on asylum grounds.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    involved the making of an error of law.  That decision  was  set  aside
    for the reasons set out in my decision dated 20 July 2016.

13. For the above reasons, I remake the decision allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds.


                                 Signed

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date



