
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00581/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th November 2017                |30th November 2017                    |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE FARRELLY OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   MR.K.S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan from Kabul. He is  of  the
       Sikh religion. He made a claim  for  protection  which  was  refused.
       Dependent upon the claim are the appellant's  wife  and  their  three
       children: aged 16, 13 and 11. The appellant's  eldest  son  here  has
       special educational needs.

    2. He said his family ran a successful wholesale  pharmacy  business  in
       Kabul and because of this they were targeted  by  Muslim,  Mr  Ghulam
       Haidar.  He demanded money by menaces. He came back a week later with
       a number of men and assaulted  the  appellant  and  his  brother  and
       father. He said he would return in two days and wanted a  substantial
       amount of money, $100,000US. Shortly after this his  father  did  not
       return home and  his  body  was  found  with  his  throat  slit.  The
       appellant believes that Mr Ghulam Haidar was responsible. As happened
       before, the police offered  no  assistance.  The  appellant  and  his
       family then decided to leave.

    3. The respondent did not find the account credible and did  not  accept
       he had a successful business given the difficulties  in  the  country
       and the position of Sikhs. The claim that the appellant's father  had
       been murdered was not accepted.

    4. The appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Hussain and  was  dismissed.
       It was accepted the appellant was from Kabul  and  was  of  the  Sikh
       religion.

    5. The judge relied upon the country guidance decision of TG and  others
       (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG 2015 UKUT 00595  to  support
       the proposition that the appellant not at risk solely on the basis of
       his religion. The judge also referred to the decision of AK  (article
       15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 which concluded there was  no
       article  15  (c)  risk.  The   judge   acknowledged   the   undoubted
       difficulties the appellant faced because of his  religion  that  each
       case was fact sensitive as  to  whether  the  treatment  amounted  to
       persecution.

    6. Unlike the respondent, the judge accepted that the appellant and  his
       father had been running a successful wholesale  business.  The  judge
       pointed out that on his own evidence they were able to raise  $80,000
       to leave the country. However, the judge did not find the account  of
       extortion and murder credible. The judge stated  that  there  was  no
       evidence about his father's death and queried why he would be  killed
       before any money was handed over. At paragraph 26 the judge suggested
       the appellant could have gathered evidence  before  the  family  left
       Afghanistan, for instance, by taking photographs of his father's body
       or obtaining a death certificate or some other record.

    7. The judge concluded that as a person of means  he  could  resume  the
       family business in Kabul and that he  could  obtain  at  least  basic
       accommodation until he re-established himself. The appellant had said
       that he had sold everything and given the  money  to  the  agent  who
       brought him to the United Kingdom. The judge did not accept he had no
       money left and found this further damaged his credibility.

    8. The appellant said in transit he had been separated from his  mother,
       younger brother and eldest son which the judge also did  not  accept,
       believing they were still  in  Afghanistan.  Regarding  his  children
       here, said found their best interests were to be with  their  parents
       in Kabul. After primary level  education  they  could  either  go  to
       government schools albeit they would have to learn the Koran or  else
       they could be educated privately. The judge said  the  appellant  had
       the means to pay for their private education.  Regarding  the  eldest
       child's special educational needs,  the  judge  took  the  view  that
       additional support would not be necessary for the  future.  This  was
       because there was  nothing  to  indicate  he  would  go  into  higher
       education  and  in  any  event,  the  family   could   make   private
       arrangements.

    9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  it  was  arguable  the
       judge failed to have adequate regard to  the  background  information
       about Sikhs in Afghanistan when considering the plausibility  of  the
       claim. Furthermore, that evidence  indicated  the  police  would  not
       provide adequate protection for Sikhs. The reference to  the  absence
       of evidence as to his father's death amounted to the judge  requiring
       corroboration.

   10. At the hearing, Mrs Cleghorn adopted the grounds on which  permission
       was granted.  She  submitted  that  as  the  owner  of  a  successful
       business, as the judge accepted, it was very likely that he would  be
       targeted for extortion. She submitted it was insensitive  to  suggest
       that the appellant could have taken a photograph of his dead  father.
       She  referred  to  the  difficulty  Sikhs  experience  in  organising
       cremation  of  their  dead  and  the  problems  over  obtaining   any
       documentation.

   11. She submitted that the agent who brought the  family  to  the  United
       Kingdom would  have  assumed  control  of  all  of  their  money  and
       controlled their movements. It was contended that  the  judge's  view
       the appellant still had funds was perverse. In  her  oral  submission
       she said that the appellant had sold his business in  order  to  fund
       the trip. He was on NASS support and his belongings would  have  been
       searched. It was also submitted that given the treatment of Sikhs  in
       Afghanistan the suggestion the family could return  and  re-establish
       themselves was not sustainable. On the same basis  it  was  submitted
       that the judge erred in concluding the children could  attend  a  fee
       paid school  on  return.  In  the  public  schools  they  would  face
       harassment and ill-treatment. Reference was made to the special needs
       of the elder child.

   12. The respondent lodged a rule  24  response  and  submitted  that  the
       grounds amounted to a disagreement with findings made that were  open
       to the judge. Mrs Pettersen submitted it made no sense on  the  claim
       for the appellant's father to be killed before the deadline  for  the
       monies to be paid over. Ms Cleghorn in response suggested it was  not
       possible to know what was in the mind of the murderers and  why  they
       killed the appellant's father before monies had been  paid  over.  If
       the claim were fabricated he could have given the  account  that  his
       father was killed later.

   13. Mrs Pettersen did acknowledge if  the  appellant's  father  had  been
       murdered it was inappropriate to suggest  the  appellant  might  have
       taken a photograph of his body to confirm this for his  later  claim.
       However, she did maintain he  could  have  sought  confirmation  from
       other sources.



Consideration

   14. The situation  in  Afghanistan  continues  to  change  with  conflict
       between various groups and there are  ongoing  issues  regarding  the
       security situation in the country. Civilians  remain  vulnerable  and
       the difficulties that Sikhs in particular face  is  well  documented.
       The decision of TG and others (Afghan Sikhs  persecuted)  Afghanistan
       CG [2015] UKUT  00595  emphasises  the  need  for  a  fact  sensitive
       evaluation as to whether individual  members  are  at  real  risk  of
       persecution. The judge accepted the appellant and his  father  ran  a
       successful wholesale business. Given  their  minority  position;  the
       hostility shown towards them because of their religion; the  attitude
       of members of the police there is force in Ms Cleghorn's  point  they
       would be natural targets for extortion. There is also  merit  in  the
       challenge to the judge's conclusion the family would be in a position
       to resume life again in Afghanistan because of family  members  there
       and undisclosed financial assets.

   15. The judge did not accept the account of the appellant's father  being
       murdered and at paragraph 26 refers to the absence  of  corroborative
       evidence. This formed part of the judge's rejection of the account of
       extortion and consequent flight. The judge materially erred in law in
       requiring corroboration and this appears to have infected the overall
       assessment of the claim.  Essentially, the judge rejected the account
       given and believed the family remained  people  of  means  who  could
       return to their  life  in  Kabul  because  of  this.  This  in  turn,
       influenced consideration of the best interests of the children.

   16. My conclusion is that the decision dismissing the appellant's  appeal
       cannot stand. The decision will have to be remade. I  had  considered
       this being dealt with in the Upper Tribunal. However it seems  likely
       that the factual issues would require exploration in such detail that
       on balance the First tier remains more appropriate. I had  considered
       retaining the finding that the family had been engaged in a wholesale
       pharmacy business and had been doing well  financially.  However,  on
       balance I would not preserve this finding. It is  tied  up  with  the
       underlying index event claimed: it may unduly tie the  hands  of  the
       judge hearing the appeal  again.  There  is  no  dispute  as  to  the
       appellant's  nationality  and  religion.  These   findings   can   be
       preserved.

Decision.

The decision of First tier Judge Hussain dismissing  the  appeal  materially
errors in law and set aside. The appeal is to be  reheard  de  novo  in  the
First tier Tribunal.


Deputy Judge Farrelly of the Upper Tribunal
10th November 2017


