
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00745/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 March 2020                     |On 05 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                  Adnan [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, instructed by F A Legal Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an unusual appeal, as can be seen by Judge  Macleman's  reasons
    for his grant of permission:

         "1.  Counsel appears to have taken an extraordinary approach:

               a) Encouraging the appellant to sack representatives who  had
                  instructed her, and to instruct other representatives;

               b) Withdrawing from representing the appellant,  and  leading
                  him to conduct his own hearing;

               c) Remaining in the hearing room to observe proceedings,  and
                  to  keep  a  note  -  plainly  with  a  view  to  resuming
                  representation, in light of -

               d) Preparing extensive grounds of appeal, submitted  with  an
                  application  in  which  the  appellant  says  he  has   no
                  solicitor or other representative.

         2.   The appellant was  unexpectedly  deprived  of  representation.
         Arguably, through no fault on his part or on the part of the judge,
         he may have been deprived of a fair hearing.

         3.   Parties are expected to refer the UT to the relevant  code  of
         conduct, and any case law."

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born in 1983.  He came to  the
    United Kingdom in February 2010.  On application, he was granted  leave
    to remain as a student, and, following extensions, that leave  was  due
    to expire on  30  November  2015.   In  December  2014  his  leave  was
    curtailed so as to expire on 6 September 2015.  Since then, he has  had
    no leave.

 3. On 16 April 2016 he was found in the United Kingdom in the company of a
    person  whose  immigration  status  was  being  investigated.   He  was
    detained and questioned.  Two months later, on 13 June 2016, he claimed
    asylum.  He was invited for an interview but failed to attend  and  his
    claim was treated as withdrawn.  He remained in the United Kingdom  and
    made further submissions on 5 September 2018  with  the  assistance  of
    solicitors, Bespoke Solicitors.  He was invited for an  interview,  and
    both he and the solicitors were given the date.  He failed  to  attend.
    The solicitors were contacted on 2  and  13  November  and  invited  to
    provide reasons for the non-attendance: they provided  no  reply.   The
    appellant's claim for  asylum  was  considered  on  the  basis  of  the
    material provided in writing, and refused on 10 January 2019.

 4. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he, like most of his family,
    supported  the  aims  of  the  MQM  in  the  elections  of   2008   and
    subsequently.  He said that he was arrested  twice,  once  in  November
    2008, when he was held overnight and released without charge after  his
    father paid a bribe, and once in May 2009  when  the  authorities  were
    looking for someone  with  the  same  surname  who  they  believed  had
    undertaken terrorist training in India.  On that occasion he was beaten
    and suffered injuries which required treatment in hospital.  He was not
    under guard in hospital and was discharged after about a week.  He came
    to the United Kingdom on his own passport.   In  2013  he  returned  to
    Pakistan for a family wedding.  He said that the  police  became  aware
    that he was in Pakistan and that a bribe was paid to enable him to pass
    through the airport to return to the United Kingdom.

 5. There is some medical evidence.  A rule 35 report provides support  for
    the appellant's account of his ill-treatment during his second  arrest.
    He has had treatment for an injured knee in the United Kingdom.   There
    is evidence of psychiatric intervention in the period up to the time of
    his most recent claim.  The diagnosis is  of  anxiety,  depression  and
    subclinical PTSD.  A letter of 25 June 2018 records  that  he  had  not
    been engaging with the therapy he was offered.  He had no plans to kill
    himself and, as his consultant put  it,  "would  rather  like  to  keep
    himself busy".   His dose of Sertraline was  increased  to  150mg  once
    daily.   The  grounds  of  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision, drafted by solicitors  and  submitted  on  25  January  2019,
    append no more recent medical evidence, and do not make  any  reference
    to any existing medical problems as a reason why the appellant's appeal
    should succeed.

 6. In preparation for the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  Bespoke
    Solicitors, still representing the appellant, took a witness  statement
    from the appellant.  It is dated 20  February  2019  and  runs  to  128
    paragraphs, setting out the appellant's  case  in  detail.   This  does
    refer to the appellant's mental health, in the following terms:

         "102.    Upon my release from detention, I have been  able  to  get
         the support I have needed for  the  problems  I  have  ignored  and
         pretended did not exist.  I am currently receiving mental treatment
         for my mental health, which has to be  managed  on  a  day  by  day
         basis.

         103. I have also spoken to the psychiatrist of  my  fears  and  how
         they affect me on a daily basis, evidence of which can be found  on
         the papers attached herewith."

 7. The only medical evidence actually attached  is  the  rule  35  report,
    dated 11 June 2016.  There, the examining doctor's conclusion  is  that
    the appellant may have been the victim of torture: there was no concern
    about suicidal intentions or  that  his  health  would  be  injuriously
    affected by continued detention or any conditions  of  detention.   The
    report contains the additional self-reported  information  that  before
    leaving  Pakistan  the  appellant  had  spent  a  period  of  time   in
    rehabilitation because he was smoking cannabis.

 8. At the hearing, the appellant was represented by counsel instructed  by
    Bespoke Solicitors.   We  shall  refer  to  counsel  as  "Ms  X".   The
    appellant attended, in order to give oral evidence.  The respondent was
    represented by a Presenting Officer, Ms M Dogra.

 9. What happened at the beginning of the hearing is recorded as follows in
    Judge Davison's decision:

         "2.  I made some general introductions and explained what was going
         to happen to the Appellant with  the  assistance  of  the  Tribunal
         interpreter.   The  Appellant  confirmed  that  he  understood  the
         interpreter and that they were speaking in Urdu.

         3.   The Appellant's representative then  made  an  application  to
         adjourn.  She stated she had only been instructed on  Saturday  the
         23 February.  She believed the  Appellant's  bundle  was  "woefully
         inadequate" and in her opinion having tried  to  take  instructions
         from the Appellant he required a psychiatric report or  assessment.
         Although she did indicate her Urdu  was  not  particularly  fluent.
         She indicated she  may,  given  more  time,  be  able  to  get  the
         Appellant to change representatives and the state of  readiness  of
         the appeal was not the Appellant's fault.  The Home Office  opposed
         the application highlighting that a detailed witness statement  had
         been recently taken and provided  and  there  was  nothing  in  the
         medical evidence provided to state that the Appellant was  not  fit
         to give  evidence.   The  latest  medical  evidence  (at  page  43)
         indicated that the Appellant had anxiety and depression.

         4.   I refused the application to adjourn but stood the matter down
         to  give  the  Appellant's  representative  more   time   to   take
         instructions.

         5.   When the hearing was resumed the application  to  adjourn  was
         renewed.  The Representative stated, although she is not  medically
         qualified, in her opinion the need for  a  psychiatric  report  was
         "imperative".  She stated that chambers works with many doctors and
         "we could give an undertaking for a 6 - 8  week  turnaround".   She
         stated that without the adjournment the Appellant would not  get  a
         fair hearing and so she would withdraw from the appeal but  sit  at
         the back of the Tribunal to take note.

         6.   I asked about the witness statement and it  was  confirmed  by
         [Ms X] that  those  instructed  had  managed  to  obtain  all  this
         evidence in a one hour conference with the Appellant  utilising  an
         interpreter.  I found it to be of note that the  witness  statement
         was, substantively, 10 pages long and quite detailed (pages 2-12 of
         the Appellant's bundle).  The fact that this much  information  was
         gathered in such detail from the Appellant in such a  short  period
         of  time  did  not  suggest  issues  with  giving  instructions  or
         understanding questions posed of him.

         7.   I asked why those  instructed  had  not  sought  to  obtain  a
         psychiatric  report,  the  response  was  the  solicitors  believed
         "medical evidence would not assist the situation".

         8.   Ms Dogra for the Respondent again opposed the application.

         9.   I asked the Appellant's representative why she would  withdraw
         from  representing  the  Appellant  if  she  was  not   given   the
         adjournment she sought.  I was informed "it would be unfair without
         a psychiatric report and so I would withdraw.  It would  be  unfair
         so I cannot be part of that".  I indicated that  it  appeared  that
         [Ms X] was seeking to bind the hands of  the  Tribunal  by  stating
         either adjourn or I will withdraw.   She  then  stated  "I  made  a
         mistake  in  saying  I  would  leave   if   the   adjournment   was
         unsuccessful".

         10.  I decided to adjourn, I had in mind the  decision  of  Nwaigwe
         (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  Fairness is  what
         is required in assessing whether to adjourn.

         11.  The Appellant had produced a very detailed statement with  the
         assistance of an interpreter shortly before his hearing.  [Ms X] is
         not medically qualified and stated that her Urdu  was  not  fluent.
         The medical evidence produced did not  suggest  the  Appellant  was
         unfit to give evidence,  his  own  instructed  solicitors  did  not
         appear to believe his medical issues were  of  concern.   With  the
         overriding objective and "fairness" in mind I proceeded to hear the
         appeal.  I kept in mind that the position  may  change  during  the
         course of the hearing, but nothing happened during  the  course  of
         evidence or submissions that gave me any cause for concern.

         12.  Upon announcing my decision on this preliminary matter [Ms  X]
         elected to withdraw from the appeal and take a note from  the  back
         of the Tribunal as she had earlier indicated  she  would.  Although
         within her rights to do this I found this to be a strange decision.
          On  her  account  the  Appellant  is  so  vulnerable  that  it  is
         "imperative" that a psychiatric  report  be  obtained  and  in  the
         absence of one it would not be possible to have a  "fair"  hearing,
         yet  she  chose  to  withdraw  her  services  from  the  Appellant.
         However, this is the decision she elected to make,  she  played  no
         further part in the proceedings"

10. The appeal file contains a full note by the judge  of  the  submissions
    made to him by Ms X and Ms Dogra.   In  addition  to  what  is  in  the
    decision it records two final exchanges, in which Ms X  confirmed  that
    she had not sought to discover why the appellant had not  attended  his
    interview, and that she was unable to say why, at this stage, an asylum
    interview would assist: her final submission was that whether  such  an
    interview  would  assist  was  "a  secondary  question  and   maybe   a
    psychiatric report would assist the Tribunal".

11. The adjournment having been refused, the judge proceeded  to  hear  the
    appeal.   Paragraph  13  of  his  decision   is   headed   "Checks   on
    Vulnerability" and is as follows:

         "13. At the outset of the hearing I indicated to the Appellant that
         I was aware of his medical history and if he needed a break or  was
         at any point confused about the proceedings he should bring this to
         my attention.  During the course of the hearing at no point  did  I
         feel as if the Appellant was either confused or unaware of what was
         going on.  He answered all the questions  asked  of  him  directly.
         Sometimes further clarification was needed,  but  he  provided  the
         same.  After he had been  cross  examined  for  a  little  while  I
         offered him a break which he took.  He came back after  10  minutes
         and confirmed he was content to proceed.  When the  Respondent  was
         making submissions I invited him to take a note of  any  points  he
         disagreed with.  He did this and gave submissions in rebuttal which
         made perfect sense."

12. Paragraphs 16 and 20 are as follows:

         "16.  As  the  Appellant  was  now  representing  himself  I  again
         explained the process to him.  I reassured him that if he  did  not
         know the answer to a question he could just say that.  I  took  him
         to his witness statement, he confirmed that he recalled making  the
         same and that it did set out all the reasons  why  he  was  seeking
         asylum.  He confirmed that he was on medication, but  that  he  was
         happy to be asked questions.  I stated if that  changed  he  should
         let me know.

         ...

         20.  At the end I asked the Appellant is there anything further  he
         wished to add, he  stated  no.   He  also  confirmed  that  he  had
         understood the interpreter.  I had  not  noticed  any  issues  with
         interpretation and  none  were  brought  to  my  attention  by  the
         Appellant or the Tribunal interpreter  during  the  course  of  the
         proceedings."

13. The judge's decision contains an analysis of the evidence  before  him.
    He accepted that the appellant supported the aims  of  MQM,  but  noted
    that in that respect he was no different  from  other  members  of  his
    family, who "live and work in Karachi without apparent difficulty".  He
    accepted that the appellant had been detained twice.  The first, in the
    judge's view, was attributable to nothing  more  than  that  those  who
    arrested him were able to obtain a bribe for his release; on the second
    occasion there was an explanation for  the  arrest,  (the  police  were
    looking  for  a  terrorist  of  the  same  name)  and  the  appellant's
    subsequent release demonstrated that he was  not  of  interest  to  the
    authorities.  He regarded the appellant's assertion that his father was
    able to discover every time a warrant was about to be executed  against
    him as he moved around the country as implausible and  incredible.   He
    did not accept that the appellant was of interest during his  visit  to
    Pakistan in 2013; in particular he did not accept that he had  come  to
    be of risk because a family member had reported him to the police as an
    MQM supporter now in the country, because again  that  would  apply  to
    many other members of his family.

14. The judge sums up his decision on the asylum claim as follows:

         "30. In summary  whilst  I  accept  that  the  Appellant  has  some
         sympathies with the aims of MQM and  whilst  he  has  unfortunately
         been detained on two occasions by the  authorities  in  Pakistan  I
         find he would not be of any interest to them should he be returned.
          I find he has never been charged and it  is  highly  unlikely  any
         record of these detentions even exists, if such a record does exist
         it  clearly  does  not  indicate  anything  of  an  adverse  nature
         otherwise  the  Appellant  would  have  been  identified  upon  his
         departure, return (or subsequent exit) from the country."

15. The judge went on to deal with the medical evidence.  He refers to  the
    various reports, including the rule 35 report.  His conclusions on  the
    human rights grounds are as follows:

         "33. ... I do not find the Appellant's health condition  to  be  so
         severe that the threshold of Article 3 or 8 is  met.   The  Country
         information cited by the  Respondent  in  paragraphs  33ff  of  the
         refusal does not paint a glowing picture of mental health  services
         in Pakistan, but it notes "Medication can  be  bought  easily"  and
         "anti  depressant  drugs"  including  Sertraline   are   available.
         Further,  it  notes  there  are  5  mental  health  hospital,   344
         residential care facilities  and  654  psychiatric  units.   Having
         balanced the nature of the Appellant's mental health issues and the
         treatment he receives, with the services available in Pakistan I do
         not find the threshold of Article 3 or 8 is met.

         34.  Apart from the mention of an Uncle in the Rule 35 report there
         is no mention of family, a partner or children in the UK.   I  find
         the Appellant does not have a family life in the UK.

         35.  The Appellant came to the UK in 2010 as  a  student,  for  the
         majority of the last 9 years he has been in the UK and  I  find  he
         will have developed some private life over  this  period  of  time.
         However, he is a long way short of the 20 years required under  the
         Rules to found a claim.  I do not find that removing him  from  the
         UK would disproportionately interfere with his  private  life.   He
         has studied in the UK and these studies would be of  assistance  to
         him in re establishing  himself  in  Pakistan.   He  has  extensive
         family  members  in  Karachi,  including  his  parents.   The  vast
         majority of them are MQM supporters.  Should the Appellant wish  to
         continue with his support I find he would be  able  to  do  so  and
         there would be no restrictions on his private life  any  more  than
         there is on his family members.  The medication  he  is  taking  is
         available in Pakistan.  There  is  nothing  exceptional  about  his
         appeal that would merit a grant of leave outside the Rules."

16. Thus, the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.

17. The grounds of appeal against that decision  were,  as  Judge  Macleman
    noted, drafted by Ms X.  When submitted to the First-tier Tribunal, the
    appellant was still represented by Bespoke Solicitors, so  the  comment
    that they were prepared in circumstances in which the appellant claimed
    to  have  no  representative  is,  to  that  extent  only,   incorrect.
    Following refusal of permission by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  however,
    the grounds were redrafted to include a reference to that refusal.  The
    redrafted grounds are again signed by Ms X.  They were submitted by the
    appellant purportedly acting in person, on 7 May 2019.  The grounds  in
    summary are that the determination  is  vitiated  by  "(1)  failure  to
    adjourn; (2) failing to correctly apply 339K of the Immigration  Rules;
    and (3) failing to correctly consider article 3 (risk of suicide).  The
    submissions relating to the first ground begin as follows:

         "6.  It is respectfully submitted that the learned FtTJ  fell  into
         procedural  irregularity  by  failing  to  adjourn  to  allow   the
         Appellant to obtain psychiatric evidence.   This  was  despite  two
         applications made by Counsel, who further had to withdraw from  the
         hearing due to the unfair nature of the hearing, and concerns  over
         the appellant's ability to give reliable evidence.  It  is  further
         submitted that refusal to adjourn impeded the  Appellant's  ability
         to sufficiently discharge the burden of  proof  on  his  standalone
         article 3 claim."

    There  follow  references  to  Ngaigwe  [2014]  UKUT  418   (IAC),   SH
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284,  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note (1 of 2014), and R v Kingston  upon  Thames  JJ  ex  parte  Martin
    [1994] Imm AR172.   In each case extracts are set out,  sometimes  with
    underlining, but  without  any  reference  to  the  way  in  which  the
    principles to which the grounds allude might  have  reference  to  what
    actually happened in the present appeal.  This ground concludes:

         "It is submitted that in  not  granting  the  adjournment,  despite
         Counsel's application and the medical evidence at Page  43  of  the
         Appellant's bundle stating that the Appellant  was  suffering  from
         anxiety and depression, the learned FtTJ has fallen  into  material
         procedural and legal error."

18. In relation to ground 2, the grounds assert that the judge  "failed  to
    take into account a key tenet to the asylum law in the United Kingdom",
    and "fell into a grave material error of law".   The error asserted  is
    as follows.  The judge should have appreciated that the persecution the
    appellant had already  suffered  would  be  repeated  if  he  returned.
    Paragraph  339K  and  article  4   of   the   Qualification   Directive
    (2004/83/EC) were to that effect.  The second arrest went some  way  to
    show the risk of further persecution.

19. In relation to ground 3 and article 3, the grounds set  out  references
    to J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and Y (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 362, again without any reference to the actual facts of  the  case,
    but under the heading of an assertion that the  appellant's  article  3
    claim was insufficiently  and  incorrectly  considered,  and  that  the
    learned judge "may have fallen into this error  partially  due  to  the
    previous  error  of  declining  to  adjourn  for   further   and   more
    comprehensive medical evidence from  a  consultant  psychiatrist".   In
    ground 3 Ms X also points out that it is possible to be  successful  on
    an article 3 claim whilst unsuccessful on an asylum claim and  that  it
    was "a grave material error of law to not consider article 3 within its
    full and proper legal framework".

20. The grounds are not accompanied by any further evidence, nor has  there
    at any stage been any application to adduce further evidence.

21. At the hearing before us, the appellant was represented by  F  A  Legal
    Solicitors.  In view of the history of this case,  it  is  particularly
    unfortunate that those solicitors had  failed  to  provide  any  proper
    notification that they were acting.   There  was  an  email  from  what
    appeared to be the private email address of a member of the  firm,  but
    the solicitors had not gone on  record  in  the  way  required  by  the
    procedure rules.  We had to adjourn for a short period of time in order
    to enable Mr Aslam to confirm that  he  was  properly  instructed.   Mr
    Aslam did not seek to defend Ms X's conduct.  He did not seek  to  call
    her as a witness.  He was unable to explain the basis  upon  which  she
    had drafted grounds to support an application made by an  unrepresented
    appellant.  The best he could do was to say that the appellant had been
    "certainly prejudiced" by Ms X's conduct.  He did not argue under  this
    ground that the judge had been at fault in any way.

22. Turning to the substantive grounds, Mr Aslam based his  submissions  on
    the fact that the appellant  had  been  arrested  twice.   The  country
    evidence  showed  that  there  were  "arbitrary"  arrests.   There  was
    material on which the judge  could  have  found  that  the  appellant's
    difficulties arose from his being an MQM supporter: the judge had erred
    by failing to take into account the country evidence  relating  to  the
    risk to such individuals.  In relation to article 3,  Mr  Aslam  simply
    accepted that the matter was not raised in the grounds of appeal to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

23.  Mr  Deller  submitted  on  ground  1  that  a  hearing  could  not  be
    automatically regarded as unfair because a  representative  refused  to
    take part.   The  judge  had  decided  that  there  was  no  basis  for
    adjournment, and then proceeded appropriately during the  hearing.   In
    doing so he had taken into account not only the application made by  Ms
    X but the Home Office's opposition to it.  In order to succeed on  this
    ground, Mr Aslam would have to  show  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    perverse.  So far as concerns ground 2, Mr Deller's submission was that
    paragraph 339K, on which the grounds were based,  had  no  application.
    The grounds ignored the fact that the judge had found, on the evidence,
    that neither of the appellant's arrests had any link  to  a  Convention
    reason.  To that extent the ill-treatment was not  "persecution".    So
    far as concerns suicide risk, the medical evidence had been taken  into
    account.   There was nothing suggesting an enhanced  risk  of  suicide.
    There was nothing in the original grounds of appeal that ought to  have
    caused the judge to  take  this  into  account.   So,  in  Mr  Deller's
    submission, there was no unfairness, no issue under paragraph 339K, and
    no error in the failure to deal with a  risk  of  suicide.   Mr  Deller
    concluded his submissions by saying that "really, there  is  no  reason
    for a representative to take no active part and then complain".

24. Mr Aslam made no submissions in reply.

25. Judge Davison was faced with a member of the bar who had taken it  upon
    herself, despite having no known psychiatric qualification  and  having
    difficulty in communicating with the appellant because of  her  limited
    competence in Urdu, to decide not merely that the  appellant  ought  to
    have a further opportunity to provide  a  substantive  account  of  his
    claim, but also that he suffered from a mental disorder preventing  him
    from having a fair hearing at the time fixed for it and on the evidence
    then available.  There was  no  material  supporting  either  of  those
    assertions.  The appellant had had many years to give his  own  account
    of his case to the Secretary of State if he wished to  do  so:  he  had
    given a full account of his case to his  solicitors  only  a  few  days
    previously.  His solicitors had represented him for several years,  and
    had not raised the issues now raised by counsel.  He  had  had  medical
    attention for many months, and nobody  had  previously  suggested  what
    counsel was now suggesting.

26. It is not easy to see any proper basis upon which the judge could  have
    granted the adjournment Ms X sought.   There  was  no  good  reason  to
    suppose that her view was to be preferred to those of the professionals
    who had represented, and who had looked after, the  appellant:  as  she
    acknowledged, she herself had been acquainted with  the  appellant  and
    his case for only two days.  The lack of substance in Ms X's submission
    is underlined by the fact that neither at  the  time  when  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal were submitted, nor subsequently, has
    there been any suggestion that  the  appellant's  mental  condition  is
    other than that portrayed by the  documents  available  to  the  judge,
    indicating anxiety and depression, apparently controlled by drugs,  and
    no more serious condition needing attention.

27. The authorities cited by  Ms  X  in  her  grounds  do  not  assist  the
    appellant.  Ngaigwe emphasises that the crucial question is whether the
    judge's decision on the adjournment request deprived the appellant of a
    fair hearing.  That case cites SH (Afghanistan),  which  dealt  with  a
    very different situation where, first, the application was in  relation
    to specific evidence which would have enabled the appellant to show  by
    positive evidence that the case against him was wrong,  and,  secondly,
    where the appeal  was  supported  by  production  of  the  evidence  in
    question, which had not been available to the First-tier Tribunal judge
    who had  refused  the  adjournment.   The  paragraphs  cited  from  the
    Presidential Guidance Note are 8(c) and 9.   Paragraph  8(c)  indicates
    that one of the factors weighing in favour of an adjournment even at  a
    late stage is:

         "Where further time is needed  because  of  a  delay  in  obtaining
         evidence which is outside the parties' control, for example,  where
         an expert witness fails to  provide  a  report  within  the  period
         expected."

    Paragraph 9 reads as follows:

         "9.  The following factors, where relevant, may weigh  against  the
         granting of an adjournment.

               a) The application to adjourn is not  made  at  the  earliest
                  opportunity.

               b) The application is speculative, such as,  for  example,  a
                  request for time for lodging further evidence where  there
                  is no reasonable  basis  to  presume  that  such  evidence
                  exists or could be produced within a reasonable period.

               c) The application does not show that anything material would
                  be achieved by the delay, for example, where an  appellant
                  wants more time to instruct  a  legal  representative  but
                  there is no evidence that funds or legal aid is available.

               d) The application  does  not  explain  how  the  reason  for
                  seeking an  adjournment  is  material  to  the  case,  for
                  example, where there is a desire to seek further  evidence
                  but this evidence does not appear to be  material  to  the
                  issues to be decided.

               e) The application seeks more time to prepare the appeal when
                  adequate  time  has   already   been   given.    In   such
                  circumstances, the Tribunal may take into consideration  a
                  failure to comply with directions.  However, a failure  to
                  comply with directions will not be sufficient of itself to
                  refuse an adjournment."

28. In the context of  this  case,  paragraph  8(c)  does  not  assist  the
    appellant,  and,  bearing  in  mind  the  speculative  nature  of   the
    application and the appellant's history, point against the granting  of
    an adjournment.

29. Neither the law nor the material placed before the judge by Ms X (which
    consisted, in reality, solely of her own assertions) provide any reason
    at all for a conclusion that the judge was not  entitled  to  take  the
    decision he did, which was that an adjournment should not  be  granted.
    Following his refusal of an adjournment he  took  all  the  appropriate
    steps to ensure that the appellant had a proper opportunity to tell his
    story and although Ms X was  observing  the  proceedings  she  did  not
    assert in her grounds that the hearing that  actually  took  place  was
    not, in the end, an entirely fair one.   In  reality  her  grounds  are
    limited to saying that because  her  application  did  not  succeed  it
    follows necessarily that the hearing was not fair.  That  position  is,
    in our view, wholly untenable.  We reject ground 1.

30. So far as concerns ground 2, it was for  the  judge  to  determine  the
    facts on the basis of the evidence placed before him.  He did that.  We
    agree with  Mr  Deller  that  paragraph  339K  did  not  apply  if  the
    appellant's ill treatment was not the result of, or motivated  by,  his
    support of MQM.  The judge's treatment of the evidence  before  him  is
    not the subject of any specific ground of appeal, nor could it be.  The
    evidence adduced by the appellant, both in the calm of his  solicitor's
    office and in the hearing, was wholly insufficient to demonstrate  that
    he had a well-founded fear of persecution.

31. So far as concerns the ground based on article 3, the position  is,  as
    Mr Deller pointed out and as Mr Aslam had already  accepted,  that  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  respondent's
    decision, prepared  professionally  and  by  solicitors  who  had  been
    acquainted for a considerable time with the appellant's  case,  do  not
    raise that argument.  We doubt whether, in the circumstances, it can be
    regarded as 'Robinson obvious': there might have  been  some  room  for
    complaint if the medical evidence before the judge had  raised  matters
    which needed inquiry, but it did not.  The judge  dealt  properly  with
    the  medical  evidence,  noting  the  appellant's  conditions  and  his
    requirements, and reaching legitimate conclusions about their impact on
    the appellant's removability.

32. For the foregoing reasons we dismiss this appeal.

33. Ms X's conduct, both  during  and  after  the  appeal  hearing,  raises
    considerable ground for concern.  We cannot see any  basis  for  saying
    that counsel was entitled to treat herself as the decision-making  body
    on the question whether an  adjournment  should  be  granted.   As  the
    servant of justice she was obliged  to  ameliorate  any  unfairness  or
    injustice she thought might happen, by presenting the appellant's case.
     Whether or not she was entitled to suggest, as  she  appears  to  have
    done, that the appellant should dispense with the services of his  firm
    of solicitors, is a matter to which attention may need to be  given  by
    others.

34. The grounds of appeal that she drafted raise further cause for concern.
     First, there is the question of the professional capacity in which she
    was acting on 6 May, when the renewed  grounds  were  signed  and  were
    apparently made available to the appellant who was  acting  in  person.
    Secondly, the very fact that they  raised  what  is  described  as  the
    "stand alone article 3 claim" emphasises the very serious nature of  Ms
    X's conduct at the hearing.  It appears that she thought that there was
    such a claim, although she must have been aware that it was not  raised
    in the grounds.  Yet she did  not  seek,  at  any  stage,  to  seek  an
    amendment of the grounds to ensure that the  judge  took  into  account
    this claim, not previously made.  That cannot be characterised as other
    than a breach of her duty both to the Tribunal and  to  the  appellant.
    Although we have decided that there was no  evidence  to  support  that
    claim anyway, that is not to the point: if she thought the judge should
    have been dealing with that point she should have sought to  amend  the
    grounds.

35. It is further of concern that the grounds as  presented  fail  to  deal
    with the case.  As we have pointed out,  ground  1  entirely  fails  to
    explain the basis upon which it could properly be said either that  the
    judge should have  granted  the  adjournment  or  that  the  subsequent
    hearing bore any marks of unfairness.   Ground  2  simply  ignores  the
    judge's findings and seeks, without even expressing any basis for doing
    so, to reargue the case on the evidence; ground 3 wholly  ignores  both
    the evidence and the procedural aspects of the case.  These grounds  of
    appeal ought not to have been presented by any competent member of  the
    bar.

36. Ms X's conduct  has,  for  no  discernible  good  reason,  considerably
    delayed the resolution of the  appellant's  case.   It  raises  concern
    about her performance of her professional duties.   Those  matters  are
    not primarily for us, but for the Bar Standards Board.  So far  as  the
    appeal is concerned, for the reasons we have given, we dismiss it.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                            Date: 7 May 2020
