
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00187/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2021                  |On 10 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     M P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi, Counsel, instructed by French & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 10 March 2020 of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Law which refused the asylum and human rights claim
    brought by the appellant.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania and was born in 1991.  She  came
    to the UK on 8 February  2016,  claiming  asylum  on  arrival.   On  23
    October 2018 the National Referral Mechanism (NRM) found that  she  had
    been a victim of trafficking.   On  27  December  2018  the  respondent
    refused her asylum and human rights claim.

 3. The appellant appealed against the refusal and in a decision issued  on
    21 May 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox refused her  appeal  on  all
    grounds.  However, in a decision dated 13 September 2019, Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chamberlain found an error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal such that it had to be set aside to be  re-made  de
    novo.  The appeal therefore came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Law
    on 28 February 2020 with  the  decision  refusing  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds following on 10 March 2020.  Permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted on 11 August 2020.

 4. The appellant's asylum claim maintained that after she married she went
    to live with her husband's family and had a baby on 18 August 2011.  In
    the same year her husband left and she has not  known  his  whereabouts
    since then. The appellant remained living  with  her  husband's  family
    until 2015.  In 2015 she met a man, M, on a bus.  This man  gained  her
    trust and she agreed to travel to Italy with him and her  child.   Once
    in Italy she was forced by M to work  as  a  prostitute.   An  Albanian
    client eventually agreed to help her leave and she travelled  via  Rome
    to Gran Canaria from where she flew to the UK on 8 February 2016.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal set out the basis  of  the  appellant's  appeal
    paragraph 11 of the decision:

         "11. The appellant adopted her witness statement dated 5 March 2019
             and was tended for cross-examination.  I note from paragraph 6
             of her statement that the appellant does not believe that  the
             police in Albania could protect her from M as they are corrupt
             and M is a very powerful businessman.  She also says that  she
             fears her brother will  want  to  find  her  and  take  action
             against her for the dishonour she has brought to  her  family.
             She says that she would not feel safe in a shelter  and  would
             be without any support if she had to return to  Albania.   Her
             brother could find her as Albania is a very small country  and
             she would have to  travel  to  her  home  area  to  obtain  ID
             documents in order to register elsewhere.  Employers would not
             want to give her a job once they discovered she was  a  single
             mother with a young child.  She says that  she  had  not  been
             able to describe her medical condition  during  the  screening
             interview as she had only just arrived in the UK and  not  yet
             seen a doctor to discuss her  symptoms;  she  had  since  been
             prescribed  anti-depressant  medication   and   had   attended
             counselling sessions, but those sessions had  now  stopped  as
             funding for an interpreter was not currently  available.   She
             says that having attended school in [K] her family then  moved
             to [D] where she worked as a seamstress and she lived  in  [M]
             with her husband which was half an hour's drive from [K].  The
             family now lived in various parts of Albania,  ([M],  [L]  and
             [K]) and her youngest brother who  she  feared  the  most  was
             living in Tirana with his wife and children  as  explained  in
             her Home Office interview."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted in paragraph  24  of  her  decision
    that the respondent accepted that the appellant had been  a  victim  of
    trafficking and had a subjective fear  of  mistreatment  on  return  to
    Albania.  The judge identified in that paragraph:

         "There  are  outstanding  issues  about  whether   that   fear   is
         objectively well-founded both in her home area and in the  rest  of
         Albania, and whether, if there is  a  part  of  Albania  where  the
         appellant would be safe, it would be reasonable  for  her  and  her
         child to go there."

 7. In paragraphs 25 to  30  of  the  decision  the  judge  considered  the
    evidence on the appellant's mental health.  She had  been  referred  by
    her GP for counselling and, at various times during her period of  stay
    in the UK, had been on anti-depressants.  At the time  of  the  hearing
    she was awaiting assessment  and  counselling  from  Nottingham  Sexual
    Violence Support Services (NSVSS).  The judge  concluded  in  paragraph
    30:

         "30. There is  no  psychiatric  report  in  this  case,  but  based
             primarily on the GP's letter I am satisfied that the appellant
             suffers  from  depressed  mood  and  is  being  treated   with
             sertraline.  She  has  been  assessed  as  someone  who  might
             benefit from counselling, but that has not  yet  taken  place,
             through no fault of hers."

 8. In paragraph 34 the judge accepted that the undisputed facts before her
    were that the appellant would not be able to live with her  own  family
    or with her husband's family on return.  The  crux  of  the  case  was,
    therefore, whether it was reasonable to expect the appellant to  access
    sufficient  protection  on  return  in  a  shelter   for   victims   of
    trafficking.

 9. The judge went on in paragraphs  31  to  37  to  consider  the  country
    guidance case of TD and AD (trafficked women) (Albania) CG [2016]  UKUT
    0092 (IAC) and set out the  submissions  made  for  the  appellant  and
    respondent.

10. In paragraph 39 the judge made the following  findings  concerning  the
    appellant's mental state and how this would impact on her on return  to
    Albania:

         "39. There is no psychiatric evidence in this case to suggest  that
             the appellant's health would deteriorate on return.  While she
             was diagnosed by her GP  as  being  depressed  and  prescribed
             medication accordingly, it is also clear from his letter  that
             the appellant has been able to  come  off  the  medication  at
             times.  She has also been attending College at some stage.   I
             am without expert evidence as to the cause of her  depression,
             whether it is caused solely  by  her  sexual  exploitation  or
             whether it is  also  attributable  to  the  uncertainty  which
             asylum seekers face while their claim is being considered;  in
             this case, the appellant still  faces  the  uncertainty  which
             began when she claimed asylum almost four years ago.   I  find
             that the appellant's depressed moods do not result in physical
             symptoms and that it has not  been  shown  that  she  requires
             counselling; however, it would be available on return  as  the
             current language barrier would not be a problem."

11. In paragraphs 40 to 42 the judged considered the degree of  seriousness
    of the mental state of the appellants in TD and AD,  reminding  herself
    that each case had to be considered on its merits. The judge  concluded
    in paragraph 43 that the appellant would be able to return to a shelter
    for trafficked women for up to two years or possibly more.   She  would
    be without family support but would have basic  day-to-day  assistance.
    It was likely that she would have access to counselling  and  would  be
    offered vocational training. Nothing suggested she would be  unable  to
    access that support or work because of her mental health  problems  The
    judge concluded that the appellant would access counselling as she  had
    expressed a wish to do so  whilst  in  the  UK.   The  judge  found  in
    paragraph 44 that the appellant's anti-depressant would be available to
    her in Albania as would other medical care and would receive assistance
    to pay her rent after leaving the shelter.

12. The judge addressed the risk from M and  the  appellant's  brothers  in
    paragraph 45 of the decision.  The judge found:

         "45. I am not satisfied that the appellant would be at risk from re-
             trafficking by  M  since  she  does  not  believe  him  to  be
             connected to the police or politics and it is not likely  that
             "a construction  businessman"  would  have  sufficient  inside
             knowledge to be able to access registration  records  or  find
             out  from  others  that  she  had  returned  to  Albania   and
             registered.  Likewise, I am not satisfied that she would be at
             risk from her family; she said that her youngest brother  whom
             she fears is not connected to the police or politics  and  the
             only occupation she knows about for him is working in a  caf�.
             She has never suggested that she is at risk from her estranged
             husband's family.  There is the possibility of  re-trafficking
             by a different person, but her age means that she  is  not  in
             the target group and I am not satisfied that re-trafficking is
             reasonably likely in her circumstances."

13. The judge therefore concluded that the appellant was  not  at  risk  on
    return from her family or M and would be able to access sufficiency  of
    protection in a shelter and that it was reasonable for her to do so.

14. The first ground, set out in paragraphs 2 to 5 of the written  grounds,
    contends that the judge did not "give due weight to the evidence of the
    Appellant's mental health".  The letter from NSVSS  dated  20  February
    2020 showed that the appellant needed  specialist  counselling  as  her
    needs were "too complex" for more  mainstream  counselling.   A  letter
    from Let's Talk Well Being dated 4 October 2019 also set out  that  the
    appellant's treatment plan was for "specialist long term  counselling".



15. It is not my  view  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  assess
    correctly the appellant's evidence concerning her  mental  health.  The
    judge accepted that the appellant had mental health problems and  noted
    that she had been referred for counselling; see paragraphs 30,  39,  43
    and 44.  She was entitled to find that there was no formal  psychiatric
    evidence or detail of the reasons for the appellant's  difficulties  or
    any evidence suggesting that her condition would deteriorate on  return
    to Albania; see paragraphs 30, 39 and 43.  There  is  no  dispute  that
    appropriate medication would be available, as found in paragraph 44.

16. Further, the country material showed that  specialist  counselling  for
    victims of trafficking was available in the shelters and after  leaving
    the shelters. The US Department of State 2019  Trafficking  in  Persons
    Report: Albania (USDSR) indicated that the shelters provided a  variety
    of support including medical care,  free  healthcare  and  counselling.
    The  report  indicates  on  page  4  of  6  that  "observers   reported
    professional  staff  and  good  quality  of  care  at  shelters".   The
    respondent's Country Policy and Information Note (CPIN) Albania: People
    Trafficking dated March 2019 indicates in paragraph 2.4.11:

         "Victims of trafficking are provided  with  free  healthcare;  this
         includes mental healthcare outside shelters.  In addition, shelters
         usually  have  a  psychiatrist.   The  HO  FFT  were  told  by  one
         interlocutor that there are few opportunities for long-term  mental
         health support but by another that a greater level of psycho-social
         support is offered to those  leaving  shelters  and  that  this  is
         provided for as long as it is needed."

    Paragraph 11.5.1 sets out that:

         "Every person who approaches the shelters is subject  to  a  mental
         health assessment and a report is produced.  Depending on the level
         of treatment required and severity, it can be dealt with in  either
         the shelter or the person can be sent to a specific centre.

         The director of the NRCVHT spoke of a specific example of a  person
         who had  mental  health  issues,  and  they  have  been  undergoing
         treatment in the centre for two years now.

         Normally, the shelters are equipped with a psychiatrist."

    The report goes on in paragraph 11.5.1 to state:

         "The head of mental health  and  addictology  at  the  Ministry  of
         Health said psycho-social support is offered to people who come out
         of shelters, they will get more support than others and there is no
         time limit on how long they are monitored in  the  community  -  it
         depends on the diagnosis."

17. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  therefore  that  the
    appellant would be offered specialist  counselling  on  return  for  an
    extended period of time and that she  would  be  able  to  access  that
    support. On that basis, it was open to the  judge  to  find  that  this
    aspect of the evidence indicated that the appellant could  be  expected
    to return and access the support provided in  the  system  of  shelters
    that had been established for trafficked women in  Albania.  Given  the
    clear acceptance of the appellant's mental health  problems,  including
    the referral for counselling and the examination  of  the  evidence  on
    whether she could access treatment on return, it is odd that the  judge
    stated in the final sentence of paragraph 39  that  "it  has  not  been
    shown  that  she  requires  counselling".  That  statement  is  clearly
    incorrect but that is not material given that  elsewhere  the  decision
    identifies, correctly, that the appellant can  receive  the  specialist
    counselling that she needs on return and thereafter.

18. The second ground of appeal maintained  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge erred in her assessment of whether the appellant faced a risk  on
    return from her in-laws, her brothers and M.  The  grounds  took  issue
    with the judge's failure to give weight to the letter from  her  mother
    dated 13 November 2019 which maintained that the appellant would be  at
    risk from her violent brothers on return, both having criminal records,
    and would come under pressure from her husband's family  as,  according
    to Albanian culture, they should have control of her daughter and  were
    in a position to decide who she should marry at the age of 14.

19. I did not find that this ground had  merit.  In  paragraph  34  of  the
    decision the judge indicates that it was  accepted  by  the  respondent
    that the appellant could not live with  her  own  family  or  with  her
    husband's family. The judge did not go behind this concession but found
    that the appellant could relocate because of the support  available  in
    shelters for victims of trafficking. The grounds  do  not  dispute  the
    appellant's evidence that "neither her brother nor M had links  to  the
    police or politics in  Albania";  see  paragraphs  34  and  45  of  the
    decision. The judge was therefore entitled to find in paragraph 45 that
    this meant that it was not shown that the  appellant's  brothers  or  M
    would be able to find her or harm her on return given  that  she  could
    access support from the shelter system.

20. Further, the grounds do not dispute  that  the  appellant  herself  had
    never suggested that she was  at  risk  from  her  estranged  husband's
    family. The judge was entitled to rely on this in paragraph 45 even  if
    the letter from the appellant's mother set out  her  concern  that  the
    appellant and her daughter could be pressurised or harmed  by  her  in-
    laws. Also, as before, the judge reached a lawful conclusion in finding
    that the appellant could relocate  and  be  protected  in  the  shelter
    system. Nothing in the materials provided suggested  that  her  in-laws
    had contacts that would enable them to trace  or  harm  her.  The  CPIN
    indicates in paragraph 9.12.2 that police provide  armed  security  for
    the state shelters and private security companies provide security  for
    the NGO run shelters.  The same paragraph identifies:

         "The victim's civil registration is the NGOs' office address rather
         than the shelter address so that even a corrupt  or  unprofessional
         police officer with access to the civil registration system  cannot
         compromise the victim's location."

    Paragraph 2.4.8 of the CPIN indicates:

         "By law, the police have a duty to ensure  the  confidentiality  of
         data related to trafficking victims.  The database is secure,  data
         is entered  by  a  designated  person,  and  only  the  Responsible
         Authority has access to it.  Sources spoken to by the HO  FFT  were
         in agreement that unauthorised access would  be  difficult  and  is
         unlikely."

21. It is therefore my conclusion that the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings
    on no risk arising from the appellant's brothers or  M  on  return  was
    lawful. The appellant did not claim to be at  risk  from  her  in-laws.
    Even were such a fear made out objectively, the conclusions on  support
    and protection being available in the shelters applied equally  to  any
    potential pressure or threats from the appellant's in-laws.

22. I also did not find that  the  third  ground  challenging  the  judge's
    approach to the country evidence was made out. The  grounds  maintained
    that the judge erred in the assessment of the country evidence, placing
    too much  weight  on  the  CPIN  and  insufficient  weight  on  the  US
    Department of State Report (USDSR) for 2019.  The US DSR provided  more
    up to date information than the CPIN. It identified on page 3 of 6 that
    there had been a reduction in some of the  funding  from  the  Albanian
    government to the specialised shelters, specifically, that in 2018,  in
    contrast to 2017, "The government did not transfer resources to a  fund
    of seized criminal assets for support services, compared to 4.7 million
    leks ($43,900) in 2017."

23. It is not my view that the information about this aspect of the funding
    for shelters in the UDDSR is sufficient to show that the judge erred in
    placing weight on the CPIN  when  considering  what  support  would  be
    available for the appellant on  return.  The  USDSR  referred  to  some
    difficulties in funding but set out clearly that the shelters continued
    to offer support to  victims  of  trafficking.  Immediately  after  the
    comment about the change to the transfer of seized criminal assets into
    the funding for  victims  of  trafficking,  the  UDSDR  indicates  that
    "Funding for NGO-run shelters steadily increased  over  the  past  four
    years"  and went to state that there was a "good quality of care at the
    shelters"  and  wide  range  of  services  available  to   victims   of
    trafficking notwithstanding these issues.  In paragraph 9.3.1 the  CPIN
    sets out that the USDSR for 2018 showed that funds seized from criminal
    assets was used for the first time in 2017 so it was not that  a  long-
    standing or main part of financial support for the shelters had changed
    when this did not happen in later years.

24. It  was  therefore  my  view  that  the  change  in  financial  support
    identified in the USDSR relied on for the appellant did not  show  that
    the judge erred in placing weight on the CPIN  and  when  finding  that
    sufficient support was available in the shelters for the appellant such
    that it was reasonable for her to relocate .

25. For all of these reasons, it is my conclusion that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was lawful and does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
    point of law.

Notice of Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed: S Pitt                                        Date: 8 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


