
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00486/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2019                            |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    T. T.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
                    Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, claiming to be a national of Eritrea, entered the UK
illegally and made a protection claim. That was refused on 21 December
2017, and in doing so the Respondent placed in contention his general
credibility as one who had used a number of identities, given an
inconsistent account, and was not able to provide the information
reasonably to be expected of one who had told the truth about his
nationality.

The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis, who
allowed it on the basis he accepted that the Appellant was indeed an
Eritrean national, in a decision promulgated on 24 May 2018.

The Respondent's application for permission to appeal was granted by First-
tier Tribunal Judge Alis on 4 August 2018 on the ground that it was
arguable the Judge had failed to conduct a fair hearing. The Appellant did
not reply to that grant with a Rule 24 response.

Inspection of the Tribunal file discloses that the Appellant's
representatives declared to the Tribunal for the purposes of the PHR that
he had no intention of calling any witness at the hearing of his appeal,
other than himself. That was an odd declaration to make, indeed it was
patently untrue, since an internal email of 23 January 2018 [ApBp6] which
passed between members of that firm noted that he did wish to call his wife
to give evidence, but the author did not believe he had enough diary time
available to interview her. The firm did seek an adjournment of the hearing
of the appeal in order to obtain expert evidence as to the Appellant's true
nationality, but offered no details of who was to be instructed, when any
relevant expert could provide a report, or, even that an application for
public funding had been made for that purpose. As a result the Judge who
dealt with the PHR on 31 January 2018 refused to adjourn the listing of 14
February 2018, but invited the Appellant to submit a properly detailed
application, when the issue would be reconsidered.

That invitation was duly accepted, and as a result on 7 February 2018 the
appeal was adjourned to allow the Appellant to instruct Dr Gunter Schroder,
and relisted for Monday 14 May 2018. It is not clear why, but
notwithstanding that adjournment, on 9 February 2018, the Appellant's
representatives filed and served a bundle of the evidence that would be
relied upon at the hearing of the appeal. That bundle necessarily contained
no expert's report - but it also failed to include a witness statement from
the Appellant's wife. In the event no expert report has ever been filed or
served, but on Thursday 10 May 2018, without any prior warning the
Appellant filed and served (by now out of time) a witness statement from
his wife dated 9 May 2018. In this statement she asserted (inter alia);

        i)    that she had been granted refugee status by the Respondent
           upon entry to the UK,

       ii)    That she had met the Appellant when she attended a house
           church in Eritrea in 2003, that she knew his family and that
           they lived in Eritrea too, and that she had married him in
           Eritrea in 2004

      iii) That the Appellant had been the subject of compulsory
           conscription two weeks after their wedding, and that they had
           not seen one another again until they met by chance in Greece in
           2009

A witness statement from the presenting officer who attended the appeal
hearing was offered as evidence in support of the Respondent's application
for permission to appeal. Its content was not challenged by the Appellant
in the form of any Rule 24 Reply. Nor has it been challenged with any
evidence from either the Appellant or the representative who attended the
appeal hearing. Ms Cleghorn accepts therefore that I may proceed on the
basis that its content is accepted.

Although neither his decision nor his record of proceedings make any
reference to it, it is therefore common ground that when the appeal was
called on for hearing the Judge was faced with a dispute between the
parties. The Respondent's position was that if the late evidence of the
Appellant's wife was to be admitted, then in fairness the Respondent should
have a fair opportunity to consider the material that would be found upon
her file. That required obtaining the file from storage (which could not
physically have been done in the time frame afforded to the Respondent by
the Appellant's representatives), due reflection upon its content, and thus
the impact its content might have upon the credibility of the evidence
offered by the Appellant, allowing adequate time for the preparation for
the cross-examination of the witnesses in the light of it. In other words,
the Respondent sought a consequential adjournment if this evidence was to
be admitted notwithstanding the Appellant's failure to comply with
directions, and the failure to offer any reasonable excuse for that
failure. The alternative was no doubt, to refuse to admit the late evidence
on the basis the Respondent was being ambushed.

The Judge's response to that application was blunt, and simple; the appeal
had been adjourned for three months already, and it would not be adjourned
by him again. No further reasons were offered [Ms Charles #7]. That
judicial stance was regrettable. It demonstrably failed to engage with the
reasons that had been advanced to him for the Respondent's application. In
my judgement it rendered the hearing that followed procedurally unfair. It
is theoretically possible the Judge persuaded himself that because the
presenting officer had been able to obtain from the Respondent's
computerised records a note of the case worker's reasons for the decision
to grant refugee status to the Appellant's wife, an adjournment of the
appeal would serve no purpose. If so, then he had a duty; (i) to explore
with the Respondent whether that was accepted as a complete answer to the
late service, and the ambush, (ii) to recognise that this note was unlikely
to be a complete record of all of the information that might be contained
in the physical file that had not yet been retrieved from storage, and,
(iii) to explore with the presenting officer when she had been able to
obtain this note, and what preparation time she had been able to enjoy
since she had done so. It is not suggested that any of that occurred. Nor
was this offered as a reason for the refusal of the application.

Before me Ms Cleghorn accepts that the Judge did fail to offer a reason for
the refusal of the adjournment application that engaged with the reasons
advanced by the Respondent for it. She accepts that the Judge fell thereby
into error. Faintly she advanced the proposition that this might not have
amounted to a material error, but was unable to articulate why that would
be the case. I am satisfied that there is no substance to that proposition.

In the circumstances, the Respondent has made out his case of procedural
unfairness, and the only proper course is that the appeal should be
remitted for hearing afresh. None of the findings of fact made by the Judge
are safe, or can be preserved. In circumstances such as this, where it
would appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered by
the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to
deprive the parties of the opportunity for their case to be properly
considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact
finding exercise required is such that having regard to the over-riding
objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to the
First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13
November 2014.

To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other than
First tier Tribunal Judge Hillis, at the North Shields Hearing Centre. An
Amharic interpreter is required. Since the Respondent wishes to place
before the Tribunal material contained in the file maintained upon the
Appellant's wife, he must file and serve a supplemental bundle by 5pm 22
February 2019. If so advised, the Appellant must in turn file and serve any
additional evidence he wishes to rely upon in response by 5pm 8 March 2019.
 Such documents should be filed with the Tribunal at the North Shields
Hearing Centre.

    Subject to the directions above, the listing will be expedited, and
    will be heard on the first available date after 8 March 2019. The
    parties should expect the appeal to called on for hearing thereafter at
    short notice.

Notice of decision


 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 8 February 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

