
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00805/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd December 2016                          |On 8th December 2016          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                                 Milena [T]
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Johnrose
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 23rd December 1991 is a citizen of Eritrea.   The
    Appellant was present and represented by Miss Johnrose.  The Respondent
    was represented by Mr McVeety, a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made an application for asylum which had been refused
    by the Respondent on 6th August 2015.   The Appellant had appealed that
    decision and her appeal was heard on 18th February 2016  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pooler sitting at Stoke.  The judge  had  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The Appellant had made  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and that application had
    been refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell on 21st March  2016.
    The application had then been renewed and  permission  was  granted  on
    9th April 2016 by Upper Tribunal Judge Mr McGeachy on the basis that it
    was arguable there  was  an  element  of  speculation  in  the  judge's
    assessment of the Appellant's evidence.

Submissions

 3. I had a discussion with  both  representatives.   It  was  agreed  that
    whilst the judge may  have  conducted  an  exercise  in  assessment  of
    credibility leaving aside his findings on credibility it was  necessary
    for him to consider the risk on return.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge at  paragraph  36  had  referred  to  and
    quoted from the case of MA concerning the  consideration  of  legal  or
    illegal exit and the relationship with credibility  findings.   However
    the judge did not refer to the later country guidance case of MO  which
    updated the situation regarding the  highly  restricted  categories  of
    people who would be granted legal exit  from  Eritrea  particularly  if
    they were of military age.

 5. The  judge  does  not  appear  to  perhaps  have  fully  considered  in
    irrespective  of  findings  of  credibility  whether  there   was   any
    likelihood the Appellant would have been able to leave Eritrea  legally
    and therefore assess the risk on return.  Further at  paragraph  37  of
    the decision when assessing  credibility  the  judge  referred  to  two
    matters.  The first appears to be somewhat speculative namely that  she
    was not from a rural area and the second point was merely  a  reference
    to her education to grade 12.  The location where  she  lived  and  her
    education do not appear to have been  matters  in  dispute  and  it  is
    somewhat difficult  particularly  in  line  with  country  guidance  to
    understand why either or  both  of  those  matters  would  have  caused
    concerns regarding credibility or thereafter the relevance in terms  of
    risk on return.

 6. The absence of reference to the later country  guidance  case  and  the
    lack of perhaps focus on the risk on return to Eritrea are matters that
    have led to a material error of law in this  case,  in  that  if  those
    matters had been fully considered there may well have been an  entirely
    different outcome to  this  case.   It  was  agreed  therefore  that  a
    material error of law had been made.

Notice of Decision

 7. I find that a material error of law was made by the judge in this  case
    and I allow the appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



 8. Anonymity not retained.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
