
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
pa/00663/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 September 2016                     |On 19 October 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                    SHOO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Chaudhry, instructed by IAS, Leeds
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born in 1991 and is a citizen of Iraq.   He  came  to
    the United Kingdom as a student but subsequently claimed asylum in  May
    2015.  The  appellant  is  a  Syriac  Christian.   He  claims  to  fear
    persecution or ill-treatment at the hands of  IS  (otherwise  Isis)  or
    others within Iraq  over  whom  Isis  has  influence.   The  respondent
    refused the appellant's claim for asylum by a decision  dated  20  July
    2015.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Hussain) which, in a decision promulgated on 18  June  2016,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. At [27], Judge Hussain found that "it not seriously in dispute that the
    appellant and his family were persecuted  because  of  their  Christian
    beliefs.  All this happened in and around 2010."  The judge noted that,
    in 2010, the appellant's brother  had  been  ordained  as  a  Christian
    priest, an event broadcast on Iraqi  television.   However,  the  judge
    found [28] that "I am satisfied that such prominence as the family  had
    [as Christians] had all but disappeared by 2014."   He  also  accepted,
    however, that the appellant's family had been driven out of their  home
    area of Mosul and were living in Erbil (in the Autonomous Kurdish  Area
    of Iraq) where they had been forced  to  live  in  the  basement  of  a
    Christian church with other Christian families.

 3. The decision of Judge Hussain is, in parts,  problematic.   Instead  of
    making a clear finding as to whether or not the appellant would  be  at
    risk of his home area (Mosul)  of  Iraq,  the  judge  has  conflated  a
    discussion  regarding  return  to  Mosul  with  an  analysis   of   the
    possibility of internal  flight  within  Iraq,  both  to  Baghdad  and,
    crucially, to Erbil.  As  I  have  noted,  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's family's high profile as Christians had diminished in Mosul
    in or around 2014.  At [33], the judge found that  it  was  not  likely
    that the appellant had lost contact with  his  parents  and  sister  in
    Erbil as he claimed.  The judge gave good reasons in that paragraph for
    reaching the finding.  The hearing had been attended  by  the  Reverend
    Canon Dr William Taylor who gave  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's
    Christian faith.  The  judge  noted  [33]  that  the  Reverend  Taylor,
    "maintains links with the church in Erbil and could  have  facilitated"
    the establishment of contact  between  the  appellant  and  his  family
    living in that city.

 4. The grounds of appeal assert that (i) the judge failed properly to take
    into account the appellant's sur place activities in the United Kingdom
    which included being photographed at a "high profile meeting  with  HRH
    Prince of Wales" (ii) the judge failed to  have  proper  regard  to  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC)  when  reaching  his
    decision.  It is asserted that the judge cannot have had regard to that
    country guidance when he concluded that the appellant could  reasonably
    return to live with his family in Erbil.  The grounds record  that  the
    Tribunal in  AA  found  that  "the  respondent  will  only  return  [an
    appellant] to the IKR if the appellant originates  from  the  IKAR  and
    [his] identity has been 'pre-cleared' with the IKR authorities" it  was
    also found in AA that "as a general matter, a non-Kurd who is  at  real
    risk with his home area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to  relocate  to
    the IKR."

 5. Although it would have been helpful if the  judge  had  made  a  proper
    clear finding as to the risk facing the appellant in his home  area  of
    Iraq (it appears from his analysis that he believes that the  appellant
    may, notwithstanding his Christian faith, may not have  been  at  risk)
    for the reasons which I give below, I find that this  is  not  such  an
    error that should lead me to set aside the decision.  Even if the judge
    did err by failing to make clear findings regarding the risk facing the
    appellant in his home area of Iraq, his additional findings in  respect
    of the internal flight alternative are, in my opinion, entirely  sound.



 6. The  first  ground  of  appeal  challenges  the  judge's  decision  for
    allegedly failing to take properly into  account  the  appellant's  sur
    place activities.  The judge  accepted  [30]  that  the  appellant  had
    attended a conference at Westminster Cathedral which had been  attended
    by the Prince of Wales.  He went on to find [31] that  the  appellant's
    actions had been "motivated by a desire to bolster his  asylum  claim."
    Such a motivation would, of course, not negate the sur place activities
    if these are likely, as the appellant appears to claims, to come to the
    attention of Isis in Iraq.  As regards that contention,  I  agree  with
    Mrs Pettersen, for the respondent, who submitted that, even if the  sur
    place activities of the appellant do come to  the  attention  of  Isis,
    this is not relevant given that the appellant could relocate to the IKR
    and in particular, Erbil.  This is because Isis is not present  in  the
    IKR, an area of Iraq which  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  access
    directly from the United  Kingdom  without  passing  through  Mosul  or
    Baghdad.

 7. This brings me to the second ground of appeal.  The  appellant  asserts
    that the judge has failed to have proper regard to the country guidance
    of AA.  The quotations from AA which I have set  out  above  do  indeed
    indicate that a non-Kurd may find it difficult to relocate from an Arab-
    area of Iraq to the IKR.  However, the Tribunal in AA found that it was
    "unlikely" for a non-Kurd to access the IKR.  The case of an Arab Iraqi
    with no contacts or family members  living  in  the  IKR,  there  would
    appear to be little prospect of  exercising  internal  flight  to  that
    area.   The  circumstances  of  the  appellant  are,   however,   quite
    different.  The judge accepted that the appellant  has  family  members
    with whom he is in contact and who live in  Erbil.   In  addition,  the
    appellant has an association with a United Kingdom  clergyman  who,  in
    turn, was involved with the Christian community living  in  Erbil.   It
    was against this specific (and unusual) background that the judge  made
    his findings regarding internal flight to  the  IKR.   The  grounds  of
    appeal  completely  ignore  these  particular  circumstances   of   the
    appellant.  Whilst it may indeed be unlikely for a non-Kurd  to  access
    safety in the IKR, I find that the judge does not err in law by finding
    that the appellant would be able to join his family  in  Erbil  put  it
    another way, if the appellant's only objection  to  such  a  course  of
    action involves relying upon the generic statements  contained  in  AA,
    then it is apparent that he has failed to show the real obstacles would
    prevent him travelling directly from the United Kingdom to Erbil.   The
    appellant's family members are not Kurdish but they appear to  live  in
    safety in the IKR whilst the appellant has produced no evidence to show
    those family members would be unable to facilitate his  entry  to  that
    region; as Mrs Pettersen pointed out, the appellant entered the  United
    Kingdom as a student with a valid  Iraqi  passport  so  he  should  not
    encounter problems over his travel documentation.

 8. In conclusion, whilst it would have been helpful if the judge  had  not
    conflated his analysis of the risk facing the  appellant  in  his  home
    area of Iraq and the option of internal flight,  I  find  that  he  has
    given sound and sustainable reasons for dismissing the appeal on asylum
    and human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 17 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date 17 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


