
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00058/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 June 2019                      |On 26 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LP
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Clarke, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (hereafter  SSHD)
         appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Lal (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on  25  March  2019,
         allowed the appeal of Mr LP (hereafter claimant) against the SSHD's
         decision of 13 December 2018 to refuse his asylum and human  rights
         claim.




Background

      2. The claimant is a national of China, born in  1965.  He  was  first
         encountered by the British authorities on 28 November 2014. On this
         occasion he claimed to have illegally entered the UK  in  2007.  He
         was placed on reporting conditions but was recorded as an absconder
         in September 2017. He was then encountered  on  29  September  2018
         picking cockles along with several other men. On this  occasion  he
         claimed to have arrived in the UK 10 years previously. He lodged an
         asylum claim on 3 October 2018. Although an NRM referral  was  made
         in respect of trafficking  claim,  a  negative  reasonable  grounds
         decision was made on 4 December 2018.


      3. I summarise the salient features of the claimant's asylum claim. In
         early 2006 he was asked by TJ, a monk in charge of a temple  in  Yu
         Xi town, Fu Jian Province, to transfer money to a person called  "A
         Da" who lived in Tibet. The claimant did this as a  favour  to  the
         monk, whom he respected. Then around November 2006 the claimant was
         arrested by  Chinese  police  and  accused  of  supporting  Tibetan
         independence. He was tortured and admitted to sending money for the
         temple but did not disclose the name of the monk. The claimant  was
         bailed on payment  of  a  bribe  but  told  to  report  weekly.  He
         subsequently left China without reporting  under  threat  from  the
         monk who was concerned that the claimant may expose him.

The Reasons for Refusal Letter

      4. The SSHD rejected the claimant's account  of  events  in  China  as
         incredible.  At  paragraphs  24  and  26  the  SSHD  identified  an
         inconsistency in the claimant's account relating to his involvement
         in political  groups.  In  his  screening  interview  the  claimant
         claimed to have been arrested because  of  his  involvement  in  an
         "independent Tibet" riot, and he informed a GP  during  a  Rule  35
         assessment that he had been arrested and detained  by  the  Chinese
         police at a riot. However later in  his  screening  interview,  and
         then in his substantive asylum interview, the claimant said he  was
         not involved in any political group or activism.  At  paragraph  25
         the SSHD identified an inconsistency  in  the  claimant's  evidence
         concerning his involvement in a "riot". In paragraphs 25 and 32 the
         SSHD noted inconsistencies in the claimant's account  of  when  his
         problems with the Chinese authorities first began  (in  his  asylum
         interview he said his problems first began in late 2006, but in his
         Rule 35 examination he said he was arrested and tortured in  2005).
         The claimant is recorded  as  having  given  inconsistent  evidence
         relating to being detained (in his screening interview  he  claimed
         his detention in the UK was his "first time"  but  described  being
         detained by the  Chinese  authorities  in  his  substantive  asylum
         interview and in his Rule 35 assessment). At paragraph  28  of  the
         Reasons for Refusal Letter an inconsistency was noted in respect of
         whose idea it was to send money to Tibet, and at  paragraph  29  an
         inconsistency was noted in  respect  of  the  amount  of  time  the
         claimant spent working at the temple. A further  inconsistency  was
         noted at paragraph 31 in respect of the date the  claimant  arrived
         in the UK. Based on these inconsistencies, and the late  timing  of
         the asylum claim, the SSHD concluded that  the  claimant's  account
         was not credible and that he would not be at risk of persecution on
         return to China.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The SSHD's decision attracted a right of appeal, which the claimant
         exercised. In his decision the judge out the claimant's immigration
         history and the relevant law, and then  summarised  the  claimant's
         evidence and the evidence from his brother (who  was  a  recognised
         refugee based on his membership of the Chinese Democratic Party).


      6. In the section of his decision headed "Findings and  Decision"  the
         judge first explained why he did  not  draw  an  adverse  inference
         under section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
         Claimants, etc) Act 2004. At [21] the judge then stated,

             "The  Tribunal  had  an  opportunity  to  assess  the   asylum
             interview and the [claimant's] own evidence. It  accepted  his
             account because it has remained consistent throughout that  he
             has been implicated in an  allegation  that  involved  illegal
             funding in Tibet."

      7. At [22] the judge found that the claimant's account  was  supported
         by the Rule 35 assessment as the physical marks on  the  claimant's
         body may be consistent with what he  described.  The  judge  stated
         that, "The central elements of his account  has  not  changed."  At
         [23] the judge noted that the evidence of the claimant's brother is
         accepted by the SSHD in his grant of status and found the  brothers
         evidence to be clear and credible. At [24] the judge stated that he
         found the claimant to be an overall credible witness and was  under
         the impression that he was trying to assist the  Tribunal  whenever
         he could. The judge then again said  that  the  claimant's  account
         given at interview was consistent with the witness and all evidence
         received at the hearing. The judge then went on to assess risk  and
         concluded that the claimant would be  at  risk  of  persecution  in
         China due to his relationship  with  his  brother  and  an  imputed
         political profile. The judge consequently allowed  the  asylum  and
         human rights appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

      8. The brief grounds contend that the  judge's  decision  was  "almost
         totally devoid of any reasoning and fails to address a single issue
         raised in the refusal letter." The judge had not addressed  any  of
         the credibility issues identified in the Reasons for Refusal Letter
         and failed to exercise the requisite anxious scrutiny.


      9. In granting permission to appeal judge of the First-tier Tribunal I
         D Boyes stated,

             "The judgement is extraordinarily brief and arguably fails  to
             give any regard to any of the evidence.


             Permission is granted as the grounds are clearly arguable."

     10. I am grateful to Ms Clarke  for  her  considered  and  clear-headed
         approach at the 'error of law' hearing. She was open and upfront in
         accepting that the decision was devoid of  adequate  reasoning  and
         failed  to  take  into  account  or  engage   with   the   numerous
         inconsistencies identified in the Reasons for Refusal  Letter.  She
         accepted that the decision was unsustainable and that it had to  be
         remitted for an entirely fresh hearing. I indicated at the  hearing
         that I was satisfied the judge erred on a point of law and that the
         decision had to be set aside, and that it  was  appropriate,  given
         the failure  by  the  judge  to  lawfully  deal  with  the  adverse
         credibility points raised  by  the  SSHD,  for  the  matter  to  be
         remitted for a de novo hearing.

Discussion

     11. In his statement the claimant denied having said he participated in
         a riot during his  screening  interview  and  during  his  Rule  35
         assessment. He claims that he was  misunderstood  or  that  he  was
         misinterpreted. The judge however found that the  central  elements
         in the claimant's evidence was  "consistent  throughout".  This  is
         clearly not the case. While it may have been open to the  judge  to
         accept the claimant's explanation, there was no engagement with  or
         assessment of that explanation. In his statement the claimant  also
         maintains that that he may have made a mistake in  respect  of  the
         time his problems started in China, that  there  may  have  been  a
         misinterpretation about whose idea it was to send money  to  Tibet,
         and that, when asked in his screening interview whether he had been
         previously detained, he believed he  was  only  being  asked  about
         detention  in  the  UK.  Once  again  the  claimant  has   provided
         explanations for apparent inconsistencies in his account,  but  the
         judge had failed to deal  with  the  inconsistencies  and  has  not
         engaged with the explanations advanced by the claimant.


     12. Whilst the claimant's account of transferring money  to  Tibet  has
         been consistent, at least since his substantive  asylum  interview,
         there were other inconsistencies in his account that  required  the
         judge's  consideration.  The  judge  has  effectively  ignored  the
         inconsistencies identified in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  and
         has consequently failed to take account of relevant considerations.
         The evidence of scarring contained in the Rule 35 report  and  that
         fact that the oral evidence at the hearing was consistent with  the
         evidence given by the appellant in his substantive asylum interview
         and with the evidence given with his brother is no  answer  to  the
         failure by the judge to deal with  the  other  inconsistencies.  It
         cannot be said that the other  inconsistencies  were  incapable  of
         materially affecting the outcome of the decision.

     13. There was agreement by both parties that the judge's decision could
         not stand and that it had to be set aside.  Given  the  absence  of
         lawful credibility findings it is appropriate for the  case  to  be
         remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  determined  at  a
         fresh hearing, all issues open, by a judge other than judge of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Lal.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an  error  on  a  point  of  law
requiring it to be set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing,
to be heard by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 24 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
