
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00862/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 7th September 2018                         |On 28th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     H B
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge M  A  Khan)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse him asylum or  humanitarian  protection
    or leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom from  Morocco,  which  is  his
    country of nationality, in 2015 with leave to enter as a student  which
    was curtailed to expire on 20 December 2015, as he failed to study.  In
    September 2016 he was encountered and served with form RED.001  and  on
    10 May 2017 form RED.004 a notice of removal.  On 11th May 2017 he  was
    convicted of theft and possession of controlled drugs class B  cannabis
    resin.  He had  a  previous  conviction  for  battery  and  failing  to
    surrender to custody at the appointed time on 2 March 2017  and  on  19
    May 2017 he was served with a stage 1 deportation decision  letter  and
    claimed asylum on 13th June 2017, by which time  he  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for just under two years.

 3. The appellant claims that he is of homosexual  sexual  orientation  and
    that this would put him at risk in Morocco.  There is a Rule 35  report
    from the detention centre suggesting that he may have signs of  torture
    in  the  form  of  body  scarring,  but  no  mention  of   any   mental
    difficulties.

 4. The appellant is no longer  legally  represented:  he  is  representing
    himself. The appellant did not attend the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal because he refused to leave the detention centre.  He has  not
    attended or arranged  representation  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  appeal
    hearing, although he was granted bail on 19 June 2018 and therefore was
    able to attend had he chosen to do so.

 5. The grounds of appeal suggest that the judge misapprehended  the  basis
    of the appellant's appeal, that his decision lacks anxious scrutiny and
    that the solicitors, who were instructed 8  days  before  the  hearing,
    were entitled for that reason to  have  an  adjournment  to  provide  a
    comprehensive witness statement, a medical report and a country  expert
    report.

 6. Those solicitors are  no  longer  acting,  but  in  any  event,  having
    accepted instructions to act on the basis of the case  as  it  stood  8
    days before the hearing, and apparently having made the application for
    an adjournment on the day of the hearing  without  having  evidence  of
    seeking to improve their instructions in the ways indicated,  it  would
    not have been appropriate or a proper  application  of  the  overriding
    objective for the hearing to be adjourned on that basis.

 7. I note that this appeal had previously been  heard  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in March 2018 when again the appellant was  unrepresented  and
    did not attend the hearing.  That decision was  appealed  and  remitted
    for rehearing afresh.  The appellant had had plenty of time to  prepare
    properly for the second  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and  indeed  to
    attend it and the fact that he chose not to do so, is finally a  matter
    for the appellant and not a ground for adjournment on the day.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal's decision sets out why  the  judge  considered
    the appellant's case was not proved.  In particular, at paragraphs [32]-
    [37] for proper, intelligible  and  adequate  reasons,  the  First-tier
    Judge found that the appellant had "simply made up and  fabricated  his
    evidence in support of his asylum claim  in  order  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  I do not find the appellant to  be  a  credible  or  a
    consistent witness".

 9. The evidence before the judge was such that he was unarguably  entitled
    to conclude that the  appellant  had  not  proved  his  claimed  sexual
    orientation, even to the lower  standard  applicable  in  international
    protection claims, nor had he established that he was at risk by reason
    of his claimed orientation.

10. This appellant has now failed to attend three hearings of  his  appeal.
    I maintain the anonymity order. I conclude that  he  takes  no  further
    interest in this appeal and for of the reasons already given I  dismiss
    the appeal.

DECISION

 1.      For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law.

    I do not set aside the previous decision.  The decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal stands.

Signed:        Judith  A  J  C  Gleeson                          Date:    25
September 2018
              Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson




