
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00753/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2017                  |On 26 January 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                    [a T]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)

                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aziz, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Eldridge promulgated on 16 March 2017 dismissing the Appellant's appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 11 January 2017 refusing his
    protection claim.

2.    The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh. He was permitted  to  enter
    the United Kingdom in June 2011 as a student  and  had  leave  in  that
    capacity until 29 June 2013. On 27 December 2012 he applied for further
    leave to remain on human rights grounds. That application  was  refused
    and a subsequent appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed  on  7
    August 2014. On 25 July 2016 he claimed asylum. His claim was based  on
    his opposition political activities and, in  consequence,  he  was  the
    subject of adverse attention by ruling party members.  The  application
    was refused by the Respondent  on  11  January  2017.  The  Appellant's
    appeal against that decision came before Judge Eldridge on 23  February
    2017.

3.    Judge Eldridge comprehensively set out the Appellant's claim  and  the
    proceedings that followed at [1] to [32]. In particular, he  summarised
    the contents  of  the  Appellant's  screening  and  substantive  asylum
    interviews and  noted,  in  the  former,  he  complained  that  he  was
    suffering from depression. Judge Eldrigde further noted the evidence of
    the Appellant and two witnesses. At the  outset  of  his  findings  and
    conclusions Judge Eldrigde stated that he had borne in mind  the  lower
    standard of proof and directed himself appropriately  by  reference  to
    the Immigration Rules and noted that he was obliged to consider whether
    the Appellant's credibility was adversely affected by the provisions of
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004 (hereafter "the 2004 Act"). At [35] the judge expressly  noted
    that these provisions were not in themselves determinative of the issue
    of credibility. Turning, firstly, to  deal  with  these  issues,  Judge
    Eldridge stated thus:

         "37. I have considered, firstly, the issues of delay  in  making  a
         claim that have been raised by the  Respondent.  If  there  is  any
         significant unjustified  delay  then  that  factor  is  capable  of
         nullifying the Appellant's ability to claim  the  "benefit  of  the
         doubt" rules  in  Paragraph  339L  and  is  also  relevant  to  the
         assessment of his general credibility under section 8 of  the  2004
         Act.

         38. There can be no doubt that there has been a  very  considerable
         delay in the prosecution of any claim for asylum. The Appellant  is
         now aged 30 and he arrived in this country almost 6 years ago as  a
         student. He may well have had leave to remain until the end of June
         2013 but that is not a reason for him not pursue a claim for asylum
         (sic). The great majority of events upon which he  relies  happened
         before he left Bangladesh (although it must be acknowledged he also
         relates more recent interest in him). Even if his  reason  for  not
         claiming asylum earlier was taken at face  value,  he  waited  just
         over another 3 years before doing so. He made an application at the
         end of 2012 and appeared before the Tribunal (Judge Ross)  in  July
         2014. The only issue in connection with  protection  was  that  his
         representative informed the Tribunal that the Appellant  only  rely
         upon Article 8 and that he wished to pursue Article 3 or any  issue
         of asylum then he would make a claim in due course  (sic).  He  did
         not do so for another two years."

4.    Accordingly, Judge Eldridge concluded at [39]  that  the  "benefit  of
    the doubt" could not be afforded to the  Appellant  as  there  was  "no
    justification for the very considerable delay in claiming", and further
    concluded  that  the  Appellant's  general  credibility  was  "severely
    adversely affected having regard to section 8 of the 2004 Act."

5.    Judge Eldridge then proceeded to consider the  Appellant's  claims  of
    his political activities in Bangladesh and in the United Kingdom,  with
    reference to the Appellant's written and oral testimony,  the  evidence
    of  the  witnesses  and  the  documentary  evidence.   Judge   Eldrigde
    identified various deficiencies  in  that  evidence  at  [41]  to  [51]
    leading ultimately to his conclusion that the Appellant's claim  was  a
    fabrication.

6.    In his omnibus conclusion Judge Eldridge stated as follows:

         "52. In my judgement the Appellant has fabricated the bulk of  this
         claim as a last-ditch attempt to remain in the United Kingdom after
         he had exhausted other avenues of application and appeal. I find it
         is reasonably likely that the Appellant  had  some  involvement  in
         student politics whilst in Bangladesh and that  he  had  sought  to
         extend that interest whilst in this country only for  the  purposes
         of his claim and appeal. I do not accept that he had ever held  any
         significant office within the BNP or its student  wing.  I  do  not
         accept any of the three incidents upon which he seeks to rely. I do
         not accept he came to this country in fear of his life or  that  he
         has been sought or his family travelled  or  political  reasons  in
         Bangladesh and since he had been in the  United  Kingdom  (sic).  I
         consider he is an economic migrant and one can find no other  means
         of remaining in this country other than international protection.

         53. He would be returned to Bangladesh as a person who some 6 years
         ago had some interest in the student wing of the BNP.  He  did  not
         hold any significant office. I accept that  he  may  have  attended
         some rallies and meeting whilst in this country.  I  have  rejected
         his evidence and that of his  witnesses  that  he  is  a  political
         figure. He would be returned to Bangladesh as a person without  any
         significant adverse profile and he  has  no  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  for  reasons  of  his  political  opinion  (actual  or
         imputed) or otherwise."

7.    The judge thus concluded that the Appellant not entitled to asylum  or
    humanitarian  protection  and,  further  concluded  that  the   medical
    evidence was not sufficient  to  make  out  a  claim  on  human  rights
    grounds.

8.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was initially  refused
    by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  subsequently  granted  on   renewed
    application by the Upper Tribunal.

9.    Essentially, the grounds  assert,  first,  that  the  judge  erred  in
    finding the Appellant not credible and, secondly,  undertook  a  flawed
    assessment of the evidence by not giving weight to such matters  as  he
    ought to have done.

10.   The Respondent opposed the appeal  in  a  Rule  24  response  dated  4
    October 2017.

Consideration

11.   The basis of the Appellant's submissions as advanced on his behalf  by
    Mr Aziz is that the judge was  fixated  by  the  Appellant's  delay  in
    claiming asylum and treated this  as  a  determinative  factor  in  his
    assessment of credibility. This, Mr Aziz complained, was a "major flaw"
    in the judge's assessment of credibility, and that he had not conducted
    that assessment with an "open-mind" taking into  account  the  evidence
    "in the round" citing paragraph 19 of  JT  (Cameroon)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 878, and that, he applied
    a higher standard of proof than that applicable to such claims.

12.   Mr Jarvis, on the other hand, submitted that  there  was  no  material
    misdirection in law. He  submitted  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider whether the Appellant had advanced  a  reasonable  explanation
    for the delay and, failing that, he may not have been entitled  to  the
    "benefit of the doubt". While Mr Jarvis acknowledged that  the  wording
    at [37]  could  have  been  clearer,  he  submitted  that  the  judge's
    assessment of the evidence was not flawed,  and  that  the  judge  made
    other adverse findings that were open to him notwithstanding the  issue
    of delay citing paragraph [30] of Y v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223.

13.   In reply Mr Aziz reiterated that the judge's overbearing  emphasis  on
    the issue of delay affected his assessment of credibility.

14.   I consider that the central submissions  advanced  by  Mr  Jarvis  are
    correct. Firstly, there is  no  merit  in  the  submission  that  Judge
    Eldridge applied a higher standard of proof. Mr Aziz acknowledged  that
    this complaint was not raised in the grounds of appeal and it is  plain
    the judge's legal self-direction was correct  and  not  inappropriately
    applied during the course of his fact-finding. Second, the emphasis  of
    the submissions advanced by Mr Aziz was that the judge was pre-occupied
    by the issue of delay which was  determinative  of  his  assessment  of
    credibility. I do not accept that submission. Judge Eldridge was  aware
    that the issue of delay and the applicable provisions of section  8  of
    the 2004 were not determinative of the Appellant's credibility. Indeed,
    he expressly said so at [35]. It has not been shown that Judge Eldridge
    fell-foul of this principle. While the wording at [37] and  [39]  could
    have been clearer, the judge correctly identified  that  the  issue  of
    delay was equally applicable to the application of  paragraph  339L  of
    the Immigration Rules (see sub-paragraph (iv)) and  section  8  of  the
    2004 Act.  Judge Eldridge gave cogent reasons at [38]  as  to  why  the
    Appellant had not demonstrated good reason for not claiming  asylum  at
    the earliest opportunity and that  finding  was  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.

15.   What is then argued is that the judge failed to  engage  in  a  global
    assessment of the evidence but, in my judgement, that contention is not
    made  out  because  the  judge  clearly  embarked  upon  an  evaluative
    assessment of the evidence notwithstanding the  issue  of  delay.  That
    evaluative assessment included an  analysis  of  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant, witnesses and  the  documentary  evidence  which  the  judge
    rejected for a myriad of reasons. The  grounds  of  appeal  boldly  and
    generally  assert  that  these   findings   are   unfair,   irrational,
    speculative  and  harsh.  Mr  Aziz  did  not  directly  address   these
    complaints in his submissions, but I have no hesitation  in  concluding
    that they are without merit. In my judgement,  the  findings  of  Judge
    Eldridge were properly based on the evidence and were entirely open  to
    him. In fact, paragraph  52  is  indicative  of  the  fairness  in  his
    approach and the global assessment he made, given that he was  prepared
    to accept certain claims made by the Appellant. Having done so, it  was
    open to the judge to conclude that the  Appellant's  political  profile
    would not place him at risk on return for the reasons he gave at [53].

16.   In  my  judgment,  the  Appellant's  criticisms  of  Judge  Eldrigde's
    Decision are essentially a disagreement  with  his  evaluation  of  the
    approach to be taken and the weight to  be  attached  to  the  evidence
    which was a matter for him. It  cannot  be  said  that  the  weight  he
    accorded to the evidence was irrational. I conclude that the grounds of
    appeal and the submissions I received on  the  Appellant's  behalf,  do
    not, I find, identify an error of law. In all the circumstances, I find
    that the decision of Judge Eldridge is not in any way flawed for  error
    of law but in fact comprehensively addresses all the issues  raised  by
    the Appellant.

Notice of Decision

17.         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  no  error  of
    law and shall stand.

18.         The appeal remains dismissed.

No Anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal and  none  is  sought
from or made by the Upper Tribunal.


Signed      Date: 10 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

