
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00544/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2016                         |On 4 November 2016            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Poynor, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
(London)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of the First-tier Judge allowing the appeal of the
    respondent against the Secretary of State's decision of 7 January  2016
    refusing to grant asylum.  I shall refer hereafter to the Secretary  of
    State as the respondent, as she was before the judge, and to N  as  the
    appellant, as he was before the judge.

2.    It  is  agreed  between  the  representatives  that  this  appeal   is
    materially flawed by errors of law such that it will have to be reheard
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of  State's  grounds  allege
    among other things that the First-tier Judge failed to make findings on
    material facts in dispute, including the nationality of  the  appellant
    and also the asylum claim and risk on return.   It  is  also  contended
    that the judge failed to consider all the  country  guidance  cases  on
    minors from Afghanistan.

3.   In her Rule 24 response Ms Poynor did not accept  that  the  judge  had
    failed to make findings on risk or return or that the failure to make a
    finding on the appellant's nationality was a material error of law, but
    agreed that the judge had misdirected himself in failing to decide risk
    on return at the date of hearing and that that was a material error  of
    law.

4.   I am grateful to both representatives for the  points  that  have  been
    made in this case and in particular for the realistic Rule 24  response
    of Ms Poynor.  It was clearly a material error of  law  in  failing  to
    decide risk on return at the date of the hearing.  I do  not  think  it
    was sufficient for the judge to make a finding on risk on return on the
    alternative if the appellant were not an Afghan national  but  returned
    to Afghanistan.  It was important in a case where  nationality  was  in
    dispute for a clear finding to be made.   The  nature  of  the  judge's
    errors is such as to make this a proper case for a  full  rehearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, with  no  preserved  findings  of  fact.   The
    matter will therefore be relisted at Hatton Cross with a time  estimate
    of three hours and a Pushtu interpreter will be  booked.   It  was  not
    possible to provide a hearing date, but I express the hope that bearing
    in mind the appellant's age in particular that an  early  date  can  be
    found for the rehearing of this appeal.  The outcome of today's hearing
    is that the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the  judge's
    decision is allowed and the matter is to be  reheard  in  full  in  the
    First tier.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

