
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00278/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2016                       |On 3 October 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                     S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  She is an  Ahmadi.   She  came
    to the UK on a five year family visit visa in  2010.  In  August  2015,
    just before expiry of this visa,  she  claimed  asylum,  based  on  her
    claims that the last time she returned to  Pakistan  in  May  2015  she
    received threats from Khatme Nabuwat who had set fire to a business she
    had in her home area. The respondent accepted that the appellant was an
    Ahmadi, but not  that  she  had  experienced  significant  problems  in
    Pakistan or that she would face such problems on return.  The appellant
    appealed. In a decision sent on 19 May 2006 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain dismissed her appeal.

2.   At paragraphs 26-31 the judge said:

         "26.  It appears to me that on a plain reading of  the  appellant's
             interview it is fairly clear that she has in Pakistan lived  a
             fairly  uneventful  life  although  committed  Ahmadi.  I   am
             satisfied from the evidence that  the  appellant's  commitment
             and affinity to the Ahmadi faith is very strong  as  evidenced
             by the exchange of correspondence between her and  the  groups
             Khalif.  However  I  have  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  this
             appellant  has  not  encountered   any   difficulty   of   any
             significance or at least none that may amount  to  persecution
             whilst living in Pakistan.


         27.  I find it difficult to imagine that if she had encountered any
             problems that she would have single handily ran a dry cleaning
             business established by her husband even before  she  came  to
             the United Kingdom in May 2015.  My belief that the  appellant
             has not encountered any difficulty is further supported by the
             frequent journeys she has  made  between  the  United  Kingdom
             without previously  applying  for  asylum.  Even  the  present
             application was made some three months after her entry to this
             country.


         28.      I find that there is unlikely  to  be  any  truth  in  the
             appellant's claim  that  there  was  a  fire  started  in  her
             business. I say this because such a momentous event must  have
             called for the incident to be  reported  to  the  police.  The
             appellant's explanation  that  the  police  were  against  the
             Ahmadis is not a sufficient answer since there was no evidence
             that either the police or the group that oppose people of  her
             faith were involved. In any event I would think for  formality
             sake she  would  have  made  the  effort  of  registering  the
             incident.  However that said it goes to the appellant's credit
             her admission that she does not know who started the fire  and
             whether it was  deliberate.  Her  suspicion  is  that  it  was
             started by others maliciously because she  was  surrounded  by
             people who were inimical to her faith.


         29.  In my view even there was a fire at her place  there  is  very
             little objective evidence on which to build a case that it was
             done in order to harm her because she is an Ahmadi.


         30.  The appellant was frank in admitting  in  her  interview  that
             after 1984 she has practiced her faith  in  private.  Although
             some effort was made to embellish that story  in  the  written
             statement during cross-examination the appellant appears  very
             uncomfortable having to deal with questions concerning  public
             manifestation of her faith.


         31.  Whilst it is not for the Tribunal  to  speculate  on  why  the
             appellant made the application for asylum, it is difficult  to
             overlook her advancing age  and  the  fact  that  she  has  no
             remaining children in Pakistan. After her arrival this country
             in May 2015, her children  would  have  had  to  confront  the
             question of her long  term  care.  It  is  my  inference  that
             thinking lead to the decision  to  make  the  application  for
             asylum. However, for reasons given earlier, I fined  that  the
             appellant has neither the subjective nor the  objective  basis
             on which to found an asylum claim."

3.   The grounds of appeal advance four grounds, submitting that  the  judge
    erred in law in (i) making conflicting findings of fact and applying  a
    higher standard of proof; (ii) failing to resolve  material  issues  in
    the appeal; (iii) failing to make findings on sur place activities; and
    (iv) failing to make any findings on Article  8.   These  grounds  were
    amplified by Mr Khan and opposed by Mr Tufan, both of whose submissions
    were succinct and to the point.

My decision

4.   I am not persuaded by the first ground, for much  the  same  reason  as
    given by the judge who granted  permission  to  appeal.  There  was  no
    conflict in the judge stating at [23] that there  was  nothing  in  the
    background evidence inconsistent with the appellant's  claim  and  then
    going on in later paragraphs to reject key aspects of  the  appellant's
    claim.  The statement at [23] was plainly just the first  step  in  the
    judge's assessment  of  an  application,  as  to  its  congruence  with
    background country information. It was not a  finishing  point  in  the
    assessment.  The  judge  gave  sound  reasons  for   disbelieving   the
    appellant's  account  about  her  past  experiences  Pakistan  and  for
    concluding that she had lived a "fairly uneventful  life  although  [a]
    committed Ahmadi". It is clear from the judge's reference in  the  same
    paragraph to correspondence  between  the  appellant  and  the  group's
    Khalifa, that the judge was aware of her account of being a poet and  a
    writer and was quite entitled to conclude that even  so  this  did  not
    establish she had suffered past persecution.  One  powerful  reason  in
    the appellant's case for so  concluding  was  that  the  appellant  had
    chosen to return to Pakistan more than once within the currency of  her
    five year visa and by such action had shown clearly that  she  did  not
    consider that by doing so she exposed herself to a real risk  of  being
    persecuted.

5.   As regards the second ground, I am not able to accept  that  the  judge
    gave insufficient consideration to all relevant aspects of the Tribunal
    country guidance as set  out  in  MN  and  Others  (Ahmadis  -  country
    conditions - risk) Pakistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389  or  to  the  legal
    guidance as set out before Moore Bick LJ  in FA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 763 at [13]:

         "In my view the decision in MN is so potential significance to  any
         case in which a Pakistani Ahmadi makes a claim for asylum,  because
         it provides the basic  findings  about  the  risks  to  which  such
         persons are exposed in their country of origin.  It is  clear  from
         that decision that the key question is  the  extent  to  which  the
         individual concerned feels impelled to manifest his faith to  third
         parties, by actively seeking converts, preaching or merely  talking
         openly to others with  whom  he  comes  into  contact.   Those  who
         profess their faith openly or actively seek to interest  others  in
         it are at significant risk, the extent of which may vary  depending
         on the precise nature and scale of their activities, whereas  those
         who practise their faith privately  are  not.  Although  individual
         cases must be considered on their own facts, MN provides a template
         against which they may be assessed.  The  risk  of  persecution  on
         return cannot be divorced from that of internal relocation and  the
         possibility of internal relocation cannot be divorced from the  way
         in which the claimant chooses to practise his  faith.  Although  KN
         operates throughout Pakistan, there was no  finding  in  this  case
         that it has the will or the means to track individual Ahmadis, such
         as the appellant who move to a different part of  the  country,  so
         that internal relocation is not an effective option for someone who
         had come to their attention.  Given the Tribunal's  findings  about
         the appellant's wee of life before he returned from his first visit
         to this country in 2014, it was not possible in  my  view  for  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  to  assess  the  effectiveness  of   internal
         relocation without having regard to the  findings  in  MN.   In  my
         opinion, therefore, the Upper Tribunal was right  to  find  that  a
         failure to address its findings constituted an error of law  which,
         in view of its potential significance, could not  be  described  as
         immaterial and justified setting  aside  the  Tribunal's  decision.
         This makes it unnecessary to decide whether the Tribunal's  finding
         that the appellant's  could  not  escape  persecution  by  internal
         relocation  was  inadequately  reasoned  or  unsupported   by   the
         evidence.

6.   The judge made explicit reference to the MN guidance at  [2]  and  [24]
    and it is clear from his assessment that he had clearly  in  mind  that
    she was entitled to success in her claim if able to show that she was a
    committed Ahmadi for whom it would  be  of  fundamental  importance  to
    practice her faith publicly outside the setting  of  attendance  at  an
    Ahmadi mosque.

7.   I would accept that it would have been better had the  judge  dealt  in
    clear and more specific terms with the issue of whether,  even  if  the
    appellant had not experienced past persecution, she might  nevertheless
    face a current risk on return.

8.   However, reading the decision as a whole it is entirely clear that  the
    judge's assessment was that nothing significant had occurred  to  alter
    the fact that she was a committed Ahmadi for whom it had  not  been  of
    fundamental importance to profess her faith in a way that  would  place
    her at risk on return.  The fact  of  her  history  of  return  visits,
    coupled with her advancing age, provided further evidential  foundation
    for the judge's conclusion.  Insofar as the appellant had a claim based
    on sur place religious activities, it was extremely weak.

9.   I do not  accept  the  judge's  assessment  was  somehow  based  on  an
    assessment only of physical harm. The judge clearly had regard  to  the
    claimed loss of her freedom to express her religion. In considering the
    appellant's case the judge was  entitled  to  consider  that  her  oral
    evidence (as summarised in [3]-[12])  and  the  oral  evidence  of  her
    daughter and son (as summarised in [137] to [157]) did  not  strengthen
    her claim. In particular, it was open to the judge to find that she had
    not given a satisfactory account of  her  claim  to  need  to  publicly
    manifest her religion though activities such as proselytising.

10.  What I have said  in  dismissing  the  second  ground  of  appeal  also
    suffices to explain my reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  third
    ground of appeal, as regards sur place activities.

11.  As regards the fourth ground, I would accept that the  judge  may  have
    erred in deciding not to make a decision on the appellant's  Article  8
    grounds of appeal. The respondent  had  considered  Article  8  in  her
    refusal decision and the appellant had raised Article 8 in her grounds.
     However I do to consider this was a material error because:

    (i)  The thrust of the Article 8 grounds before the judge was  confined
         to the issue of risk on return;

    (ii)      The  submissions  made  to  the  judge  on  Article  8   were
    generalised and cursory;

    (iii)    No response was made in the  grounds  or  submissions  to  the
         respondent's reasons  as  set  out  in  the  refusal  decision  for
         concluding that she did not meet the requirements of the Rules  and
         did not warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules (see  paras  34-
         44);


    (iv)     The written statements of the appellant and her family did not
         demonstrate  that  the  ties  with  her  adult  children   or   her
         grandchildren were such as to make the decision to refuse her leave
         to remain disproportionate;


    (v)  Related to (iv), the grounds wholly fail to address the fact  that
         in assessing the public interest question under Article 8 the judge
         would have been required to attach little  weight  to  her  private
         life ties under s.117B(5) of the NIA  2002  ;and,  insofar  as  she
         could be said to have family life ties with her UK family  members,
         these too stood to be considered in  the  context  that  they  were
         developed during a temporary sojourn on the basis of a family visit
         visa (with nine trips  back  to  Pakistan)  over  some  five  years
         previously. I should perhaps add that Mr  Khan,  no  doubt  in  the
         spirit of realism, did not seek to suggest that the Article 8 claim
         was a strong one.

12.  For the above reasons, I conclude:

    The FtT judge did not materially err in law;

    His decision to dismiss the appeal is upheld.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 3 October 2016


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



