
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00686/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 September 2016                          |On 16 September 2016           |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     e b
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, Counsel instructed by Fisher & Myftari
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed, with permission, against a decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pears promulgated on 7 March 2016.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania,  aged  19  years,  and,  having
    entered the UK on 1 September 2014, she  subsequently  claimed  asylum.
    The respondent refused her application for asylum on 31  July  2015  on
    non-compliance grounds as the appellant did not attend her  substantive
    asylum interview.

 3. The appellant appealed that refusal and  her  appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 25 February 2016.  At that  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge there were a number of  applications  for  an
    adjournment on the basis that the appellant was  not  before  a  female
    court, that she was seven months pregnant at the date  of  the  hearing
    and had become visibly distressed during the questioning and the  judge
    failed to grant an adjournment which it was asserted was a  significant
    procedural irregularity.

 4. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    consider the overarching criteria of  fairness  in  line  with  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and that there  were  a
    number of factors when considered together rendered it arguably  unfair
    not to adjourn and that included an all female court, that the evidence
    was likely to include sensitive matters and detailed as  there  was  no
    substantive asylum interview and that the appellant  was  seven  months
    pregnant and distressed.

 5. The further grounds were that the judge had failed to give reasons  why
    the appellant's evidence was disbelieved and,  thirdly,  had  erred  in
    finding that the appellant could  safely  relocate  internally  if  she
    returned to Albania alone.

 6. At the hearing before me, Mr Bramble conceded that there was a material
    error of law in relation to the refusal to  grant  an  adjournment  and
    also conceded that the judge had failed to give adequate reasoning.

 7. On the basis that the judge did not consider the cumulative  impact  of
    the circumstances highlighted  by  Counsel,  I  accepted  Mr  Bramble's
    concession in relation to the  first  and  second  ground.   I  do  not
    necessarily find an error in relation to the refusal of an  adjournment
    for  an  all  female  court.   That  had  not  been  requested  by  the
    appellant's solicitors  prior  to  the  hearing  and  further  to  M  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 00121  on  this
    ground alone I would not have been so persuaded.   I  would  also  note
    that there is no obligation on or  indeed  power  of  the  Tribunal  to
    direct that  the  Secretary  of  State  conduct  an  interview  of  the
    appellant.

 8. That said, I do note that the appellant became distressed  and  bearing
    in mind her age, only  19  years  at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the
    cumulative effect is that it is likely that she may have been  hindered
    when giving her oral evidence which would affect the  fairness  of  the
    proceedings.    I  therefore  find  a  procedural  error  with  regards
    regarding the hearing which is an error of law.  As such  the  findings
    cannot be preserved.

 9. The matter should be returned  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   At  the
    hearing I directed the  Secretary  of  State  to  produce  evidence  in
    relation to the appellant's partner who appeared to have made  a  false
    asylum claim on the basis that he was a Kosovan national rather than an
    Albanian national.



Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the  reasons  identified.  I  set  aside  the
decision  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals   Courts   and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and  extent  of
the findings to be made the matter should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2  (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Direction to the Secretary of State

The  Secretary  of  State  should  produce  evidence  in  relation  to   the
appellant's husband [I D], aka [I D B] and his current  immigration  status
in the light of his claims  and  that  evidence  should  be  served  on  the
Tribunal and the appellant at least 21 days before the hearing.



Signed        Helen Rimington                          Date  15th  September
    2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
