
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00799/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2021                  |On 23 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NMS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Olawanle, Del & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (NMS).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 16 August 1979.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 21 December 2004 with entry clearance  as
    a student valid until 10 December 2005.  That leave was extended  until
    31 May 2007.  On 3 July 2007, the appellant was granted  further  leave
    as a student until 31 August 2008.  On 4 September 2008, the  appellant
    applied for further leave to remain as a student but this  was  refused
    on 16 December 2008 with no right of appeal.  On  16  March  2016,  the
    appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain   outside   the   Rules   on
    compassionate grounds.  On 18 October 2016 he was granted leave on this
    basis valid until 18 April 2017.

 4. On 27 January 2017, the appellant married a British citizen, Ms M  whom
    he had met in 2014.

 5. On 20 February 2017, the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  based
    upon his marriage under the  ten-year  route  in  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  On 22 May 2018,  the  Secretary
    of State refused the appellant's application.   On  29  May  2018,  the
    appellant lodged an appeal against the respondent's decision but, on 15
    November 2018, the appellant's appeal was  dismissed  by  Judge  Fraser
    sitting  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Permission  to   appeal   was
    subsequently refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 10 January 2019  and
    by the Upper Tribunal on 20 February 2019.

 6. On 14 March 2019, the appellant made an application for asylum  on  the
    basis that he would be at risk of serious harm on return to India as  a
    result of his inter-faith marriage to his wife.

 7. On 10 January 2020, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.



The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant again appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. In a decision sent on 15  January  2021,  Judge  Heaven  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.   The
    judge did not accept that the appellant would be  at  risk  of  serious
    harm or persecution on return to India.

10. However, the judge allowed the appellant's appeal under Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.  Although the judge found that the appellant  could  not  succeed
    under the relevant "partner" provisions in Appendix FM,  in  particular
    the requirements of para EX.1. were not met on  the  basis  that  there
    were not "insurmountable obstacles" to the appellant's family life with
    his wife continuing in India, the judge  nevertheless  found  that  the
    appellant's removal would be a disproportionate interference  with  his
    private and family life under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The appellant did not seek to challenge the judge's  dismissal  of  his
    appeal on international protection grounds.

12. However, the Secretary of State sought permission to appeal against the
    judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal under  Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.  In brief, the grounds contended that the  judge  had  failed  to
    give adequate reasons in his decision for allowing  the  appeal,  given
    Judge Fraser's earlier decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under
    Art 8, in particular in applying the provisions in ss.117B(1), (2)  and
    (4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  NIA  Act
    2002").

13. On 14 February 2021, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Feeney) granted the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.  At para 3 of his reasons, the
    judge set out, based upon the grounds, what he  considered  to  be  the
    arguable error of law:

         "... the judge acknowledged that  the  previous  decision  was  the
         starting point but Devaseelan is not a 'straitjacket'  and  he  was
         entitled to assess the evidence before him in deciding the  present
         appeal.  The judge did not appear to attach weight to the fact that
         the appellant could speak English and was  financially  independent
         whereas these are said to be neutral factors.   Further  the  judge
         said that the appellant had met his wife and married  her  when  he
         was lawfully present in the UK whereas that does not appear  to  be
         the case as he was an overstayer at the time.  The judge  erred  in
         these assessments and these arguably affected  his  proportionality
         assessment".

14. The appeal was listed for  a  substantive  hearing  before  me  at  the
    Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on 9 September  2021.   The  Secretary  of
    State was represented by Mr Howells and the appellant by Mr Olawanle.

15. Mr Howells relied upon the grounds of appeal which he  supplemented  in
    his oral submissions.  I also heard oral submissions from Mr  Olawanle.



The Judge's Decision

16. The appeal only concerns the judge's decision to allow the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8.  The judge approached Art 8  by  first  considering
    whether the appellant could succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules,  in
    particular the rules concerning a "partner" in Appendix FM.   At  paras
    27-28, the judge found that the appellant could not succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  Although it was accepted that the appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  partner,  in  order  to
    succeed under the Rules (as he was unlawfully in the UK), the appellant
    had to establish that para EX.1. applied, namely that  there  would  be
    "insurmountable obstacles to family  life"  with  his  wife  continuing
    outside the UK, in particular in India.  At paras 27-28, the judge made
    a finding  that  para  EX.1.  was  not  satisfied  as  there  were  not
    insurmountable obstacles.  That finding is not challenged.

17. Thereafter, the judge went on to consider the appellant's  claim  under
    Art 8 outside the Rules.  At para 29, the judge set out  the  competing
    arguments and the submissions made on behalf of the appellant that:

         "...considering the evidence in the round this  was  sufficient  to
         show  that  the  consequences  of  the  decision  will  cause  very
         substantial   difficulties   or   exceptional   circumstances    or
         unjustifiable harshness and when balanced against the  strength  of
         the public interest in immigration control my decision must fall in
         the appellant's favour".

18. At  para  30,  Judge  Heaven  gave  his  reasons  for  finding  in  the
    appellant's favour under Art 8 outside the Rules.  The judge said this:



         "Clearly the first parts of the Razgar tests are met and the  issue
         for  my  determination  is   proportionality.    When   considering
         proportionality and that balancing exercise I must undertake I find
         that the appellant speaks English and [Ms M] is able to support him
         and so he is financially  independent  and  not  a  burden  on  the
         taxpayer.  These  are  relevant  factors  to  the  public  interest
         considerations.  I take into account that  the  appellant  met  and
         married [Ms M] when he had valid leave to  remain  in  the  UK.   I
         accept that this relationship then developed when he was unlawfully
         present in the UK and I am required to afford this aspect of family
         life little weight.  However, this does not mean no weight.   There
         clearly is family life and the facts  are  different  to  when  the
         matter was last considered by IJ Fraser.  The couple have now  been
         married for over three years and I accept that it  is  likely  that
         the appellant will be granted  a  form  of  leave  to  enter.   The
         appellant if required to leave to obtain entry  clearance  will  be
         separated from [Ms  M]  and  I  accept  that  she  has  justifiable
         concerns about going to  India  based  on  the  discrimination  the
         respondent accepts the couple will face.  She will be left  in  the
         UK unsupported and feeling at risk from the family.   I  must  take
         this into account as it flows from the impact of the  interference.
         Considering all these matters in the round I  find  that  requiring
         the appellant to leave the UK  would  constitute  an  unlawful  and
         disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights".

19. At para 31, the judge added:

         "The Decision of the respondent breaches  the  appellant['s]  human
         rights under Article 8 ECHR.  Having taken all  the  above  matters
         into consideration, I find that the  maintenance  of  an  effective
         immigration control  is  in  the  public  interest.   However,  the
         Decision of the respondent in this particular case is inappropriate
         on the basis of the facts of this appeal.  For these  and  for  all
         the other reasons I have set out above, I consider the respondent's
         Decision is in all the circumstances [ ]  not  proportionate  in  a
         democratic society to the legitimate aim to be achieved".

20. As a consequence, the judge allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8.





The Submissions

21. On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  relying  upon  the  grounds,  Mr
    Howells made a number of submissions  which  he  contended  established
    material errors of law in the judge's reasoning essentially in para  30
    of his decision.

22. First, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had erred in law  by  taking
    into account, as relevant to the public interest,  that  the  appellant
    was financially independent and spoke English.  He submitted that  this
    was not the effect of ss.117B(2) and (3) as explained  by  the  Supreme
    Court in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58.  Mr Howells submitted that  it
    was a neutral factor that the appellant was financially independent and
    spoke English rather than, as the judge appeared  to  do  in  para  30,
    counted positively in the appellant's favour.

23. Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had erred in law  in  his
    approach to the weight that should be given to the  appellant's  family
    life.  In applying, it would appear  s.117B(4),  the  judge  mistakenly
    took into account that when the appellant and Ms M met  and,  therefore
    began to form their relationship, the appellant was lawfully in the UK.
     Mr Howells pointed out that in 2014 when they met the appellant had no
    lawful leave to remain in the UK as he had  been  an  overstayer  since
    2008.  Mr Howells accepted that the appellant had leave to remain  when
    he married in January 2017 but, again,  the  judge  had  misstated  the
    period of his lawful leave in para 2 as being between 18  October  2016
    and 18 October 2017 when, in fact, it was between 18 October  2016  and
    18 April 2017.  Mr Howells submitted that the judge had been wrong only
    to take into account that the appellant had been unlawfully in  the  UK
    as the relationship "developed".

24. Thirdly, Mr Howells submitted that the judge  effectively  applied  the
    House of Lords' decision in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40  when  he
    took into account that, if the appellant were required to leave, "it is
    likely that the appellant will be granted a form of  leave  to  enter".
    Mr Howells submitted that that, in itself, did not justify the  judge's
    decision that the appellant's removal would be disproportionate without
    taking into account the  public  interest  factors,  in  particular  in
    s.117B of the NIA Act 2002 as required by the Upper Tribunal's decision
    in Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba;  Zambrano)  [2020]  UKUT  129
    (IAC).  Mr Howells submitted that the judge made no  reference  to  the
    public interest factors, at least those weighing against the appellant,
    in para 30 before reaching his conclusion that the appellant's  removal
    would be disproportionate.  Mr Howells acknowledged that the judge made
    reference to the public interest in "effective immigration control"  in
    para 31 but, he submitted, by that time the judge had already reached a
    finding in the appellant's favour in respect of proportionality in para
    30.

25. Fourthly, Mr Howells submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding that the appellant succeeded  outside  the
    Rules  given  his  finding  in  paras  27-28  that   there   were   not
    insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's family life  continuing  in
    India.  In para 30, the judge had taken into  account  that  Ms  M  had
    concerns about going to India based upon discrimination  but,  in  para
    28, had concluded  that  that  discrimination  did  not  present  "very
    significant difficulties" or make it "impossible" for  family  life  to
    continue in India.  Further, the judge  had  also  taken  into  account
    that, if the appellant were to return to India, Ms M  would  remain  in
    the UK unsupported and with feelings of being at risk from her  family.
    However, the judge had failed to engage with his own finding in para 27
    that, although the couple had lived in fear of their family in the  UK,
    there had been "no contact or problems from the family since  the  last
    asylum appeal".

26.  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  errors  cumulatively  rendered  the
    proportionality finding unsafe and he invited me to set  that  part  of
    the decision aside and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal  to  re-make
    the decision under Art 8 outside the Rules.

27. On behalf of the appellant,  Mr  Olawanle  invited  me  to  uphold  the
    judge's finding under Art 8 of the ECHR.

28. First, Mr Olawanle submitted that the judge  had  properly  taken  into
    account the public interest both for and  against  the  appellant.   He
    submitted that the judge was entitled to take  into  account  that  the
    appellant spoke English and was financially independent as relevant  to
    the public interest.  He submitted that the judge had not in para 30 of
    his decision failed to take the public interest properly into  account.



29. Secondly, Mr Olawanle submitted that the  judge  had  been  correct  in
    applying the  "little  weight"  provision  in  s.117B(4)  in  that  the
    appellant had leave by the time of his marriage.   However,  the  judge
    correctly applied the "little weight" provision, as not  requiring  him
    to give "no weight" to the family life - as it "developed" -  when  the
    appellant  was  unlawfully  in  the  UK.    He   submitted   that   the
    circumstances of the appellant's relationship, in  particular  that  he
    married when he had leave, increased the weight  to  be  given  to  the
    relationship in the balancing exercise.

30. Thirdly, Mr Olawanle submitted that  the  judge  had  been  correct  to
    apply, in effect, the approach in Chikwamba.

31. Fourthly, Mr Olawanle submitted that the judge  had  been  entitled  to
    take into account the impact upon the appellant's  wife  both  if  they
    returned to India, and the discrimination they would face, and also her
    fear of her family in the UK if she remained in the UK.

32. Finally, Mr Olawanle submitted that the  judge  had  been  entitled  to
    depart from IJ Fraser's decision applying Devaseelan and  to  find,  on
    the  material  before  him,  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.  Mr Olawanle reminded me that I should not set  aside
    the decision simply because I disagreed with the outcome citing SSHD  v
    Starkey [2021] EWCA Civ 421.

Discussion

33. I will deal with each of the points  raised  in  the  grounds  and  the
    submissions in turn.




    Sections 117B(2) and (3)

34. As is well-known, s.117B of the NIA Act  2002  sets  out  a  number  of
    "public interest  considerations"  applicable  in  immigration  appeals
    relevant to the "public interest question" and which must be taken into
    account by any court or Tribunal determining whether a breach of Art  8
    is established (see s.117A of the NIA Act 2002).

35. Section 117B(2) states, in summary, that it is in the  public  interest
    that a person should be able to speak English as persons who can  speak
    English are less likely to be a burden on taxpayers and are better able
    to integrate into society.

36. Section 117B(3) states that it is in the public interest  that  persons
    who seek to enter or remain in the  UK  are  "financially  independent"
    because, again, such persons are not a  burden  on  taxpayers  and  are
    better able to integrate into society.

37. Plainly, when a person is unable to speak English or is not financially
    dependent, the public interest in their removal  is  engaged  by  these
    provisions.  That is in addition to the more  general  public  interest
    recognised in s.117B(1), namely that:  "the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest".

38. In this appeal, in para 30 of his decision, the judge took into account
    that the appellant was both financially independent and able  to  speak
    English.  I accept Mr Howells' submission that the  way  in  which  the
    judge took this  into  account  as  "relevant  factors  to  the  public
    interest considerations" can only be understood as if the effect was to
    diminish the public interest against the appellant or,  putting  it  in
    another way, add positively to his claim to remain in the UK.  That, in
    my judgment, is contrary to the proper understanding of the  effect  of
    ss.117B(2) and (3) as set  out  in  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in
    Rhuppiah.  At [57], Lord Wilson (with whom the other  Justices  agreed)
    said this:

         "The further submission on [Ms Rhuppiah's] behalf is and  has  been
         that the effect of section 117B(2) and (3) is to cast  her  ability
         to speak English and her financial independence  as  factors  which
         positively weigh in her favour in the inquiry under article 8.  But
         the further  submission  is  based  on  a  misreading  of  the  two
         subsections and was rightly rejected by Judge Blundell,  upheld  by
         the Court of Appeal, just as an analogous submission  was  rejected
         in para 18 of the decision in the AM case [AM (S117B) Malawi [2015]
         UKUT 260 (IAC)], cited at para 38 above. The subsections do not say
         that it is in the public interest that those who are able to  speak
         English and are financially independent should remain  in  the  UK.
         They say only that it is in the public interest that those who seek
         to remain in  the  UK  should  speak  English  and  be  financially
         independent;  and  the  effect  of  the  subsections  is  that,  if
         claimants under article 8 do  not  speak  English  and/or  are  not
         financially independent, there is, for the  two  reasons  given  in
         almost identical terms in the subsections, a public interest  which
         may help to justify the interference with their  right  to  respect
         for their private or family life in the UK. In seeking  to  portray
         the strength of their private or family life by  reference  to  all
         their circumstances, claimants may wish to highlight their  ability
         to speak English  and/or  their  financial  independence;  but  the
         legitimate deployment of such factors in  that  context  is  to  be
         contrasted  with  the  erroneous  further   submission   that   the
         subsections propel a conclusion that, where  those  factors  exist,
         there is a public interest in favour of the claims."

39. In my judgment, the judge illegitimately deployed  the  fact  that  the
    appellant spoke English and was financially independent in para  30  as
    counting positively in his favour when assessing the  public  interest.
    That amounted to an error of law.

    Section 117B(4)

40. Section 117B(4) provides that:

         "Little weight should be given to -

         (a)  a private life, or

         (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully".

41. The terms of that provision are to be contrasted with  s.117B(5)  which
    states that  "little  weight"  should  be  given  to  a  "private  life
    established" when a person's immigration status is "precarious".

42. Section 117B(4) applies to both "private life" and "family life" when a
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner  is  "established"  at  a
    time when the person was "unlawfully" in the UK.

43.  By  contrast  s.117B(5)  also  applies  to  "private  life"  which  is
    established  at  a  time  when  a  person's   immigration   status   is
    "precarious".

44. In Rhuppiah, the Supreme Court  concluded  that  s.117B(5)  applied  to
    situations where an individual had limited leave to remain  in  the  UK
    but not where an individual was "unlawfully" in the UK.  If the  latter
    was the case, then only s.117B(4) could be relevant (see [46]).

45. It follows, therefore, that  to  the  extent  that  the  appellant  was
    relying upon "family life"  with  his  partner  in  the  UK,  the  only
    provision that could apply to the appellant was s.117B(4).  That  would
    apply, such that "little weight" could be given to that family life  if
    the relationship formed with his wife was established at a time when he
    was unlawfully in the UK.

46. The immigration status of the appellant was wrongly identified  in  one
    respect by the judge in para 30.  The appellant was not in the UK  with
    valid leave to remain when he met his wife and,  it  must  be  assumed,
    when their relationship began in 2014.  He was,  however,  lawfully  in
    the UK as that relationship continued between October  2016  and  April
    2017 (including their marriage in January 2017)  but  not  beyond  that
    date.

47. On one reading of s.117B(4), the "little weight" provision  applied  to
    the appellant because his "relationship"  was  "established"  with  his
    "qualifying partner" beginning  in  2014  when  they  met  and  he  was
    unlawfully in the  UK.   The  term  "established"  in  respect  of  the
    relationship means, on this interpretation, "started" or "began".

48. A different reading  of  s.117B(4)  would  entail  recognising  that  a
    relationship with a qualifying partner is "established" not  simply  at
    the point at which a relationship "started" or "began" but at the point
    where it develops into a relationship between "partners".

49. In my judgment, the latter is the natural meaning of s.117B(4), and  in
    my view the one more likely intended  by  Parliament,  is  to  fix  the
    application of s.117B(4) on a relationship which came into existence at
    a time and developed the quality of a "partner" relationship  when  the
    individual was unlawfully in the UK.  There may  be  no  clear  'bright
    line' when a relationship  becomes  one  between  "partners"  -  it  is
    unlikely to be immediate on meeting - but that is what is required  for
    such a relationship to be said to be "established" within the terms  of
    s.117B(4).

50. The Upper Tribunal pointed out in Buci (Part 5A: "partner" [2020]  UKUT
    87 (IAC), the word "partner" is not defined in Part 5A of the  NIA  Act
    2002 and is not governed by the definition  of  "partner"  in  GEN.1.2.
    Appendix FM of the  Rules.   Of  course,  a  "partner"  as  defined  in
    GEN.1.2., including a spouse or a person  in  a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage who have lived together for at  least  two  years,  is  highly
    indicative that the individual is in a relationship with a  "qualifying
    partner" if the other individual is a British citizen or settled in the
    UK.  But the concept of a "partner" may go broader as the UT recognised
    in [18]  of  its  decision.   In  my  judgment,  it  is  the  "partner"
    relationship and when it is "established" that  engages  s.117B(4)  and
    the "little weight" provision it entails.

51. I do not accept Mr Olawanle's submission that s.117B(4) did  not  apply
    to the appellant because he had leave at  the  time  of  his  marriage.
    Section 117B(4) looks to when the "relationship" was  established  with
    the qualifying partner even if that relationship changed, for  example,
    from being an unmarried "partner" to being a married  partner  at  some
    point.  The  relationship,  despite  the  formal  legal  change,  would
    already have been established prior to the marriage.

52. Although the appellant's relationship with his (now)  spouse  would  no
    doubt have taken time to develop from their first meeting in  2014,  it
    is not suggested that they were not "partners" by  the  time  that  the
    appellant was again granted leave to remain in October 2016.   They, of
    course,  married  shortly  afterwards.   Consequently,  s.117B(4)   was
    engaged because between 2014 (when the appellant and  his  future  wife
    met) and October 2016 (when the appellant  was  again  granted  leave),
    their relationship as "partners" was established.

53. In those circumstances, the judge should have considered that s.117B(4)
    applied because the appellant's relationship with Ms M was  established
    at a time when he was unlawfully in the UK.  Properly understood,  that
    provision applied not because the relationship (after  their  marriage)
    had "developed when he was unlawfully present in  the  UK"  but  rather
    because he was unlawfully in the UK when the relationship  was  earlier
    "established".  It applied to the entirety of the  appellant's  "family
    life" with his partner/wife.

    The Public Interest Assessment




54. A judicial decision-maker is required to make an assessment of all  the
    relevant circumstances in carrying out the balancing exercise under Art
    8.2 weighing for and  against  the  public  interest.   The  judge  was
    required to determine what, if any, weight to give to  the  appellant's
    family life with his partner  and  taking  into  account  the  relevant
    public interest to determine whether there  were  "unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences" so  that  the  public  interest  was  outweighed  (see  R
    (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017 [60] per Lord Reed and Lal v  SSHD  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 1925).  In my judgment, in addition to  the  issue  raised  by  his
    application of s.117B(4),  the  judge  failed  in  a  number  of  other
    respects properly to carry out that "fair balancing" exercise  in  para
    30.




55. First, the judge's reliance upon  the  fact  that,  in  his  view,  the
    appellant would be granted entry clearance if he were to leave  the  UK
    to return to join  his  wife  relied  upon  the  position  set  out  in
    Chikwamba (and Agyarko at [51])  that  there  would  ordinarily  be  no
    public interest in an individual's  removal  if  he  or  she  would  be
    granted entry clearance.  But, as  the  UT  recognised  in  Younas  the
    relevant public interest factors, including in Part 5A of the  NIA  Act
    2002, must be taken into account and that reliance upon Chikwamba  does
    not obviate the need to do this.


56.  In  para  30,  to  the  extent  that  the  judge  considered  it   was
    disproportionate to require  the  appellant  to  seek  entry  clearance
    which, on the judge's premise he would be granted, the judge failed  to
    consider the public interest that should be placed in  the  balance  in
    deciding whether to require the appellant to do this  was  or  was  not
    proportionate.  That was an error of law.


57. Of course, a judge's decision must be read as a whole.  Nevertheless, I
    agree with Mr Howells that, although the judge referred to  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of effective immigration controls  in  para
    31,  it  is  plain  that  he  had  already  unequivocally  reached  his
    conclusion that the appellant's removal was disproportionate in para 30
    without reference to that public interest.

58. Second, carrying out the balancing exercise,  and  whether  there  were
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences" sufficient to  outweigh  the  public
    interest, the judge was entitled to take into account the impact on the
    appellant's wife if she were to go to India or if she were to remain in
    the UK.  Of course, the judge had already reached the  conclusion  that
    there were not insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and  his  wife
    continuing on their family life in India.

59. In para 30, the  judge  took  into  account  discrimination  which  the
    appellant and his wife considered they would face in India and also, if
    she remained in the UK, her feeling that she would be at risk from  her
    family.  Whilst neither of these matters was irrelevant to the  judge's
    assessment, the judge had to take into account that  he  had  concluded
    that the discrimination which they might face  as  a  result  of  their
    mixed faith marriage did not create an insurmountable obstacle to  them
    living in India.

60. Further, the judge had to take into account the evidence that he heard,
    and set out at para 27, that although the couple lived in fear  of  the
    family in the UK there had  been  "no  contact  or  problems  from  the
    family" since the last asylum appeal.

61. In other words, not only did the judge have to take into account  their
    subjective fears but also he had to determine objectively what, if any,
    fears or risks there were to them of, on the one hand, going  to  India
    (even if only to obtain entry clearance) or, on the other hand, of  the
    appellant's wife remaining in the UK if only  for  a  temporary  period
    whilst the appellant applied for entry clearance to return.

62. In my judgment, the judge's reasons in para 30  do  not  satisfactorily
    engage with the "fair balancing" exercise and the  public  interest  in
    reaching  his  finding  that   the   appellant's   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.  For the above reasons,  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for his conclusion that,  despite  the  appellant  not
    being able to succeed under the Immigration Rules (in  particular  para
    EX.1. was not satisfied), there were "unjustifiably harsh consequences"
    so that the public interest in the appellant's removal  was  outweighed
    by the impact upon him (and his wife) of his removal.

63. For these reasons, the judge materially erred in law  in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 outside the Rules.  That decision cannot
    stand and is set aside.



Decision

64. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 of the ECHR involved the making of an error of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

65. The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on  international
    protection grounds was not challenged and stands.

66. It was common ground between the parties that the  proper  disposal  of
    the appeal, if the error of law  was  established,  was  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in  order  to  re-make  the  decision
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.

67. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding  required,  and  that  oral
    evidence is likely to  be  given,  applying  para  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement, I agree that  the  proper  disposal  of
    this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal in order  to  re-
    make the decision in relation to Art 8.

68. However, as the judge's findings in relation to the  Immigration  Rules
    set out at paras 27-28 of his determination are not  challenged,  those
    findings shall stand, in particular that the appellant  cannot  succeed
    under the 'partner' Rules in Appendix FM as he  does  not  satisfy  the
    requirement in para EX.1.

69. The appeal will, therefore, be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    re-make the decision on that basis to be heard by a  judge  other  than
    Judge Heaven (or Judge Fraser).


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           21 September 2021




