
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00741/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2020                      |On 14 July 2020                      |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    S A P
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh. He  applied  for  asylum  on
    the basis that he would be persecuted as  a  gay  man  if  returned  to
    Bangladesh, but his application was refused. He appealed this decision,
    but his appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin, in a
    decision promulgated on 2 January 2020.

2.   He appealed against this decision and on  7  February  2020  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Landes granted him permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  An error of law hearing was set down for 23 March  2020  but
    on 19 March 2020 his hearing was vacated as a result  of  the  Covid-19
    Pandemic.

3.   On 28  April  2020  the  President,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane  gave
    directions about the future conduct of the error of law proceedings and
    said that it was his view that the error of law hearing could be  heard
    on the papers. a material error of law  in  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett's decision, to set aside her decision and remit the appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   Counsel for the Appellant made further written  submissions  on  9  May
    2020 and I extend time for the Appellant to do so in the light  of  the
    difficulties which have arisen in relation to the grant of legal aid as
    a result of the Pandemic. The Respondent lodged her  skeleton  argument
    on 14 May 2020. The Appellant replied on 20 May 2020.

5.   Neither party objected to the error of law hearing being heard  on  the
    papers and both have provided me  with  detailed  written  submissions.
    Therefore, I have proceeded to decide whether there was an error of law
    on the papers, as it is in the interests of justice for there to be  no
    further unnecessary delay in this appeal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   At paragraph 27 of his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baldwin
    found that the Appellant was a gay man  and  that  he  had  been  in  a
    relationship with his  partner  for  around  four  years;  despite  the
    difference between their ages and cultures. He also accepted that a few
    friends knew about his relationship.

7.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin placed  significant  weight  on  the
    fact that the Appellant's family did not know about his  sexuality  but
    failed to take into account the disclosures that he made  to  Ms  Atas-
    Kelly,  a  consultant  clinical  psychologist,  about  being   sexually
    assaulted by his grandfather when still a child and also his  fears  of
    being persecuted in Bangladesh by his uncle, who was an MP.

8.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin  failed  to  take  these  fears  into
    account when he concluded in paragraph 28 of his decision that  one  of
    the reasons that he thought that the Appellant would be content to deny
    his sexuality in Bangladesh was that he had not introduced his  partner
    to this uncle, as his partner, when he visited London.

9.   He also failed to take into account the Appellant's mental health  when
    assessing his activities in London and whether  he  regularly  attended
    gay clubs. It was clear from the report written by Ms  Atas-Kelly  that
    the Appellant had said that he felt very anxious and  that  his  social
    life was mainly restricted to time spent with his partner. It was  also
    clearly from the significant number of photographs in  the  Appellant's
    Bundle that many other people would have seen  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner together in public.

10.  Furthermore,  when  considering  whether  it  would  be  safe  for  the
    Appellant to return to Bangladesh, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baldwin
    did not take into account the fact that he would be seen with an  older
    British man as opposed to a man of his own age and  nationality,  where
    friendship may be more expected. Neither did the Judge consider any  of
    the objective evidence relating to Bangladesh and the  risks  faced  by
    the LGBTI community.

11.  In addition, in paragraph  29  of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Baldwin conflated a proper consideration of whether there  was  a
    serious risk that the Appellant would be persecuted in Bangladesh  with
    what appeared to be a human rights assessment.

12.  For all of these reasons, First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin's  decision
    contained material errors of law.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Baldwin or Landes.

Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 27 June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

