
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00157/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7th August 2017                    |On 31st  August 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     BP
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal of protection under paragraphs 326, 339 and 339F of HC 395  (as
    amended).

 2. The core of the appellant's account is that he grew up from the age  of
    6 with his uncle and eventually moved to live with his brother and  his
    wife when his brother joined the PJAK, that he had a girlfriend in Iran
    and difficulties were caused when the  girlfriend's  brother  saw  them
    together and threatened to kill him, and that the girlfriend's  brother
    stabbed him in the arm causing  scarring  and  resulting  in  a  family
    dispute which escalated to the point  where  the  girlfriend's  brother
    threatened to tell the revolutionary guards about the link between  the
    appellant and his brother and PJAK.

 3. The judge's credibility finding is founded in part on her disbelief  of
    the account regarding the girlfriend.  At [33] the judge said:-

         "33. I find that if the incident  had  occurred  as  the  appellant
             claims then [the girlfriend's brother] and  his  family  would
             have felt dishonoured not only by the  appellant  but  by  his
             sister  ...  and  I  find  having  considered  the   objective
             evidence, it is more likely that  the  appellant's  girlfriend
             would have been  killed  for  dishonouring  her  family.   The
             appellant  has  not  mentioned  anything  happening   to   his
             girlfriend ...

         34.  I also find that [the girlfriend's  brother]  would  not  have
             attempted to kill or harm the appellant because he would  have
             considered the  consequence  to  himself.   According  to  the
             objective evidence 'Islamic law includes  a  principle  called
             qisas, which gives private individuals  the  right  to  demand
             retaliation in kind for a murder or deliberate bodily injury'.



         35.  The appellant relies on the scars he has on  his  arm  and  he
             provided photographs taken on a mobile phone showing scars  on
             his left arm.  As I do not accept the appellant is telling the
             truth about his claim, I do not accept that  the  injuries  on
             his arm were caused in the way he claimed it did."

 4. There are three significant flaws in  that  core  analysis,  the  first
    being that the assessment of the account of the threat is made  to  the
    standard "more likely than not" which is the ordinary civil standard of
    proof and not the lower standard applicable to protection  claims.   It
    is impossible to determine what the judge would have  decided  had  she
    applied the correct standard.  The second point is  that  at  [34]  the
    information about Islamic law and qisas  comes  from  the  respondent's
    Country Information and Guidance Note on  Women  for  Iran  April  2016
    which is in the public domain, but given that the judge  was  intending
    to rely on it she should have given an opportunity for the  appellant's
    representatives to make submissions on the  contents  of  that  report,
    which does not seem to have occurred.

 5. Finally, at [35] the judge  erroneously  applies  what  by  this  point
    appears to be a decided assessment of the  appellant's  credibility  to
    the photographs of the scarring on  his  arm  rather  than  taking  the
    admittedly rather limited evidence of the scarring  into  account  when
    arriving at the decision on the credibility of his overall account.

Conclusions

Given the seriousness of these three  errors  this  decision  cannot  stand.
There is a material error of law therein and I set  it  aside.   The  appeal
will be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date:        31 August 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

