
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00737/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 November 2016                       |On 06 December 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse, Counsel, instructed by Joules Law
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. Mr MA (Appellant) appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the
        First-tier  Tribunal  Dhaliwal,  promulgated  on  23  August  2016,
        dismissing his protection  and  human  rights  appeal  against  the
        Respondent's decision of 13 January 2016  refusing  his  protection
        and human rights claims.


   Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan,  date  of  birth  18  July
        1985. He entered the United Kingdom pursuant  to  a  visitor  entry
        clearance granted on  16  March  2015  and  claimed  asylum  on  14
        September 2015. The Appellant is an Ahmadi and he claimed to face a
        real risk of persecution in Pakistan on account of his religion.


     3. The following is a summary of the Appellant's  account.  He  hailed
        from a prominent Ahmadi family. He had an altercation with a mullah
        involving the Appellant's motorcycle and the  mullah's  stall.  The
        Appellant accidentally made physical contact with the  mullah,  who
        was the son of an influential man.  The  Appellant  was  recognised
        because his father was a doctor and the Mullah said he  would  kill
        every Ahmadi. The Appellant maintains that, together with 10 to  12
        other men, the mullah attacked his uncle's shop that  evening,  and
        the Appellant's house was attacked some 3 days later. A threat  was
        made against the Appellant's father and the father fled to  the  UK
        where he was eventually  granted  asylum.  The  Appellant  went  to
        Sweden on 27  August  2010  to  study,  but  also  because  he  was
        concerned for his safety. He did not claim asylum because he wanted
        to return  to  Pakistan  as  he  believed  his  troubles  would  be
        forgotten. The Respondent noted that the  Appellant  also  went  to
        Norway and Germany. The Appellant returned to Pakistan in 2014  and
        got married before returning to Sweden. He left Sweden in July 2015
        because he lost his job and returned  to  Pakistan.  The  Appellant
        claims that on 7 August 2015 he was outside a  mosque  when  a  man
        shouted his name and gathered others together. The  Appellant  fled
        and came to the UK. Since being in the United Kingdom the Appellant
        joined the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association  and  has  been  an  active
        member.


     4.  The  Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  Ahmadi.  The
        Respondent did not however find that the  Appellant  held  a  well-
        founded  fear  of  persecution.  The  Respondent  noted  that   the
        Appellant had returned to Pakistan over 3 times since  he  left  in
        2010, and that he had not claimed asylum in 3  different  countries
        in which he had resided. The Appellant had  never  openly  preached
        his faith in Pakistan and the Respondent was not satisfied that the
        Appellant genuinely intend or wished to manifest his  faith  openly
        in Pakistan. The Respondent was not satisfied that preaching was of
        particular significance to the Appellant's religious identity.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing

     5. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant and  from
        two witnesses, his father and the vice president of  the  Ahmadiyya
        Jamaat of West Birmingham. The judge set out the Appellant's claim,
        noting his various memberships of Ahmadi groups over the years, and
        set out the basis for the Respondents decision.


     6. At [25] the judge indicated that  the  real  issue  she  needed  to
        consider was whether there was a risk to the Appellant based on how
        he would conduct himself on return to Pakistan, and if so,  whether
        relocation was a realistic option, having regard to MN  and  others
        (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389
        (IAC).


     7. At [27] the judge noted that the Appellant preached to his  friends
        whilst at university in Pakistan, never to the general  public.  In
        his asylum interview the Appellant  had  stated  that  he  had  not
        openly  preached  his  faith  in  Pakistan.  The  judge  noted  the
        Appellant's evidence that he was able  to  practice  his  faith  in
        Pakistan by preaching discreetly to a trusted select few.


     8. The judge noted that, whilst in Sweden, the Appellant was  actively
        involved in the  Ahmadi  community  and  preached  by  distributing
        leaflets. The judge noted that, whilst in  Germany,  the  Appellant
        took a friend with him to an Ahmadi congregation. The  judge  noted
        the Appellant's involvement in the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association  in
        the UK.


     9. At [28] the judge accepted, based on her findings of fact, that the
        Appellant viewed his faith "... as an important aspect of his  life
        and that he had dedicated the majority of his life to  his  faith."
        The judge noted however that whilst in Pakistan the  Appellant  had
        not engaged in any behaviour that was likely to bring  him  to  the
        adverse attention of the authorities.


    10. The judge attached significance to the  Appellant's  activities  in
        the Sweden, Norway and Germany. At [30] the judge said there was no
        evidence of any  involvement  by  the  Appellant  with  the  Ahmadi
        community in Norway at all. The judge was not  satisfied  that  the
        handing out of leaflets in Sweden and his visit to  a  congregation
        in Germany, when he invited a friend, indicated that the  Appellant
        felt the need and desire to engage  in  preaching  to  be  able  to
        identify himself as an Ahmadi. The Appellant's preaching activities
        was said to be limited throughout the period of  5  years  that  he
        lived in these safe countries. The judge concluded  that  preaching
        was not an integral and important part of the Appellant's identity.


    11.  The  judge  questioned  (at  [31])  the  motivation   behind   the
        Appellant's more public activities in the UK. The  judge  concluded
        that the Appellant's activities  in  the  UK  were  an  attempt  to
        bolster his asylum claim. The judge supported  this  conclusion  by
        reference  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  took  legal  advice
        following his entry into the United Kingdom and that shortly  after
        taking  legal  advice  he  made  contact  with  his  local   Ahmadi
        community. The judge stated that the only  difference  between  the
        other safe countries and the UK was that  the  Appellant's  parents
        resided in the  UK.  The  judge  was  of  the  view  that,  if  the
        Appellant's preaching activities had been an important  element  of
        his religious identity then he would have conducted  himself  in  a
        similar way in Sweden, Norway and Germany [32]. The judge concluded
        by finding that preaching was not an essential and  important  part
        of the Appellant's identity as an Ahmadi, and  that  the  Appellant
        would be able to practice his faith in Pakistan without feeling the
        wish to practice and manifest aspects of his faith openly.


    12. At [37] the judge concluded that the incidence  of  September  2009
        and the recent incident at the  mosque  following  the  Appellant's
        return to Pakistan did not support his claim in any  material  way.
        The judge stated, "It may well be that in  2009  that  an  incident
        began as a result of him making accidental contact with a male  and
        he was then called names based on his religion. It  is  unfortunate
        that there is abuse in  Pakistan  directed  towards  those  of  the
        Ahmadi faith. Whilst this is unacceptable,  it  is  harassment  and
        threats which can be dealt with internally in Pakistan through  the
        police." Given her finding that the  Appellant  did  not  genuinely
        wish to engage in conduct that  would  breach  Pakistan  laws,  the
        judge found there  was  no  reason  why  the  Appellant  could  not
        relocate elsewhere in Pakistan and continue practicing his faith.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

    13. The original grounds, which were not drafted with great  precision,
        contended that the judge misapplied MN. Her finding that it was not
        particularly important to the  Appellant's  religious  identity  to
        practice and manifest his faith openly in Pakistan was said  to  be
        inconsistent with her acceptance  that  the  Appellant  viewed  his
        faith as an important aspect of his life and dedicated the majority
        of his life to it. It was submitted that  any  form  of  preaching,
        even if discrete, was prohibited by the Pakistan penal code and the
        Appellant therefore fell within the ambit of  MN.  This  particular
        ground was not pursued at the error of law hearing.


    14. The grounds further contended that the judge failed  to  apply  the
        principles enunciated in HJ (Iran) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
        Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1024 as the Appellant was unable to
        recite the Koran and say the call to prayer, or call his  mosque  a
        mosque. The grounds contended that the judge failed to consider the
        decision in his father's asylum appeal. It was submitted  that  the
        Appellant's legal representatives at the time of his appeal hearing
        failed to include his father's  asylum  appeal  decision  (dated  8
        October 2014) in the appeal bundle. This was said to have  amounted
        to poor legal practice and negligence. To that end a complaint  had
        been lodged against the previous representatives. It was  submitted
        that the judge erred by not enquiring as to why the father's asylum
        appeal was not before the Tribunal. It was submitted that  a  large
        part of the Appellant's claim was corroborated by the  decision  in
        his father's asylum appeal and that the judge failed  to  make  any
        reference to the evidence given by the Appellant's  father,  either
        in his statement or his  oral  evidence.  The  father's  successful
        asylum appeal was particularly relevant to the  judge's  conclusion
        (at [37]) that the threats made against the Appellant by the mullah
        could be dealt with internally in Pakistan through the police.


    15.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  on  all   of   the
        Appellant's grounds holding that they had shown arguable errors  of
        law that may have made a material difference to the outcome of  the
        appeal.

Submissions at the error of law hearing


    16. Ms Hulse sought to introduce a  supplementary  bundle  pursuant  to
        rule 15 (2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
        This supplementary bundle included letters of complaint  to  Morden
        solicitors (the Appellant's previous  representatives),  a  witness
        statement of the Appellant regarding the complaint, and the  asylum
        appeal determination of the Appellant's father. Ms  Hulse  did  not
        produce a skeleton argument that  would  have  assisted  the  Upper
        Tribunal.


    17.  Ms  Hulse  initially  submitted  that  I   should   consider   the
        determination in the father's asylum claim as this was relevant  to
        whether the judge erred in law  by  failing  to  enquire  into  the
        decision. It was submitted that judges very  often  enquired  about
        determinations in respect of other family  members,  and  that  the
        Home Office often produced such determinations. Ms Hulse  submitted
        that the judge should have requested  the  father's  determination,
        even though this was not provided by the Appellant.


    18. Thereafter, Ms Hulse's submissions revolved around  four  different
        issues. Firstly, the judge erred in law by  failing  to  take  into
        account the evidence from the Appellant's father, both  in  respect
        of the father's written  statement  and  in  respect  of  the  oral
        evidence at the hearing. The judge failed to indicate what  weight,
        if any, he placed on the  father's  evidence.  In  particular,  the
        judge was not entitled to conclude that the treatment to which  the
        Appellant and his father were subjected in 2009 could be dealt with
        internally by the Pakistan police.


    19. Secondly, Ms  Hulse  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  fully
        consider the letter from the Ahmadiyya Muslim  Association  UK  (at
        C149 in the Respondent's bundle)  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
        significant involvement within the Ahmadi community.  Following  MK
        (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC)  it  was
        submitted that this letter provided  independent  verification  and
        confirmation of the Appellant's activities.


    20. Ms Hulse thirdly submitted that the judge failed to properly assess
        the evidence relating to  the  Appellant's  activities  in  Sweden,
        Norway and Germany,  or  that  the  judge's  conclusions  were  not
        supported by the evidence before her. In respect of the Appellant's
        proselytising activities in Sweden Ms Hulse pointed out that  there
        may well have been language issues, that the Appellant was studying
        full-time for a Master's degree (which he wasn't in  the  UK),  and
        that when distributing leaflets the  Appellant  would  engage  with
        individuals about his religion. The Appellant's evidence  was  that
        he had only visited Norway on four occasions  and  Germany  on  one
        occasion, and that the Appellant had preached in Germany by  taking
        a friend, at his own  expense,  to  a  three-day  congregation.  Ms
        Hulse's 4th submission was that the judge  failed  to  address  the
        fact that the Appellant came from a  prominent  Ahmadi  family  and
        that this was relevant in determining how the Appellant would  wish
        to act if removed to Pakistan.


    21.   Ms   Isherwood   submitted   that   the   Appellant's    previous
        representatives had the determination of his father's asylum appeal
        and had  chosen  not  to  adduce  it  in  evidence.  There  was  no
        obligation on the judge to seek out a document that the Appellant's
        representatives chose not to adduce. The test for the admission  of
        further evidence in an error of law hearing, as set out in  Ladd  v
        Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489, and modified in E & R  v  Secretary  of
        State for Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49, had not been met. The
        judge was rationally entitled to her conclusions in respect of  the
        Appellant's activities in  Norway,  Sweden  and  Germany,  and  was
        entitled to take  into  account  an  increase  in  the  Appellant's
        proselytizing activities once he entered the UK.

Discussion

    22. Ms Hulse sought to introduce the determination promulgated  by  the
        First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the  asylum  appeal  by  the
        Appellant's father. It was not disputed that the Appellant and  his
        representatives at the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing  had
        possession of the father's appeal decision.  It  appears  that  the
        solicitors specifically chose not to adduce  the  decision  at  the
        hearing. Whilst I accept Ms Hulse's observation that  judges  often
        ask about appeal decisions relating to other  family  members,  and
        that the Home  Office  often  provide  such  decisions,  I  am  not
        satisfied there is any obligation on the judge to actively seek out
        or request  a  decision  in  all  circumstances.  This  remains  an
        adversarial jurisdiction and it would be inappropriate for a  judge
        to give the impression of descending into the arena and  acting  in
        an overtly inquisitorial role. It is up to the parties  to  provide
        the evidence they deem important. It would  place  an  unreasonable
        burden on a judge  to  seek  out  evidence  that  could  have  been
        provided but was not provided, after consideration, by a party.


    23. I have considered the authorities of E & R v Secretary of State for
        Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49 and R (Iran) & Ors  v  Secretary
        of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  982.  I  am  not
        satisfied there was any 'mistake' in  the  failure  to  adduce  the
        father's  asylum  appeal  decision.  It   appears   that   specific
        consideration was given  as  to  whether  to  adduce  the  father's
        decision. In the circumstances I can see no merit in  Miss  Hulse's
        assertion that the Appellant was deprived of a fair hearing by  the
        conduct of his  representatives  or  the  failure  to  provide  his
        father's decision. I am not satisfied that  it  is  appropriate  to
        admit the father's decision into evidence when determining  whether
        the first-tier Tribunal materially erred in law. It  remains  clear
        however that the judge accepted that the Appellant's father  was  a
        refugee, and that the father produced a written statement and  gave
        evidence before the judge.



    24. For the following reasons I find  there  is  merit  in  Ms  Hulse's
        submission  that  the  judge  either  misdirected  herself  in  her
        consideration  of  the  Appellant's  proselytising  activities   in
        Sweden, Norway and Germany, or  that  the  judge's  conclusions  in
        relation to such activities was not supported  by  evidence  before
        her.


    25. The judge clearly attached  significant  weight  to  the  different
        nature of the Appellant's activities in Sweden, Norway and Germany,
        in comparison to his increased public activities  in  the  UK  (see
        [32] & [34]). To be entitled to distinguish between the Appellant's
        activities in these countries, based on differences in the  way  he
        conducted himself, it was important for the  judge  to  have  fully
        considered the circumstances of the Appellant  in  these  countries
        and the nature of the activities that he undertook.

    26. The judge appeared to believe that the Appellant lived  in  Germany
        and Norway as well as Sweden (see [19], 29] and  [30]).  There  did
        not however appear to have been any evidence  suggesting  that  the
        Appellant ever lived in Germany or Norway. There  was  very  little
        evidence before the judge as to how long the Appellant  resided  in
        Norway or Germany, how frequently he visited  those  countries  (it
        was the Appellant's evidence that he had been  to  Norway  about  4
        times (Q11) but he was not asked how  many  times  he  had  visited
        Germany) or why he went to those countries. There was  no  evidence
        before the judge as to whether the Appellant  spoken  Norwegian  or
        German (or indeed Swedish).


    27. The Appellant initially resided in Sweden  as  a  student,  and  it
        appears that he was last granted permission to remain  there  as  a
        worker, although he subsequently lost his job. In his interview the
        Appellant indicated that he distributed 'preaching  leaflets'  that
        were designed to introduce the reader to the Ahmadi faith (Qns  55,
        57, 58). The Appellant used to distribute these leaflets to  houses
        and outside the university campus (Qns 60 & 62). When he handed out
        the leaflets the Appellant would talk about the Ahmadis as being  a
        sect of Islam (Qn 64). The Appellant  said  that  he  didn't  avoid
        preaching to Muslims and would distribute to everyone on  the  road
        but those he believed were Muslims would not take the leaflets from
        him because they knew he was Ahmadi (Qn  67).  When  asked  why  he
        distributed the leaflets the  Appellant  said  it  was  a  part  of
        preaching and because there  was  not  much  else  to  do  for  his
        organisation in the town in which he lived (Qn 68).  The  Appellant
        indicated in his interview that there were only 3  Ahmadis  in  the
        town in which he lived (Qn 55). This  would  clearly  restrict  the
        range of Ahmadi  activities  the  Appellant  would  be  capable  of
        undertaking.


    28.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  failed  to  contextualise  the
        Appellant's activities in Sweden. No account was taken of the  fact
        that the Appellant was only one of 3 Ahmadi's in his town,  or  the
        fact that he was studying at the same time. Nor is  it  clear  that
        the judge fully appreciated the circumstances of his leafleting. If
        the judge had  properly  considered  this  evidence  she  may  have
        concluded (but would not have been obliged to  conclude)  that  the
        Appellant's  activities  were  more   significant   in   terms   of
        proselytising than she actually found.

    29. The judge appears to have proceeded on the basis that the Appellant
        lived in Norway and Germany. There was simply  no  evidence  before
        the judge to support this assumption. I'm not satisfied  the  judge
        was entitled to hold against  the  Appellant  the  absence  of  any
        asserted proselytising in Norway  in  circumstances  where  it  was
        wholly unclear how long the Appellant resided in  Norway,  what  he
        was doing there or how often he visited.


    30. It is not clear from the Appellant's  interview  or  statement  how
        often he visited Germany. Ms Hulse submitted that he only  went  to
        Germany once  but  the  evidential  basis  for  this  assertion  is
        unclear. At Qns 71 to 77 of  his  asylum  interview  the  Appellant
        described taking a Muslim friend  who  was  studying  with  him  at
        university (presumably in Sweden) to a 3 day Ahmadi congregation in
        Germany. The Appellant put his friend up in  a  hotel  at  his  own
        expense, and the friend listened  to  the  speeches  given  by  the
        current Ahmadi leader. If the Appellant did only visit  Germany  on
        the  one  occasion  then  his  entire  visit  was  an  exercise  in
        proselytising. The judge held against the Appellant the absence  of
        any other evidence of proselytising activity in  Germany,  but  she
        was only entitled to do  so  if  fully  aware  of  the  Appellant's
        circumstances in Germany,  such  as  how  long  and  how  often  he
        visited, and what he did when he was there.


    31. The judges assessment of the (lack of) proselytising activities  of
        the Appellant in Sweden, Norway and Germany,  in  contrast  to  his
        activities in the UK,  was  a  material  finding  underpinning  her
        conclusion relating to the importance to the Appellant  of  holding
        open discourse  about  his  religion  and  the  importance  to  his
        religious identity of being able to practice and manifest his faith
        openly. For the reasons given above I am satisfied that  the  judge
        did err in law in her approach to this  assessment  and  that  this
        renders her conclusions unsafe.


    32. I have additional concerns relating to the  judge's  assessment  of
        the incidents that cause the Appellant to leave Pakistan  in  2010.
        At [37] the judge states that the Appellant may well have  been  in
        an incident involving accidental contact with a  mullah.  According
        to the judge  the  incident  involved  the  Appellant  been  called
        derogatory names based on his religion. This however does not fully
        reflect the  Appellant's  account,  or  that  of  his  father.  The
        Appellant claimed that the mullah recognised him because his father
        was a doctor, threatened him and threatened to  kill  all  Ahmadis.
        The Appellant described how, that evening,  his  uncle's  shop  was
        attacked, and how some 3 days later there  was  an  attack  on  the
        Appellant's home during which the Appellant was requested to  leave
        the house. With the greatest respect of the judge, this  goes  some
        way beyond mere harassment and threats. If the Appellant's  account
        was true (the judge did not make  a  specific  adverse  finding  in
        relation to this account) the Appellant was  specifically  targeted
        in a serious manner by a  number  of  individuals  because  of  his
        religion. The judge did not identify any background evidence before
        her indicating that activity of this nature  could  be  "...  dealt
        with internally in Pakistan through the police." On  the  contrary,
        the general tenor of  the  background  evidence  before  the  judge
        relating to Ahmadis in Pakistan suggested that the police  may  not
        be willing to deal adequately with the  threats  and  assault  (see
        paragraphs 2.33 and 2.3.4 of the Country Information and Guidance -
        Pakistan: Ahmadis (May 2016), contained in the Appellant's bundle).
        Furthermore,  although  the  appeal  decision  in  respect  of  the
        Appellant's father's asylum claim was not  before  the  judge,  the
        judge was aware  that  the  Appellant's  father  was  a  recognised
        refugee (see [18]). In his appeal statement the Appellant's  father
        made specific reference to the attack on  the  family  home  on  19
        September 2009 (paragraph 8 of the father's  statement,  A14).  The
        Appellant's father described that he  and  his  family  feared  for
        their lives (paragraph 9, supra). No  reference  was  made  by  the
        judge to this evidence.


    33. In all the circumstances I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        decision is  unsafe.  Given  that  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
        activities in Sweden, Norway and Germany will need to be revisited,
        I consider it appropriate to remit the matter back  to  the  First-
        tier Tribunal for a full de novo hearing.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law.
The matter will be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
hearing, to be heard by a judge other  than  Judge  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Dhaliwal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum               06 December 2016
