
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00721/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard and dictated at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th February 2018                        |On 2nd March 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before


                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE NICKLIN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     PIM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Billie, Legal Representative, A. Billie Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                   [extemporary judgment given at hearing]

1.   The appellant in this case, in respect of whom an  anonymity  direction
    has been made, is a citizen either of Zimbabwe or South Africa, it does
    not matter for the present purposes what, and  is  presently  40  years
    old.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 12th May 2002, travelling  on
    a South African passport.   He  claimed  asylum,  but  that  claim  was
    refused, and an appeal dismissed.

2.   The appellant was convicted on 9th October  2007  of  possession  of  a
    counterfeit passport.  He was sentenced to  ten  months'  imprisonment.
    On 26th March 2013, the appellant applied for leave to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules in a slightly  different  name,  his  second  and
    first names had been transposed.  The application  was  rejected  as  a
    mandatory part of that form had not been completed.  He  reapplied  for
    leave on 2nd August 2013 based on ten years' family and private life in
    the UK.  That application was refused.

3.   Notice of deportation was served on him on 5th November 2015.   On  9th
    January 2017, the Secretary of State refused  a  protection  and  human
    rights claim  made  by  the  appellant  on  29th  December  2015.   The
    appellant's evidence was  that  he  was  married  in  2006,  he  has  a
    daughter, S, now aged 7 and both his  daughter  and  wife  are  British
    citizens.  The appellant appealed the decision to refuse his protection
    and human rights claims to the First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on 22nd November 2017  and
    the judge promulgated the reasons on 6th December 2017.

4.   The judge correctly noted,  at  paragraph  13  of  the  decision,  that
    paragraphs 399 and 399A of the immigration rules (HC395) did not  apply
    because the appellant's sentence was below twelve months. Nevertheless,
    in paragraph 45, the judge addressed the  question  of  whether,  under
    Section 117C, it would be unduly harsh  for  S  to  remain  in  the  UK
    without the appellant.  She found that it  would  not  be.   The  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian grounds.

5.   The appellant's application for permission  to  appeal  was  lodged  on
    20th December 2017.  Various grounds were advanced but the first was  a
    challenge to the judge's conclusions in relation to Section  117C.   It
    was submitted that, having found correctly that the appellant was not a
    foreign criminal (as he had not been  sentenced  to  more  than  twelve
    months' imprisonment, had not been convicted of an offence that  caused
    serious  harm  and  was  not  a  persistent  offender),   the   judge's
    consideration of Section 117C was erroneous.  She should have  assessed
    the applicant's Article 8 claim in accordance with Section  117B,  and,
    in particular, Section 117B(6), which provides:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and


         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

    Qualifying child for these purposes  is  defined  in  Section  117D  as
    including a British citizen.

6.    In  paragraph  45,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant did have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  S.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen on
    5th January 2018 on the grounds we have identified  above.   Permission
    to appeal was refused on grounds 7 to 9.

7.   For the reasons that have been advanced, we find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did err in determining that Section 117C governed the decision
    she had to make.  That section did not apply because the appellant  did
    not fall into the category of foreign criminal.  His claim should  have
    been assessed by reference to the  criteria  in  Section  117B  and  in
    particular Section 117B(6).

8.   Therefore, we will allow the appeal.  We will remit it  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal but with the direction that the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    only considering the Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the First-tier Tribunal  materially
erred in law in its consideration of the article 8 human rights  claim.  The
case is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal,  before  a  judge  other  than
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  M  Robertson,  to  reconsider  afresh  the
article 8 appeal only.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed: [pic]          Date: 22 February 2018

The Honourable Mr Justice Nicklin
