
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00689/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th October 2016                          |On 2nd December 2016          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                               MS EHTERAM [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  26th  March  1945.   The
    Appellant visited the UK on three occasions between 2002  and  2015  on
    visit visas.  On the first two of these she abided by the terms of  the
    visa.  On the third visa which was issued on 27th May 2015  valid  from
    5th June 2015 to 5th December 2015 whilst during  the  course  of  that
    visit whilst residing with her daughter in Kent she attended the Asylum
    Intake Unit at Croydon on 3rd September 2015 and claimed asylum.

 2. The basis of her claim for asylum was that she had a well-founded  fear
    of persecution in Iran on the basis of a particular social group namely
    that she is a woman in Iran who had committed adultery and that she had
    fears if she is returned to Iran  she  would  face  mistreatment  as  a
    result of that adultery and that her  husband  was  aware  of  and  had
    reported the matter to the authorities in Iran.  The Secretary of State
    refused the Appellant's application issuing Notice of Refusal  on  12th
    January 2016.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Roopnarine-Davis sitting at  Taylor  House  on  4th  July
    2016.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  14th  July  2016  the
    Appellant's appeal was  dismissed  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds and the Appellant was found not to be in need  of  humanitarian
    protection.

 4. On 27th July 2016 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    On 8th August 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher refused  permission
    to appeal stating that the grounds were no  more  than  a  disagreement
    with the judge's finding and an attempt to explain matters further  and
    that the judge reached conclusions  which  were  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence and all of her findings were adequately reasoned.

 5. Renewed Grounds of  Appeal  were  lodged.   They  mirror  the  original
    grounds.  On 21st September 2016 Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor
    granted permission to appeal finding that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge had failed  to  make  clear  and  reasoned  credibility  findings
    firstly by erroneously conflating her own view of the  plausibility  of
    the account with a perceived lack of credibility, secondly  effectively
    attempting to put herself in the  position  of  "a  reasonable  abusive
    Muslim husband in Iran" and thirdly failed to give adequate reasons for
    rejecting the account of the Appellant's daughter.

 6. On 6th October 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response  contends  that  the  judge
    gave a comprehensive determination, considered the  evidence  including
    the oral evidence given at the hearing and gave cogent reasons for  not
    accepting that the Appellant did not commit adultery and would  not  be
    at risk on return.  The Rule 24 response goes on to  contend  that  the
    grounds in essence are a mere disagreement with  the  judge's  findings
    and that there are no material errors of law in the determination.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Moriarty.  Mr Moriarty is familiar  with  this  matter.   He
    appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by  her  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr  Armstrong.   In
    addition I am assisted in this matter by a skeleton argument drafted by
    Mr Moriarty and lodged on behalf of the Appellant.

Submissions/ Discussion

 8. Mr Moriarty starts by saying that there are three  distinct  errors  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He points out  that  at
    paragraph 16 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision that  she  had
    noted that the Appellant's oral evidence was expressed  clearly,  given
    in an open manner and largely consistent with  her  previous  evidence.
    He further sets out that the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  that
    the Appellant presented as "a somewhat naive and trusting person" whose
    explanation for her reasons for marrying her husband were "credible and
    consistent in the context of her account."   He  reminds  me  that  the
    marriage in question is the Appellant's second marriage  and  that  she
    married at the age of 64  and  he  submits  that  the  judge's  factual
    finding is unreasoned and the finding by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    that it is incredible that the Appellant would have had an affair  with
    her second husband when he proved to be controlling and abusive is  not
    one that is sustainable in fact or in law.  On the contrary he contends
    that it is highly plausible that that scenario could have happened.

 9. He takes me to paragraph 21 of the decision and that the judge's choice
    of words are at best unfortunate and at worst  completely  improper  by
    stating that it "beggars belief" (the judge's words) that the Appellant
    and the person with whom she is purported to  have  committed  adultery
    would go out in public together and ignore the attendant risk that this
    would come to the attention of her husband in context of his character.
     He points out that the judge has again unfortunately used this  phrase
    at paragraph 26 when referring to the  husband's  temperament  and  the
    fact that he did not confront her about the  purported  adultery  until
    she threatened to divorce him until after she arrived in the UK.

10. Mr Moriarty takes me to paragraph 6 of his skeleton argument  and  some
    of the factual findings set out at paragraphs 24 and 25 of the  judge's
    decision.  He states that these findings in particular  the  fact  that
    the judge has made an assertion that there was  direct  evidence  of  a
    relationship is in fact wrong on the evidence that  was  presented  and
    further at paragraph 30 the judge has made a finding that the Appellant
    can just move out of her home in Iran  and  live  elsewhere  in  rented
    accommodation or with family members in Tehran.   He  points  out  that
    there is absolutely no basis whatsoever for such a finding and there is
    no corroborative evidence relating to it.

11. He further points out that there is direct reference within the Rule 24
    to the age of the Appellant and submits that age is not a cogent reason
    for findings and submissions  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   He
    contends that the judge overall has failed  to  give  full  and  proper
    anxious scrutiny to the Appellant's claim.  He submits that it has been
    shown that the Appellant has an abusive husband in Iran and  he  relies
    on the guidance given in HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA 1037 and  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Y v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]  EWCA
    1223 as to the approach to be adopted by the judiciary.

12. Further he reiterates that both the Appellant's daughters  are  British
    citizens with impeccable immigration histories, that they gave detailed
    and consistent oral testimony that their maternal  uncle  had  recently
    informed them over the phone that the Appellant's husband  had  carried
    out his threat of reporting the Appellant to the  Iranian  authorities.
    He submits that there is no suggestion that their evidence has not been
    consistent and that the sole reason for  rejecting  their  account  was
    that  -  paragraph  27  -  the  continuing  relationship  between   the
    Appellant's daughters and her husband's son also undermined the  claim.
    He submits that  this  is  neither  a  coherent  reason  nor  factually
    accurate.  He asks me to find that there are substantial errors of  law
    within the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  set  aside  the
    decision and to remit the matter back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing.

13. Mr Armstrong firstly starts by conceding two points:

      a) That the use of the phrase "beggars belief" is a phrase that should
         not be used within a decision; and

      b) That it is inappropriate for the Secretary of State within her Rule
         24 response to make reference to the Appellant's age.

    Having said all that he points out that the judge  heard  the  evidence
    and it was up to the judge to  make  her  findings.   He  submits  that
    without further evidence being available  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    reach the findings that she did and that the  submissions  made  by  Mr
    Moriarty on her behalf amount to little  more  than  disagreement.   He
    relies on such submissions  and  those  set  out  within  the  Rule  24
    response.  He asks me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

14.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

The Judicial Approach

16. The approach to be adopted by judges is firstly set out in  HK  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWCA 1037 where Lord Justice Neuberger said that an  Appellant's
    account should not be rejected merely on  the  basis  that  it  is  not
    credible  or  plausible  when  making  such  assumptions   largely   on
    conjecture and speculation.

17. Such an approach was also endorsed by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Y  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA 1223 where Keene
    LJ cautioned Immigration Judges against

         "finding an account to be inherently incredible, because there is a
         considerable risk that he will be over-influenced by his own  views
         on what  is  or  is  not  plausible,  and  those  views  will  have
         inevitably been influenced by his own background  in  this  country
         and by the customs and ways of our own society.   It  is  therefore
         important that the judge should seek to view an Appellant's account
         of events, in the context of conditions in the country  from  which
         the Appellant comes."

Findings on Error of Law

18. A proper approach to credibility requires an assessment of the evidence
    and of the general claim.  In asylum claims, the relevant  factors  are
    firstly the internal consistency of the claim;  secondly  the  inherent
    plausibility of the claim; and thirdly the  consistency  of  the  claim
    with external factors of the sort typically found in country  guidance.
    It is, I accept, theoretically correct that a claimant need do no  more
    than state his or her claim but that claim still needs to  be  examined
    for consistency  and  inherent  plausibility.   In  nearly  every  case
    external information against which the claim could be checked  will  be
    available.

19.  It  is  against  that  approach  along  with  the  guidance  given  to
    Immigration Judges in HK v SSHD and Y v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department that I consider the issue before me.  There are two  initial
    points which are conceded by Mr Armstrong.  The use of  the  colloquial
    phrase "beggars belief" is not a phrase that should find its  way  into
    an Immigration Judge's decision.  Secondly  the  implication  that  the
    chain of events is unlikely to have occurred due to the Appellant's age
    as set out within the Rule 24 response is unfounded and  unsupportable.
    Neither factor however in themselves constitute material errors of law.
     The phraseology used by  the  Immigration  Judge  is  unfortunate  and
    inappropriate but it does set out her view and perhaps  better  wording
    could have been found.  The judge has however at no  stage  within  her
    determination gone on to suggest, as is implied  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, that the Appellant's age would be a factor to be  considered  as
    to whether or not adultery had taken place.   Consequently  neither  of
    these factors per se constitute material errors of law.

20. The issue consequently remains as to whether there are material  errors
    of law  in  the  decision  or  whether  the  submissions  made  on  the
    Appellant's behalf by Mr Moriarty amount, as Mr Armstrong  submits,  to
    no more than disagreement with the  judge's  decision.   I  accept  the
    judge heard the evidence.  However I am satisfied that there are errors
    within the decision which tainted her decision.  I start in fact at the
    end of the decision.  At paragraph 30 the judge has contended that  she
    sees no reason why the Appellant could not return to Iran and live with
    her family or in rented accommodation.  She may well have  expressed  a
    desire to do so within her witness statement but this appears to  be  a
    view merely expressed by the judge without giving  any  proper  or  due
    consideration to any evidence that was before her or certainly at least
    should have been considered before making such a finding.

21. Secondly there are factual findings which would appear to underpin  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  negative  credibility  conclusions   that   are
    erroneous.   The  assertion  that  the  Appellant's  original   witness
    statement did not mention her husband's threat to report  her  adultery
    and that the Appellant only mentions such threat "when subsequently and
    specifically asked about it at interview" as set out at paragraph 24 is
    incorrect and I follow the paper trail relating to this as pointed  out
    to me by Mr Moriarty.  The assertion that there was not direct evidence
    that the Appellant's husband had ever named Mojtaba or anyone  else  as
    her partner is  also  wrong  and  I  am  referred  to  the  appropriate
    documentation again relating to this.  Thirdly in appearing  to  accept
    that the Appellant's  husband  might  have  threatened  to  report  her
    adultery as set out at paragraph  25  of  the  decision  and  that  the
    Appellant only formed  the  intention  to  divorce  her  husband  after
    arriving in the UK and realising  the  impact  that  her  marriage  was
    having upon her - as set out at paragraph 26 - are matters that  it  is
    emphasised to me were consistently emphasised by the Appellant and  her
    daughters throughout the appeal.  The judge had failed to  address  the
    implication of these  apparently  positive  factual  findings  and  has
    failed to make findings thereon.

22. Mr Moriarty has taken me back to his skeleton argument before the judge
    at the First-tier Tribunal hearing  and  further  reiterates  that  the
    Appellant's eldest daughter explained during her  oral  testimony  that
    they had seen their stepfather's son (who lives in the UK) once,  at  a
    "small gathering", and that they tried to be civil  but  did  not  talk
    about their parents' problems.  It would appear both from the  decision
    and his submissions (which are not challenged in this  instance  by  Mr
    Armstrong) that neither daughter was asked any questions about this  by
    either the Respondent or the Judge.  I accept that such evidence  would
    on the face of it in its entirety be in keeping with  Iranian  societal
    norms and that it cannot properly be said  to  amount  to  an  adequate
    reason as is put  within  the  decision  for  rejecting  the  detailed,
    consistent and deeply personal oral evidence of both daughters in their
    entirety.

23. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has formed a very strong
    view in this matter but I am satisfied that she has  not  gone  through
    the appropriate approach and  test  for  considering  plausibility  and
    consequently the credibility of the Appellant's testimony.  That is not
    to say that on re-scrutiny of this matter another judge will come to  a
    different decision to the original First-tier Tribunal Judge but it  is
    clear that in the interests of fairness that further scrutiny should be
    given to this appeal.  In such circumstances I find for all  the  above
    reasons that there are material errors of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and not mere disagreement.  I set  aside  the
    decision of the judge and give directions hereinafter for the rehearing
    of this matter.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.

Directions for the rehearing of this matter are given below.

1.   That the appeal be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Taylor House on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH  of
    three hours.

2.   That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

3.   That the appeal be heard by any  Immigration  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Roopnarine-Davis.

4.   That there be leave to either party to file  an  up-to-date  bundle  of
    objective and subjective evidence upon which they seek to rely  and  to
    serve a copy on the other party  at  least  seven  days  prior  to  the
    restored hearing.

5.   That a Farsi interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 2nd December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 2nd December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
