
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00078/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2016                  |On 21st November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     S R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Qureshi of Counsel, instructed by Linga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  24  June
    1984.  The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  13  October  2006
    following a successful appeal against a refusal  for  a  student  visa.
    His student visa was valid from 5 October 2006 until 31  October  2009.
    The appellant's visa was subsequently extended until 26 December  2011.
    The appellant stated that he returned to Sri Lanka in January 2011  and
    then returned to the United Kingdom on 28 March  2015  using  a  French
    passport not in his name.  The appellant claimed asylum  on  26  August
    2015, that claim being refused by the respondent on 20  December  2015.
    The appellant appealed against that refusal under  Section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Manyarara  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  23  September  2016
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed with permission on the following grounds:

      1) Ground  1,  that  the  judge's  consideration  of  credibility  was
         incorrect as the appellant's account is plausible;

      2) Ground 2, it was  submitted  that  the  judge's  consideration  and
         rejection  of  the  appellant's  claimed  torture  was   incorrect,
         including in relation to how  the  judge  applied  KV  (scarring  -
         medical evidence) [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC);

      3) Ground 3, it was submitted  that  the  judge  incorrectly  required
         corroboration; and

      4) Ground 4, that the judge failed to  adequately  apply  the  country
         guidance case of GJ and  others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
         Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

    Ground 1

 3. Ms Qureshi's submissions relied primarily on the medical  report,  from
    the Medical Foundation completed by Dr Susan  Leather  of  the  Medical
    Foundation following examinations in February, March  and  April  2016.
    It was also Ms Qureshi's general submission, although I note that  this
    is not in the grounds of appeal for permission to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    that the judge had incorrectly applied the standard of  proof  in  this
    case.  Even if such ground were before me the judge at  paragraphs  [6]
    to [10] and again at [29] of her Decision and Reasons clearly  set  out
    that the burden of  proof  was  with  the  appellant  that  he  was  to
    establish  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  he   would   be
    persecuted.  The judge also set out that in  relation  to  humanitarian
    protection it was for the appellant to  establish  substantial  grounds
    for believing that returning him to Sri Lanka would result  in  a  real
    risk of him suffering serious harm as defined in paragraph 339C  of  HC
    395.  In relation to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) the
    judge again correctly set out that it was for  the  appellant  to  show
    that there were substantial grounds for believing  that  the  appellant
    would be exposed to a  real  risk  of  torture,  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment or punishment contrary to Article 3.  The judge set  out  the
    Article 8 test.  At [29] the judge reminded herself that  the  standard
    of proof was a low one.  Ms Qureshi was unable to point to any specific
    part of the judge's decision which might support  her  claim  that  the
    judge applied the wrong standard of proof.  I do  not  find  any  error
    disclosed in this argument.

 4. In relation to ground 1 in general  it  was  argued  that  the  judge's
    findings were questionable  given  that  the  "applicant's  account  is
    plausible".  It was submitted that the judge omitted to  consider  that
    the reason the appellant delayed claiming asylum was out of fear and it
    was submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  acknowledge  the  possible
    difficulty for the appellant in articulating his circumstances.

 5. I do not accept that this ground, which is essentially  a  disagreement
    with the conclusions the judge reached, is made  out.   The  judge,  at
    paragraph [29], reminded herself that she had to look  at  all  of  the
    evidence in the round.  That was clearly reflected in the detailed  and
    careful consideration by the judge in her Decision and Reasons.

 6. The judge considered all aspects of the case including, in  the  round,
    the appellant's failure to make a timely asylum application (at [75] to
    [76] of the Decision and Reasons).  The judge gave clear  and  detailed
    reasons for not accepting  that  the  appellant  was  credible  in  his
    account, from paragraphs [32] to [68] of the decision.  The appellant's
    submissions in this regard that the appellant's account is  "plausible"
    amount to nothing more than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's  clear
    findings that the appellant was not credible.

 7. No material error of law is disclosed in ground 1.

    Ground 2

 8. This was the main thrust of Ms Qureshi's argument.  Ms Qureshi took  me
    in detail through the medico-legal report of Dr Leather and it was  her
    submission that no due weight had been given to Dr Leather's  findings.
    Ms Qureshi also submitted on more than one occasion that the judge  had
    reached  her  own  "clinical"  findings  on  the  appellant's   claimed
    injuries.  However, she was unable to point to any specific finding  by
    the judge which might support such an allegation.  I did not find it to
    be made out.  Equally any suggestion that the judge, in  effect,  dealt
    with evidence in isolation and therefore departed from the guidance  in
    Mibanga is similarly without foundation.

 9. It was Ms Qureshi's submission that the doctor did not need to look  at
    the issue of Self-inflicted Injuries By  Proxy  ("SIBP").   Ms  Qureshi
    relied on her grounds that the country guidance case of KV (scarring  -
    medical evidence) v The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC) and  specifically  indicated  that  the  doctor
    should only be expected to consider SIBP  as  a  possible  cause  where
    there was some basis for considering that there was a real possibility,
    a possibility that  was  not  a  merely  fanciful  or  theoretical  one
    (paragraph 286 of KV).  The  Tribunal  in  KV  stated  that  presenting
    factors which might require the doctor to engage with SIBP could be  of
    two kinds, clinical and non-clinical presenting factors.  The  Tribunal
    did not seek specifically to exhaustively define these but stated  that
    non-clinical factors would  arise  when  there  was  a  clear  mismatch
    between the claimant's account  of  when  and  where  and  how  he  was
    tortured and the established facts.  One example  would  be  where  the
    claimant had stated that he was tortured in his country of origin in  a
    particular month in the year but it was incontrovertible  that  at  the
    relevant time he was in the UK.

10. It was submitted by Ms Qureshi that  neither  the  respondent  nor  the
    judge had identified a "presenting feature" that required the doctor to
    engage with SIBP.

11. I do not accept that this was the case.  The respondent in the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter did not accept that the appellant  had  returned  to
    Sri Lanka in January 2011 at all noting that there was no  evidence  to
    show  that  he  had  returned.   The  respondent  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's credibility in general.

12. The judge at paragraphs [56]  to  [67]  of  her  Decision  and  Reasons
    considered Dr Leather's report and findings in some considerable detail
    including setting out a number of her findings.  The judge also engaged
    with the  Istanbul  Protocol.   The  judge  reached  a  conclusion,  at
    paragraph [64], that whilst Dr Leather had attributed  the  appellant's
    scarring to torture the judge found that this is not  determinative  of
    whether the appellant's  scarring  was  as  a  result  of  torture  and
    detention.  The judge considered Dr Leather's findings in light of  the
    case of KV (scarring - medical evidence) [2014]  UKUT  230  (IAC).   In
    particular the judge set out the considerations  in  relation  to  SIBP
    including that the presenting feature needed to be more than a fanciful
    possibility.  It was clear that the judge engaged with the proper test.
     The judge also considered that KV engaged with the  issue  of  whether
    scarring can be dated after a two year period as considered in  KV  and
    the judge took into consideration at [67] that the appellant's scarring
    would have been almost two years old by the time he was examined on the
    basis of the appellant's time line.

13. Although Ms Qureshi submitted that Dr Leather did not  need  to  engage
    with SIBP as there was no presenting feature which raised  it  as  more
    than a fanciful possibility, I am not satisfied that this is  the  case
    including as noted above that the respondent did not  accept  that  the
    appellant had left the UK at all at the time when the appellant claimed
    the torture took place.  SIBP was more  than  a  fanciful  possibility.
    This is supported in my view by the fact that Dr Leather  did  to  some
    extent engage with the issue of SIBP.  At paragraph 59 of  the  medico-
    legal report Dr Leather stated: "It is  highly  improbable  that  these
    injuries were self-inflicted and highly unlikely  that  such  extensive
    injuries could be self-inflicted by  proxy.   He  is  right-handed  and
    would not have been able to reach to inflict any of the injuries."  The
    doctor also at paragraph 94 of the report,  the  concluding  paragraph,
    which was relied on by Ms Qureshi, stated that she found clear physical
    and  psychological  evidence  confirming  the  appellant's   consistent
    account of experiencing extensive torture.  The doctor  concluded  that
    the scars are clearly demarcated and diagnostic of or highly consistent
    with ill-treatment and the physical findings also typical reactions  to
    and collectively diagnostic of ill-treatment that any suggestion  of  a
    false allegation of torture can be discounted.

14. It is apparent that Dr Leather  considered  SIBP  to  be  more  than  a
    fanciful possibility as she  specifically  rejects  it.   However,  the
    judge gave adequate reasons for not being satisfied that Dr Leather had
    adequately addressed the issue of  SIBP.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    doctor's only real comment on the  position  was  in  relation  to  the
    appellant not having inflicted the scars on himself as  he  was  right-
    handed.  The judge at [66], did not consider that Dr Leather adequately
    dealt with the issue of causation and  specifically  SIBP.   The  judge
    took this into consideration, together with the judge's findings  that,
    relying on KV, the process of determining the cause of his scars  would
    not have necessarily been a straightforward process due to the lapse of
    time.  The judge found that the doctor's conclusion that the  appellant
    did not inflict the scars himself did  not  take  his  claim  that  the
    scarring was the result of torture and detention any further given that
    "any alternative view would not only include whether the appellant  had
    inflicted the scars himself but whether the scars may be SIBP."

15. Mr Avery submitted, in relation to paragraph  289  of  KV,  that  if  a
    person had been burnt on the back it would be necessary for that person
    to have been unconscious throughout the procedure and that  was  likely
    to have  required  anaesthetisation.   In  those  circumstances  it  is
    incumbent on an examining doctor to consider whether the torture  claim
    is clinically plausible.  Mr Avery relied on the fact that  the  doctor
    had detailed at paragraph 58 that the markings on the appellant's  back
    were "typical of those expected following  past  branding  with  a  hot
    implement ..."  Mr Avery submitted that this was  further  evidence  of
    the doctor's failure to engage with the possibility  of  SIBP  in  this
    scenario or generally.

16. Although Ms Qureshi submitted that the doctor did not have to deal with
    the issue of SIBP in relation to all of the other  injuries  which  the
    doctor set out at some considerable length  in  her  report  I  do  not
    accept that this is the case.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  was
    correct in  reaching  the  conclusions  she  did  that  the  presenting
    features of the case raised SIBP as more than a  fanciful  possibility.
    This is notably the case given the respondent's lack of acceptance that
    the appellant had established he was even outside the UK at the time of
    the alleged torture (as set out at [55] of the decision  and  reasons).
    Dr Leather  in  her  report  indicated  that  she  had  read  both  the
    appellant's statement of evidence for interview form dated 17  December
    2015 and the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  In light of this,  the  judge
    made no error in her conclusion that Dr Leather had  failed  to  engage
    adequately with the issue of SIBP and gave  adequate  reasons  for  not
    being satisfied that the medical evidence established  the  appellant's
    claimed torture at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities.  The  judge
    did not accept the appellant's account to have been of interest and did
    not accept that he was detained on his claimed return to Sri  Lanka  in
    January 2011.  The judge did not accept that the  appellant's  scarring
    was as a result of torture at the hands of the Sri Lankan  authorities.
    That was a properly reasoned conclusion that was open to her.

17. Ms Qureshi also relied on the fact that Dr  Leather,  in  reaching  her
    conclusion that the appellant had been tortured, had considered in some
    detail  the  appellant's  psychological  claimed  difficulties  and  at
    paragraph [92] of the medical report  the  doctor  had  considered  the
    issue of suicide risk.  I am satisfied that  the  judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for the findings she reached on the appellant's  mental  health
    including in relation to suicide.  At [86] of the Decision and  Reasons
    the judge noted that Dr Leather did not refer to any imminent risk  and
    that although   Dr  Leather  referred  to  the  support  the  appellant
    receives from his family as a protective factor the appellant was  able
    to attend his appeal alone.  The judge  gave  cogent  reasons  for  not
    accepting the appellant's account in this regard.  The judge considered
    Dr Leather's psychological assessment of the  appellant  in  detail  at
    paragraphs [81] through to [86] of the Decision and Reasons  and  again
    gave adequate reasons that were open  to  her  for  not  accepting  the
    appellant's  account  including  that  Dr   Leather's   findings   were
    inconsistent with the appellant's own evidence of the lack of input  he
    was receiving in relation to his mental health problems at the time.

18. I am not satisfied that any material error of law has been identified.

    Ground 3

19. Although it was submitted that the judge  required  corroboration  this
    was misconceived.  The judge correctly directed herself  at  [46]  that
    there is no requirement for  an  appellant  to  provide  corroboration.
    However, the judge was entitled to make the point that she did that the
    appellant relied on the fact that his activities in the UK were "widely
    publicised".  There is no error in the judge taking into  consideration
    that it was reasonable to expect that if those activities  were  indeed
    widely publicised that the appellant would have been  able  to  produce
    evidence to substantiate that claim.  Equally the appellant had  relied
    on his claim to have been a "known activist" and had stated that he had
    taken part in protests and demonstrations which were  photographed  and
    filmed and  widely  publicised  and  circulated  on  the  internet,  in
    magazines and newspapers etc.  Again there was no error  in  the  judge
    taking into consideration, in the round, that the  appellant  ought  to
    have been in a position to produce evidence if it was widely  available
    as he claimed.

    Ground 4

20. Ms Qureshi did not actively pursue this ground before me.   However,  I
    find no error in the judge's approach to GJ and others.  The judge  has
    made adverse credibility findings open to her and  in  light  of  those
    findings the judge considered the appellant was not at risk  on  return
    for the reasons she gave  at  [69]  to  [74]  of  her  decision.   This
    included  her  finding  that  the  appellant's  attendance  at  a   few
    demonstrations in the UK together with his past claimed involvement  in
    2005 does not place him in  any  of  the  identified  risk  categories.
    Those were findings that were clearly open to her.

    Notice of Decision

21. The appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara does  not  disclose
    any material error of law and shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable and therefore no fee award is applicable.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

