
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00944/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Wednesday 6th May 2021            |On Wednesday 30th June 2021          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J McWILLIAM
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R THOMAS


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Courtland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a national of  Afghanistan  born  on  1st  January
         1999.

      2. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 31st July 2015 and made a claim
         for asylum. His application was refused, but he was given leave  to
         remain as an unaccompanied minor to the 30th  June  2016.  He  then
         made a further application for leave to remain, renewing his asylum
         claim that he was at risk on  return  to  Afghanistan  of  forcible
         recruitment by the  Taliban  and  submitting  he  was  at  risk  of
         destitution and of being a victim of indiscriminate violence.  This
         application was refused by the Secretary of  State.  The  Appellant
         appealed against that decision. In a ruling promulgated on 1st July
         2019, First-Tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara:

          i)  Dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum   grounds,   finding   the
             Appellant's evidence about a  specific  threat  faced  by  the
             Taliban was inconsistent and  lacking  in  credibility.   That
             finding has not been the subject of an appeal by either party.



         ii) Allowed the appeal on  the  humanitarian  protection  grounds.
             Those findings were appealed by the Respondent.

        iii) Made no findings  relating  to  the  Appellant's  private  and
             family life as protected by Article 8 ECHR.

      3. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal against the
         decision to allow the appeal on humanitarian grounds. The  decision
         was set aside on 6th November 2019 by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper
         Tribunal Judge Jackson) on the grounds that it involved a  material
         error of law, namely the appeal should not  have  been  allowed  on
         humanitarian protection grounds in  the  absence  of  any  findings
         about the Appellant being at risk on return to  his  home  area  as
         defined in Article 15(c) of the Qualification Direction, and  where
         the correct  test  insofar  as  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  is
         concerned had not been applied. That decision  is  appended  below.
         Directions were made for a resumed hearing and that took place on a
         'face-to-face' basis on 5th May 2020.

    The Hearing

      4. We were invited to treat the Appellant as a  vulnerable  adult.  It
         was said by Ms Iqbal that the Appellant was a minor when he arrived
         in the UK and the medical evidence (as set out below)  revealed  he
         has been diagnosed with depression and PTSD. We indicated  we  were
         prepared to treat the Appellant  as  a  vulnerable  adult  for  the
         purposes of The Joint Presidential Guidance Note 2 of 2010:  Child,
         Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive  Appellant  and  Practice  Direction
         (Child,  Vulnerable  Adult,  and  Sensitive   Witness).   Following
         discussion with both advocates, it was agreed  the  only  necessary
         measures as a consequence were to ensure the Appellant was clear he
         could have a break on request and to  ensure  that  questions  were
         kept short and clear.

      5. An  interpreter  attended.  The  Appellant  indicated  through  his
         counsel that he wished to conduct the hearing in  English  but  for
         the interpreter to remain in order to assist if necessary.  In  the
         event, the Appellant's evident endeavours in obtaining  proficiency
         in the English language meant the interpreter was not called upon.

      6. The scope of issues to be resolved at the  hearing  was  clarified,
         namely:

          i) Asylum (risk from Taliban): The  Appellant  did  not  seek  to
             cross-appeal against the First-tier  Tribunal's  dismissal  of
             his asylum claim. The findings made by Judge Manyara  as  part
             of the rejection of the asylum claim stand. In particular, (a)
             the findings made that  the  Appellant  was  not  at  risk  of
             recruitment by the Taliban and (b) the findings made rejecting
             the credibility of the Appellant's assertion he was not  aware
             of the whereabouts of his family.

         ii) Asylum (mental health): On the  morning  of  the  hearing,  Ms
             Iqbal sought to permission to rely on a ground of appeal  that
             was not before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  namely,  that  the
             Appellant he would face a risk of persecution on return  given
             his diagnosed mental illness. This was not an application that
             was foreshadowed in  her  skeleton  argument  served  the  day
             before the hearing. We are told it arose  as  a  result  of  a
             conversation with Ms Isherwood on the morning of  the  hearing
             in which Ms Isherwood  raised  the  potential  impact  of  the
             decision  in  DH  (Particular  Social  Group:  Mental  Health)
             Afghanistan [2020] UKUT 223 (IAC) that was promulgated on 24th
             August 2020. Given there was no objection from the Respondent,
             given that decision post-dated the error  of  law  hearing  in
             this appeal, and given the material on which we  were  invited
             to making a finding on this ground was already before  us,  we
             gave permission.

        iii) Humanitarian Protection: We had to consider the  evidence  and
             resolve  the  appeal  on  Humanitarian   Protection   grounds,
             addressing both the risk on return to his home  area  and  the
             risk on return to Kabul/reasonableness  of  such  an  internal
             relocation.

         iv) Article 8 ECHR:  Whatever  uncertainty  there  may  have  been
             insofar as the Article 8 ECHR claim  is  concerned,  that  was
             resolved at the CMR on 12th  January  2021  and  both  parties
             agreed the Appellant was permitted to  pursue  his  appeal  on
             this ground.

      7. In support of his case, the Appellant  relied  upon,  and  we  have
         considered carefully:

          i) A bundle lodged with the Fist Tier Tribunal  containing  three
             sections (A1-118, B1-229, C1-52) ['FTT Bundle'].

         ii) A supplementary bundle lodged with the First Tier Tribunal  of
             25 pages ['Supplementary FTT Bundle'].

        iii) A second supplementary  bundle  lodged  with  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal, unpaginated  but  with  an  index  referring  to  13
             documents ['Second Supplementary FTT Bundle'].

         iv) A bundle lodged with the Upper Tribunal containing  113  pages
             ['The UT Bundle].

      8. The Appellant's position (absent the amended asylum ground) was set
         out in a skeleton argument dated 6th May 2021.

      9. The Respondent relied on, and we have considered carefully:

          i) A bundle without an index lodged with the FTT on 13th February
             2019 ['The Respondent's Bundle'].

         ii) An e-mail from Ms Isherwood dated 4th May 2021 containing five
             web links to documents (two UNAMA reports,  two  CPIN  reports
             and a Background Note).

     10.  There  was  no  skeleton  argument  from   the   Respondent   and,
         unhelpfully,  no  document  identifying  those  passages   in   the
         aforementioned reports upon which the Respondent sought to rely. We
         sought clarification and  were  provided  with  some  very  limited
         paragraph references.

     11. We heard evidence  from  the  Appellant  who  adopted  his  witness
         statement  dated  3rd  May  2021.  He  was  cross  examined  by  Ms
         Isherwood.

     12. The parties made submissions, and we reserved our judgment.

    Asylum (Mental Health - Particular Social Group)

     13. In DH (Particular Social Group: Mental Health)  Afghanistan  [2020]
         UKUT 223 (IAC), the Appellant's  mental  illness  led  to  sexually
         disinhibited behaviour. The Upper Tribunal in that case  noted  the
         factual findings of the Fist-Tier Tribunal:

             "12. The First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
             under Article 3 ECHR on the basis that  the  manifestation  of
             the appellant's mental illness created a strong likelihood  of
             sexually disinhibited behaviour that in Afghanistan would lead
             to serious harm, making the following finding:

                  "103.    There is  a  real  risk  he  would  behave  in  a
                      disinhibited  fashion.  The  risk  must  increase  in
                      proportion to the deterioration in his mental  state.
                      His convictions relate to incidents taking place some
                      years ago. However, the evidence of Ms Underhill  and
                      Dr  Wootton  shows   that   he   continues   to   act
                      inappropriately towards females. His mental health is
                      very likely to deteriorate if he were returned. It is
                      reasonable to infer from this that the  risk  of  the
                      appellant behaving in an unacceptable way would  also
                      increase.

                  104. Even if the strict letter of  the  law  will  not  be
                      applied to him,  the  consequence  of  the  appellant
                      behaving inappropriately towards a woman or  touching
                      himself in public would be to enrage onlookers. There
                      is a real risk of mob violence. The risk is more than
                      fanciful.  The  appellant's  risky  behaviours   have
                      endured in the UK for several years now.""

     14. The issue before the Tribunal  in  DH  was  whether  the  Appellant
         should,  on  those  findings,  be  entitled  to  protection  for  a
         Convention reason, namely as a member of a particular social  group
         ('PSG').  It was not in  dispute  that  DH  was  suffering  serious
         mental health issues and lacked litigation  capacity  and  did  not
         have the capacity to give evidence. The Secretary of State accepted
         that his condition manifested  itself  with  sexually  disinhibited
         behaviour. The Tribunal found, insofar as mental health and PSG  is
         concerned [our emphasis]:

             "78. People with mental disabilities can be said  to  share  a
                  common uniting characteristic that sets  them  apart  from
                  those within society who have  no  such  concerns.  People
                  diagnosed  as  having  a  mental   disability,   such   as
                  schizophrenia, for example, form  a  cognisable  group  in
                  terms of  their  particular  social  and  medical  status.
                  Whether they are  treated  as  a  cognisable  group  is  a
                  question of a fact in  each  case.  In  many  societies  a
                  person with a mental disability  will  suffer  no  adverse
                  reaction from the society in which they live unless  their
                  behaviour, brought about  as  a  result  of  their  mental
                  illness,  causes  them  to  transgress  social  norms   or
                  accepted rules of social conduct. In this appeal it is the
                  appellant's disinhibited behaviour  as  a  result  of  his
                  mental health issues which give rise to  a  real  risk  on
                  return to Afghanistan.

             79.  Whilst I refer above to 'serious mental illness' I accept
                  the key issue is how an individual is viewed in  the  eyes
                  of a potential persecutor making it  possible  that  those
                  suffering a lesser degree of illness may also face a  real
                  risk.  This requires a fact specific assessment  depending
                  upon the nature of the illness, how it  manifests  itself,
                  and country conditions.  It is also  the  case  that  many
                  problems experienced  by  those  suffering  mental  health
                  issues are as a result of ignorance grounded in a lack  of
                  understanding of an individual's  mental  health  problems
                  and how the same will, ordinarily, manifest themselves."

     15. The evidence on how DH would be viewed in the eyes of  a  potential
         perpetrator included the expert report of Dr.  Ritu  Mahendru,  the
         key conclusions being recorded at paragraph 103 of the judgment:

             '7.1      Afghan  society  holds  deeply-embedded  stigma  and
                  discrimination  against  individuals  with  mental  health
                  problems [96];

             7.2  There is a lack of institutional protection [96];

             7.3  From her experience of working  in  Afghanistan  men  who
                  perform any  kind  of  sexual  act  in  public,  including
                  masturbation and fondling of body parts, would be at  high
                  risk of physical violence from mob  mentality  [96];    In
                  Afghanistan, she witnessed men with mental health problems
                  being pelted with stones in broad daylight [96].'

     16. It is not argued in this case that the Appellant would display  any
         disinhibited behaviour (whether sexual or otherwise) as a result of
         his mental illness. The key  issue  identified  in  DH  is  how  an
         individual is viewed in the eyes  of  a  potential  persecutor  and
         there has to be a  fact  specific  assessment  in  each  case.  The
         medical evidence in this case includes a  Medical  Report  from  Dr
         Hajioff dated 26th May 2019, a Medico Legal Report of Dr  Syed  Ali
         dated  3rd  August  2020,  and   a   Psychiatric   Report   of   Dr
         Balasubramaniam dated 17th December 2020. There is a  diagnosis  of
         depression and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.  Those  reports  are
         reviewed more comprehensively below,  but  there  is  no  evidence,
         expert or  otherwise,  that  the  Appellant's  condition  manifests
         itself in a way that will cause him to transgress social  norms  or
         accepted rules of social conduct such as to result  in  persecutory
         behaviour from others. The Appellant's mental health is relevant to
         this appeal,  but  he  has  not  established  that  it  results  in
         persecution on the grounds of being a member of a PSG.  The  appeal
         is refused on asylum grounds.

    Humanitarian Protection

    Home area: Real risk of suffering serious harm

     17. The Appellant's asylum claim, grounded in the risk  he  faced  from
         the Taliban, was refused and is not in issue in  this  appeal.  The
         Appellant nonetheless is entitled to humanitarian protection if  he
         would face a real risk of suffering serious harm if returned to his
         country of origin. Article 15 of the Qualification  Direction  (QD)
         defines serious harm for the purposes of this appeal as a  "serious
         and individual threat to a civilian's life or person by  reason  of
         indiscriminate violence in situation of international  or  internal
         armed conflict".

     18. The Court of Justice in Elgafaji v Staatssecretaris van Justitie (C-
         465/07); [2009] 2 CMLR 4 made clear that in order for the threshold
         in Article 15(c) QD to be reached,  the  degree  of  indiscriminate
         violence must be at:

             "[S]uch a high level that substantial grounds  are  shown  for
             believing that a civilian, returned to  the  relevant  country
             or, as the case may be, to the relevant region, would,  solely
             on account of his presence on the territory of that country or
             region, face a real risk of being  subject  to  that  threat."
             [para. 45]

     19. This is  now  trite  law  having  been  confirmed  subsequently  on
         multiple occasions, most recently by the Upper Tribunal in SMO, KSP
         & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT  00400
         (IAC). As explained in HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012]
         UKUT 00409(IAC), the source of the threat to an individual need not
         come directly from the armed conflict.

             "[T]he threat to life or person of an individual need not come
             directly from armed conflict.  It will suffice that the result
             of such conflict is a breakdown of law and order which has the
             effect of creating the necessary risk."

     20. In addition, the assessment of risk  is  not  limited  to  civilian
         casualty rates. At para. 114 of  HM,  in  a  paragraph  cited  with
         approval in SMO, it is stated:

             "One aspect of the inclusive approach is an appreciation  that
             there are threats to the  physical  safety  and  integrity  of
             civilians beyond  those  measured  in  the  civilian  casualty
             rates.  As put by Michael Knights of the Washington  Institute
             for Near East Policy in a report of 16 February, 2012 entitled
             "A Violent New Year in Iraq, The National Interest  (cited  at
             n. 217 of the May 2012  UNHCR  Guidelines),  "[m]ass  casualty
             attacks tell only part of the story of violence in  Iraq,  and
             mortality statistics overlook the targeted nature of  violence
             in today's Iraq, where a high proportion of victims are  local
             progovernment community leaders. For every one person of  this
             kind who is  killed,  an  exponential  number  of  others  are
             intimidated into passive support for insurgent groups". Whilst
             our principal focus  when  examining  levels  of  violence  is
             physical harm causing death or injury, it is important that we
             also take account  of  indirect  forms  of  violence  such  as
             threats, intimidation, blackmail, seizure of  property,  raids
             on homes and businesses, use of checkpoints to push out  other
             factions, kidnapping and  extortion.  To  adopt  Mr  Fordham's
             metaphor, these factors mean that  most  Iraqis  (outside  the
             KRG) l continue to "live under the shadow of violence"."

     21. Ms Iqbal relies in particular on the fact  that  Article  15(c)  QD
         encompasses a "sliding scale" whereby, as set out in  paragraph  39
         of Elgafaji:

             "The  more  the  applicant  is  able  to  show  that   he   is
             specifically affected by reason of factors particular  to  his
             personal circumstances, the lower the level of  indiscriminate
             violence required."

     22. Given the emphasis in this appeal on the impact of the  Appellant's
         personal characteristics (in particular his mental health),  it  is
         important to note the different ways in which they  must  be  taken
         into account. At this stage, those characteristics are relevant  to
         the unitary test of a risk  of  serious  harm  in  his  home  area,
         applying, if necessary, the 'sliding scale'. If  there  is  such  a
         risk on return to the home area and it is necessary  to  go  on  to
         consider internal relocation to Kabul and  Article  8(1)  QD,  then
         those personal characteristics are not relevant to the question  of
         risk of serious  harm  in  Kabul  but  instead  form  part  of  the
         assessment of whether this Appellant can reasonably be expected  to
         relocate. This approach is consistent with the Tribunal's  analysis
         in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 00130  (IAC)  at
         paragraph 41:

             "We did not hear any submissions in relation to  the  "sliding
             scale" under Article 15(c) QD and both parties only  addressed
             the personal circumstances of  the  appellant  in  submissions
             regarding reasonableness of relocation. We consider  this  the
             correct approach. Whilst the "sliding scale" will  clearly  be
             relevant in a  case  concerning  subsidiary  protection  under
             Article 2(e) QD, in appeals concerning internal relocation the
             sliding-scale   considerations   are   subsumed   within   the
             assessment of reasonableness."




    The Appellant's evidence

     23. The Appellant's unchallenged evidence  is  that  he  was  born  and
         brought up in the village of  Alim  Khail  which  is  in  Hessarak,
         Nangarhar Province.

     24. Ms Iqbal relies on the factual findings made in AS as to  the  risk
         in Nangarhar being the most significant in Afghanistan:

             "94. The SIGAR report provides comparable  figures  for  other
                  provinces  in  Afghanistan,   showing   that   many   have
                  significantly higher rates of casualties than Kabul,  such
                  as  Nangarhar  (0.81  per  thousand),  Kunar   (0.52   per
                  thousand), Uruzgan (0.51 per thousand) and  Paktiya  (0.48
                  per thousand). Langhman Province, from where the appellant
                  originates, is recorded as having a casualty rate of  0.34
                  per thousand. In absolute terms,  Kabul  has  the  highest
                  number of casualties  (1,703).  The  only  other  province
                  where there were more than  500  casualties  is  Nangahar,
                  where the total is 1,517.  The  population  in  Nangarhar,
                  however, is only 1,864,582  (approximately  one  third  of
                  Kabul).

             95.  A comparison of provinces, based on UNAMA figures, can be
                  extracted from the 2019 EASO  Guidance,  which,  like  the
                  SIGAR  report,  shows  that  several  provinces   have   a
                  substantially higher casualty rate than Kabul. The rate in
                  2018 for Nangarhar, for example, was recorded as  111  per
                  100,000 inhabitants  and  in  Kunar  was  82  per  100,000
                  inhabitants. This compares to 38 per  100,000  inhabitants
                  in Kabul."

     25. She further relies on  the  following  evidence  to  highlight  the
         particularly high risk faced in the Appellant's home area:

          i) The Report of Dr Giustozzi [FTT Bundle, A16-49] in  which  the
             particular  threat  of  conflict  in  Hissarak   district   is
             highlighted in circumstances where control of the district  is
             divided between Daesh, Taliban and the authorities.

         ii) Objective evidence contained in Section B of FTT Bundle

        iii) EASO COI Report: Afghanistan Security Situation, December 2017
             (pp. 195-201) [Second Supplementary FFT Bundle]

         iv) EASO COI Report: Afghanistan Security  Situation  Update,  May
             2018 (pp. 111-118) [Second Supplementary FFT Bundle]

          v) Nangarhar Report: 700-plus  Civilians  Killed,  Hurt  in  '18'
             [Second Supplementary FFT Bundle]

     26. Ms Iqbal also submitted that evidence from recent months of further
         withdrawal of US personnel would  suggest  the  security  situation
         will get worse, not better [UT Bundle, pp. 106-113].

     27. The approach taken in the country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))
         Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163  (IAC)  remains  unaffected  by  the
         decision in AS. In AK, the  Tribunal  accepted  that  a  provincial
         approach was necessary:

             "216.    It is right that we should place particular focus  on
                  the situation at the provincial level,  not  just  because
                  that is the approach taken  by  UNHCR  and  some  national
                  courts and/or authorities in several  European  countries,
                  but  because  our  previous  summary  of  the   background
                  evidence has pinpointed that  "much  of  the  violence  is
                  concentrated in certain areas of the country" and, in  the
                  words of the February 2012 CSIS report  (to  take  a  very
                  recent source),  "most  fighting  is  highly  regional  in
                  Pashtun areas, rather than nationwide"."

     28. The Tribunal in AK - giving its decision nearly a decade ago -  did
         "not think that bearing in mind their known populations the current
         evidence indicates that there is any province where  the  level  of
         violence reaches the Article 15(c) threshold". It did so  with  the
         following approach to the evidence before it:

             "217.    ... Thus according to the UNAMA 2011 report, the  two
                  provinces with the highest number of civilian deaths  were
                  in Kandahar and Helmand, with 290  civilians  killed.  The
                  combined total of the south-eastern and eastern  provinces
                  (which Mr Vokes identified  as  the  main  hub  of  recent
                  increases in the levels of  violence)  accounted  for  446
                  deaths. In Ghazni province, even taking into account  that
                  it has seen a significant rise in violent  incidents,  the
                  figure of  the  numbers  of  civilians  killed  are  still
                  relatively low (even assuming  for  the  moment  that  the
                  majority of the 446 deaths recorded by UNAMA for the  five
                  south-western and eastern provinces occurred in Ghazni).

             218.     According to  statistics  we  have  been  given,  the
                  population of Kandahar is 1,127,000 and  that  of  Helmand
                  1,744,700.  We do not consider that, viewed in the context
                  of the provincial populations of Kandahar and Helmand, 290
                  civilian deaths is a figure indicative of an Article 15(c)
                  threshold of violence for civilians generally.  Similarly,
                  bearing in mind that the population of Ghazni province  is
                  1,149,400, we do not think that even if all the 446 deaths
                  (for the south-eastern and eastern provinces) recorded  by
                  UNAMA were treated as having occurred  in  that  province,
                  such a figure is indicative of a level of violence  giving
                  rise to a real risk  of  Article  15(c)  serious  harm  to
                  civilians generally."

     29. The test in Article 15(c) is of a threat to 'life  or  person'  and
         that is no doubt why the Tribunal in AS used the most recent  UNAMA
         'casualty' figures rather than using figures of those killed. It is
         plain the casualty rates identified by the Tribunal in  AS  insofar
         as Nangarhar is concerned are very  significantly  worse  than  the
         rates being considered by  the  Tribunal  in  AK  in  reaching  its
         conclusions that the figures were not  indicative  of  a  level  of
         violence giving rise to a real risk of serious harm.

     30. Ms Iqbal's final submission on return to the home area is that  not
         only is there a  particular  threat  in  Nangarhar,  but  that  the
         Appellant's personal circumstances should be taken into account  as
         part of the assessment.  She  submits  that  we  should  take  into
         account that he left  Afghanistan  as  a  minor  and  has  spent  a
         significant period outside the country during his  transition  into
         adulthood. He would be perceived as Westernised and, further,  that
         he suffers from depression and PTSD.

    The Respondent's evidence

     31. Ms Isherwood sought to rely on:

          i) UNAMA - Afghanistan - Protection of Civilian in Armed Conflict
             Report 2019, at page 5.

         ii) UNAMA  -  Afghanistan  -  Protection  of  Civilians  in  Armed
             Conflict Report 2020.

        iii) Country Policy and Information Note - Afghanistan Security and
             Humanitarian Situation, May 2020, paragraph 8.2.5

         iv) Country Policy and Information Note -  Afghanistan  -  Medical
             and Healthcare Provision - December 2020, paragraphs 3, 4  and
             12.

          v) Country Background Note - December 2020.

     32. Whilst submitting that the Appellant could be returned to his  home
         area, the thrust of  Ms  Isherwood's  submissions  related  to  the
         viability of internal relocation to Kabul. That was perhaps because
         the reports on which she sought to  rely  identified  a  particular
         threat in Nangarhar. Paragraph 8.2.5 of the May  2020  CPIN  states
         'The EASO Country Guidance Afghanistan  map  below  summarised  and
         illustrated the assessment of indiscriminate violence per  province
         in Afghanistan, as  of  28  February  2019'.  The  map  shows  that
         Nangarhar is  the  one  province  where  'Mere  presence  would  be
         considered sufficient in order to establish a real risk of  serious
         harm under Article 15(c) QD'. Page 3 of the UNAMA Report 2020  also
         contains a map showing the particularly high risk in province.

    Findings

     33. We have to decide this case taking into account the entirety of the
         evidence and bearing in mind that, whilst the burden of proof rests
         on the appellant, the standard of proof is a relatively low one and
         requires us to apply  anxious  scrutiny.  Applying  the  provincial
         approach approved in AK  and  considering  the  evidential  matters
         identified in AS along with the more recent material, in particular
         that highlighted by the Respondent, we conclude that the particular
         situation in Nangarhar means there is a real risk of the  Appellant
         suffering serious harm as defined by Article 15(c) if  returned  to
         his home area. It is necessary therefore to consider whether  there
         would be a real risk of the Appellant  suffering  serious  harm  in
         Kabul and whether the Appellant can reasonably be expected to  stay
         in that part of the country.

     34. We have not found it necessary to apply the 'sliding scale', but if
         it had been necessary, the fact the Appellant left Afghanistan as a
         minor and, more significantly, his mental illness, would have  been
         relevant factors.




    Kabul: Real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  and  reasonableness  of
    relocation

     35. The Respondent is not required to provide subsidiary protection  if
         the requirements in Article 8 of the Qualification  Directive  (QD)
         are met:

          1. As part of the assessment of the application for international
             protection, Member States may determine that an  applicant  is
             not in need of international protection if in a  part  of  the
             country of origin there  is  no  well-founded  fear  of  being
             persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm  and  the
             applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of
             the country.

          2. In examining whether a part of the country  of  origin  is  in
             accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall at  the  time
             of taking the decision on the application have regard  to  the
             general circumstances prevailing in that part of  the  country
             and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.

          3. Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical  obstacles  to
             return to the country of origin.

     36. Article 8 QD is reflected in the Immigration Rules at Rule 339O(i),
         which provides:

          i) The Secretary of State will not make:

               a) a grant of refugee status if in part  of  the  country  of
                  origin a person would not have  a  well  founded  fear  of
                  being  persecuted,  and  the  person  can  reasonably   be
                  expected to stay in that part of the country; or

               b) a grant of humanitarian  protection  if  in  part  of  the
                  country of return a person would not face a real  risk  of
                  suffering serious harm, and the person can  reasonably  be
                  expected to stay in that part of the country.

         (ii) In examining whether a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
             country of return meets the requirements in (i) the  Secretary
             of State, when making a decision on whether to grant asylum or
             humanitarian protection,  will  have  regard  to  the  general
             circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to
             the personal circumstances of the person.

         (iii)    (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return
             to the country of origin or country of return.

     37. The language is clear: There are two limbs to Article 8(1) QD.  The
         first limb concerns whether the person seeking protection  will  be
         exposed to a real risk of serious harm or persecution in the  place
         of the proposed internal relocation, namely Kabul City. If there is
         such a risk, that is the end of the matter. If  there  is  no  such
         risk of harm, there then the reasonableness of  such  a  relocation
         must be considered. (See AS at paragraphs 23-24.)

    Risk of Suffering Serious Harm in Kabul

     38. The situation in Kabul is dire but does  not  meet  the  high  test
         required by Article  15  QD.  The  Tribunal  in  AS  concluded,  at
         paragraph 253:

             "Risk of serious harm in Kabul

             (ii)     There is widespread and  persistent  conflict-related
             violence in Kabul. However, the proportion of  the  population
             affected by indiscriminate violence is  small  and  not  at  a
             level where a returnee, even  one  with  no  family  or  other
             network and who has no experience living in Kabul, would  face
             a serious and individual threat to their  life  or  person  by
             reason of indiscriminate violence."

     39. The Appellant would not be at risk of serious harm if  returned  to
         Kabul. For the reasons set  out  above,  the  Appellant's  personal
         circumstances are not relevant at this stage of the assessment.  It
         is necessary however to go on to  consider  the  reasonableness  of
         relocation.

    Reasonableness of internal relocation

     40. The test to be applied  is  set  out  by  the  Tribunal  in  AS  at
         paragraph 253, and it is at this  stage  the  Appellant's  personal
         characteristics must be taken into account:

             "Reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul

             (iii) Having regard to the security and humanitarian situation
             in Kabul as well as the difficulties faced by  the  population
             living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other
             returnees, which are not dissimilar to  the  conditions  faced
             throughout many other parts of Afghanistan) it  will  not,  in
             general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh for  a  single  adult
             male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not
             have any specific connections or support network in Kabul  and
             even if he does not have a Tazkera.

             (iv) However, the particular circumstances  of  an  individual
             applicant must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of
             conditions in the place of relocation,  including  a  person's
             age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections  with
             Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
             language, education and  vocational  skills  when  determining
             whether a person falls within the  general  position  set  out
             above. Given the limited options for employment, capability to
             undertake manual work may be relevant.

             (v) A person with a support network or specific connections in
             Kabul is likely to be  in  a  more  advantageous  position  on
             return, which may counter a  particular  vulnerability  of  an
             individual on return. A person without a network may  be  able
             to develop one following return. A person's  familiarity  with
             the cultural and societal norms of Afghanistan (which  may  be
             affected by the age at which  he  left  the  country  and  his
             length of absence) will be relevant to whether, and if so  how
             quickly and successfully, he will be able to build a network."

     41.  The  Appellant  relies  in  particular  on  two  aspects  of   the
         Appellant's personal  characteristics  as  being  relevant  to  the
         reasonableness assessment. Both are referenced in the test set  out
         above and in the discussion at paragraphs 211-252 of AS, namely his
         mental health and  the  age  at  which  he  left  Afghanistan.  The
         Tribunal in AS made the following observations:

             "Mental Health

             241. The Panel in the 2018 UT  decision  noted  that  EASO  had
                  recorded very high levels of  mental  health  problems  in
                  Afghanistan, creating significant needs,  but  that  there
                  was  a  lack  of  trained  professionals  and   inadequate
                  infrastructure. It was  noted  that  there  was  only  one
                  dedicated mental health hospital in Kabul.

             242. The evidence before us  is  consistent  with  the  Panel's
                  findings: the  conflict  has  resulted  in  mental  health
                  problems for many inhabitants of Kabul,  but  there  is  a
                  lack  of  facilities  (and  professionals)  available   to
                  provide treatment. There is no new evidence on this  issue
                  to warrant a departure from the findings of the Panel.

             ...

             Age

             252. The Panel in  the  2018  UT  decision  identified  that  a
                  returnee's  age,  including  the  age  at  which  he  left
                  Afghanistan, is  relevant  to  reasonableness.  We  agree.
                  Returnees  of  any  age  without  a  network   will   face
                  significant challenges establishing themselves in Kabul. A
                  person who left Afghanistan at a young age may,  depending
                  on individual circumstances, be less able than someone who
                  spent their formative years in Afghanistan to navigate the
                  challenges of the city by, for example, finding  work  and
                  accommodation."

     42. Dr Balasubramaniam, Consultant  Psychiatrist,  concluded  that  the
         Appellant is suffering from a Depressive Episode (ICD-10 Code F-32)
         of Moderate Severity evidenced by persistent low mood, feelings  of
         hopelessness and helplessness, along  with  suicidal  thoughts.  He
         also concluded that the Appellant is suffering from  Post-Traumatic
         Stress Disorder  (ICD-10  Code  43.1).  This  includes  flashbacks,
         intrusive thoughts, nightmares and avoidance behaviour. He  suffers
         physical symptoms such as numbness and emotional blunting.

     43. Dr Syed Ali, Consultant Psychiatrist, concluded that the  Appellant
         has severe depression without psychotic symptoms and complex  PTSD.
         In his opinion, if the Appellant was returned to  Afghanistan  this
         would result in a 'stress storm' that would exacerbate his  already
         fragile state of mind, leading to  complete  collapse.  This  would
         result in a very high risk of suicide. He would  also  struggle  to
         focus on finding work.

     44. Both reports therefore concur with an earlier diagnosis of PTSD  by
         Dr Hajioff. Both were of the opinion that, without  treatment,  his
         condition was likely to deteriorate.

     45. Ms Isherwood did not challenge these findings, but she  did  cross-
         examine the Appellant on the limited extent to which he has  sought
         treatment in the UK.  The  Appellant  gave  evidence  that  he  had
         received therapy in the past but the health pandemic had slowed the
         way in which he had accessed treatment more recently. In  the  last
         few weeks, he been given phone counselling  and  also  had  further
         assistance from someone to help him with his low mood. He  accepted
         this wasn't  something  that  was  in  his  witness  statement.  Ms
         Isherwood submits that despite the findings in AS as  regards  lack
         of  available  treatment  there  was  a  basic  package  of  health
         treatment available.

     46. The Appellant's unchallenged evidence is that he  was  16  when  he
         left Afghanistan. He has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his
         father since 2015. The preserved findings are that his family  live
         in Nangarhar Province. Ms Iqbal submits that given  his  transition
         from childhood to adulthood took place in the UK, and given that he
         has lived for a number of years in the UK,  and  given  he  has  no
         family in Kabul, he would be less able to navigate  what  are  very
         real challenges in that city.

     47. Ms Isherwood explored in cross-examination the Appellant's father's
         previous visits to Kabul and the father's evidence that his  family
         had been able to travel to Kabul to meet him.  The  Appellant  gave
         evidence that his father last went to Afghanistan in 2018 and  that
         he used to stay with a friend who at that time lived in  Kabul.  It
         was suggested to the Appellant that he would have someone to assist
         him in Kabul. He denied this was the case and said he  didn't  have
         anyone to stay with or assist him in Kabul.  The  Appellant  agreed
         that he had Afghan friends in the United Kingdom and that  he  kept
         himself up to date with developments in Afghanistan.  Ms  Isherwood
         submitted that despite  the  Appellant  leaving  Afghanistan  as  a
         child, he knew Afghan culture and would be able to manage  life  in
         Kabul and had the skills to find work there. Furthermore, he wasn't
         a credible witness and would have connections in Kabul through  his
         father's friend.

     48. The Appellant's evidence about his current treatment in the UK  was
         not entirely clear, but we accept his evidence  that  he  has  been
         having some telephone counselling  and  in  the  past  he  has  had
         therapy. What is clear is that he is suffering from depression  and
         Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and that the impact  of  his  mental
         illness on his ability to  cope  with  life  even  in  the  UK  was
         profound. We accept the medical  evidence  which  establishes  that
         there would be a serious exacerbation of his condition if  returned
         to Afghanistan. Applying AS, this is something we  must  take  into
         account when determining  whether  the  Appellant  falls  into  the
         'general position' of a 'single adult male in good health'.

     49. At its highest, the evidence on which Ms Isherwood sought  to  rely
         is that the Appellant's father had a friend in Kabul in  2018  and,
         from that, we might infer the Appellant might have access  to  some
         support.  We accept the Appellant's evidence that he does not  have
         family, a support network or meaningful connections in  Kabul.  The
         Appellant left Afghanistan as a child and has never lived in Kabul,
         and this would compound the difficulties he would face as a  result
         of his mental illness and his lack of a support network

     50. Given the particular circumstances of this Appellant, and given  he
         is not in the general position of  a  single  adult  male  in  good
         health, it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant  to
         internally relocate to Kabul.

     51. The appeal is allowed on Humanitarian Protection grounds.

    Article 8

     52. Ms Iqbal submitted that the requirement in paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
         of the Immigration Rules has been met, namely  that  the  Appellant
         can demonstrate there would be very significant  obstacles  to  the
         Appellant's integration  into  Afghanistan.  It  follows  that  his
         removal would be a disproportionate interference in his  rights  as
         protected by Article 8 ECHR (TZ (Pakistan) v.  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, [2018] Imm. A.R. 1301
         and section 117B(1) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

     53. Ms Iqbal acknowledges the high test that must be met. She relies on
         the approach of of Lord Justice Underhill in Parveen v SSHD  [2018]
         EWCA Civ 932:

             "8.  Since the grant of permission this Court has had occasion
                  to consider the meaning of the  phrase  "very  significant
                  obstacles to integration", not in fact in paragraph 276ADE
                  (1) (vi) but as  it  appears  in  paragraph  399A  of  the
                  Immigration  Rules  and  in  section  117C  (4)   of   the
                  Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which  relate
                  to the deportation  of  foreign  criminals.  In Kamara  v
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ
                  813, [2016] 4 WLR 152, Sales LJ said, at para. 14 of  his
                  judgment:

                      "In my view, the  concept  of  a  foreign  criminal's
                      'integration'  into  the  country  to  which  it   is
                      proposed that he be deported ... is a broad  one.  It
                      is not confined to the mere ability to find a job  or
                      to sustain life while living in the other country. It
                      is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as
                      subject  to  some  gloss  and  it  will  usually   be
                      sufficient for a court or tribunal simply  to  direct
                      itself in the terms that  Parliament  has  chosen  to
                      use. The idea of  'integration'  calls  for  a  broad
                      evaluative judgment to be  made  as  to  whether  the
                      individual will be enough of an insider in  terms  of
                      understanding how life in the society in  that  other
                      country is carried on and a capacity  to  participate
                      in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity  to  be
                      accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day
                      basis in that  society  and  to  build  up  within  a
                      reasonable time a variety of human  relationships  to
                      give substance to the individual's private or  family
                      life."

             9.   That passage focuses more on the concept  of  integration
                  than on what is meant by "very significant obstacles". The
                  latter point was recently addressed by the Upper  Tribunal
                  (McCloskey J and UTJ Francis) in Treebhawon v Secretary of
                  State for the Home Department [2017] UKUT  13  (IAC).  At
                  para. 37 of its judgment the UT said:

                      "The  other  limb  of  the  test,  'very  significant
                      obstacles',   erects   a   self-evidently    elevated
                      threshold, such that mere hardship, mere  difficulty,
                      mere hurdles and mere upheaval or inconvenience, even
                      where multiplied, will generally be  insufficient  in
                      this context."

                  I have to say that I do not find that a very useful  gloss
                  on the words of the rule. It is  fair  enough  to  observe
                  that the words "very significant"  connote  an  "elevated"
                  threshold, and I have no difficulty with  the  observation
                  that the test will not be met by  "mere  inconvenience  or
                  upheaval". But I am  not  sure  that  saying  that  "mere"
                  hardship or difficulty or  hurdles,  even  if  multiplied,
                  will not "generally" suffice adds anything  of  substance.
                  The task of the Secretary of State, or  the  Tribunal,  in
                  any given case  is  simply  to  assess  the  obstacles  to
                  integration relied on, whether characterised  as  hardship
                  or difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether they
                  regard them as "very significant"."

     54. It is not in dispute that the Appellant has established  a  private
         life in the UK. Adopting Underhill LJ's approach, we  have  focused
         not on concepts of integration if returned to Afghanistan,  but  on
         whether there were 'obstacles' to that integration and whether they
         are 'very significant'. We accept Ms Isherwood's  submissions  that
         the Appellant has good knowledge of Afghan  culture  and  has  kept
         himself appraised of developments in the country. However, for  the
         same reasons given when  considering  the  Humanitarian  Protection
         claim, there would be obstacles to his integration, and they  would
         be  very  significant.  It  follows  that  removal   would   be   a
         disproportionate  interference  in  the   Appellant's   rights   as
         protected by Article 8 ECHR and unlawful as contrary to  Section  6
         of the Human Rights Act 1998.



Decision

The appeal is refused on asylum grounds.

The appeal is allowed on Humanitarian Protection grounds.

The appeal is allowed on Human Rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).


Signed        Richard Thomas

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R Thomas             Dated: 22nd June 2021


                      APPENDIX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00944/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th October 2019                 |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     MA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Allison of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara promulgated  on  1  July  2019,  in
    which MA's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claims dated 30 November 2018 was allowed on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.  For ease I continue to refer  to  the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal, with MA as the Appellant  and
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1999, who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 July 2015  and  made  a  claim  for
    asylum.  Although this was refused he was given leave to remain  as  an
    unaccompanied asylum seeking minor to 30  June  2016  and  subsequently
    made a further application  for  leave  to  remain,  which  included  a
    renewal of  his  asylum  claim  that  he  was  at  risk  on  return  to
    Afghanistan  of  forcible  recruitment  by  the  Taliban,  at  risk  of
    destitution and of being a victim of indiscriminate violence.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant was
    not at risk on return to Afghanistan, the letters the Appellant  relied
    upon from the Taliban were not accepted by the Respondent and the claim
    was considered to be speculative.  There was  no  risk  of  harm  as  a
    result of indiscriminate violence in accordance with Article  15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive, and the Appellant had not proved he  would
    be destitute on return.  In  any  event,  there  was  no  risk  to  the
    Appellant on return as a result of  him  being  'westernised'  and  the
    options of internal relocation to Kabul and a sufficiency of protection
    available to him.  The Appellant had family in  Afghanistan  who  could
    assist him to  reintegrate  there.   Finally,  the  Appellant  had  not
    established family life in the United Kingdom, and he did not meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules for  a  grant
    of leave to remain on private life grounds.  There were no  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain.

 4. In a decision promulgated on 1 July 2019, Judge Manyarara dismissed the
    appeal on  asylum  grounds  and  allowed  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.  In essence, the First-tier Tribunal did  not  find
    the Appellant's asylum claim to be credible, in particular because  the
    evidence was inconsistent, internally and with both the evidence of the
    Appellant's father and the Taliban letters relied upon.  The  Appellant
    has not sought to cross-appeal or challenge in any way the rejection of
    his asylum claim.

 5. In relation to humanitarian protection, the test for this  set  out  in
    paragraphs 74 to 76 of the decision, which is followed by reference  to
    the Respondent's Country Policy Information Note Afghanistan:  Fear  of
    anti-government elements, dated December 2016.  The First-tier Tribunal
    found that the Appellant  has  not  established  his  claim  to  be  of
    interest to the Taliban or the Arkabi forces and the Appellant's  claim
    was found to be completely lacking in credibility.   In  paragraph  79,
    the decision continues as follows:

         "79. ... I am however satisfied that the appellant's home  area  is
         infiltrated  by  AGE's  and  the  Taliban   operate   there.    The
         appellant's ability to travel to his home area,  where  his  family
         may or may not  still  be  living,  in  the  current  situation  in
         Afghanistan, is  questionable.   In  relation  to  the  appellant's
         ability to relocate to Kabul,  I  have  had  regard  to  the  UNHCR
         Guidelines for Assessing  the  International  Protection  Needs  of
         Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan. ... [ Quote from these Guidelines]

         80.  Whilst I have not accepted the appellant's account and  whilst
         I am satisfied that  the  appellant's  father  has  connections  in
         Kabul, I find the appellant was a  minor  when  he  last  lived  in
         Afghanistan and he has not therefore  lived  an  independent  adult
         life there.  The appellant has never lived in Kabul and he would be
         compelled to rely on the generosity of his father's  friend  for  a
         significant period of time before he would be in  any  position  to
         live in independent life himself as an IDP.

         81.  ... [Quote of the UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection
         2003]

         82.  In light of the precarious  situation  in  Afghanistan,  I  am
         satisfied that the appellant's ability to establish life himself in
         Kabul is likely to be significantly hindered."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal concluded in paragraph 84  that  the  appellant
    had discharged the burden of proof to show that he would  face  a  real
    risk of suffering "serious harm" by reference to paragraph 339C of  the
    Immigration Rules (as amended).

 7. The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  does  not  include  any  express
    decision on human rights grounds or more specifically on Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human  Rights,  save  for  setting  out  the
    burden and standard of proof in such claims in paragraph 11.  There  is
    no reference to the Appellant's private or family life recorded in  the
    evidence or oral submissions and no findings made on Article 8 at all.

The appeal

 8. The Respondent appeals essentially on the ground that  the  First  tier
    Tribunal has inexplicably allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection
    grounds, at odds with the findings on the asylum claim and for  reasons
    which are entirely unexplained.

 9. At the oral hearing, I indicated my preliminary view that there  was  a
    material error of law in the assessment of humanitarian  protection  in
    this case and the grounds of appeal on behalf of  the  Respondent  were
    sufficiently clear on the point that no oral submissions were  required
    from Mr Lindsay.

10. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Allison submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had  properly  assessed  the  question  of  reasonableness  of
    internal relocation in paragraph 79 to 82 of the decision in accordance
    with the correct  test  and  given  appropriate  weight  to  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines and the Appellant's personal circumstances.   This  followed
    an assessment of risk in the Appellant's home area which was consistent
    with the expert evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  and  with  the
    June 2019 EASO Report  which  showed  an  Article  15(c)  risk  in  the
    Appellant's home area in Nangahar.  Although it was accepted that there
    were limitations in the reasoning given by the First-tier Tribunal,  Mr
    Allison submitted that the reasoning and analysis was adequate.

Findings and reasons

 1. In relation to the asylum claim, the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  clear
    findings that the Appellant's account was not  credible,  that  it  was
    inconsistent with evidence from his own father and  with  the  evidence
    relied upon said  to  be  from  the  Taliban.   Specifically,  although
    accepted that the Taliban operate in the  Appellant's  home  area,  the
    claimed risk on return  was  not  accepted,  particularly  because  the
    Appellant's  father  (upon  whose  family  connection  the   risk   was
    predicated) has safely returned to Afghanistan on  numerous  occasions,
    including meeting his family in Kabul,  most  recently  in  2018.   The
    Appellant's father stated that the family have lived on  the  outskirts
    of Hesarak for a long time and it was not accepted that  the  Appellant
    was unaware of his family, in fact in this regard,  the  Appellant  was
    found to have shown a willingness to mislead in his evidence.  Further,
    the First-tier Tribunal did not accept that the Appellant has ever been
    of interest to the Taliban, nor had he been apprehended by them on  any
    occasion, nor that the Arkabi forces were adversely interested  in  the
    Appellant either.

 2. There are no specific findings by the First-tier  Tribunal  as  to  the
    risk on return to the Appellant  in  his  home  area  for  humanitarian
    protection purposes, only the finding in relation to the  asylum  claim
    that he is not at risk from the Taliban  or  Arkabi  forces,  there  or
    elsewhere.  There is, at its highest in paragraph 79,  a  finding  that
    the Appellant's home area is infiltrated  by  AGE's  and  the  Taliban.
    However, against the background evidence quoted  in  paragraph  77  and
    findings in paragraph 78 that only those who are well  known  or  well-
    positioned opponents of the Taliban could be at  real  risk  from  AGEs
    because of their profile and/or activities and the  Appellant  has  not
    established his claim to be of interest to either the  Taliban  or  the
    Arkabi forces, that of itself does not indicate that the  Appellant  is
    specifically at risk and there is no reference at all to a more general
    Article 15(c) risk in the home area.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal nonetheless  go  on  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant could internally relocate to Kabul following the  comment  in
    paragraph  79  that  his  ability  to  travel  to  his  home  area   is
    questionable, without any reasons given for this, and  doubt  expressed
    as to whether his family  are  still  living  there,  contrary  to  the
    earlier reference to the Appellant's father's evidence  of  where  they
    have lived for some time and his recent contact with them.

 4. The appeal  is  then  apparently  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds on the basis of  findings  in  paragraphs  80  and  82  of  the
    decision, because the Appellant's ability to establish life himself  in
    Kabul is likely to be significantly hindered.  This bears  no  relation
    whatsoever to the requirements for a grant of  humanitarian  protection
    and under  paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  under  the
    Qualification Directive and fails to follow any of  the  self-direction
    given as to the requirements in paragraphs 74 to 76  of  the  decision.
    The decision can not arguable be said  to  be  made  according  to  the
    correct test or with adequate reasons.

 5. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in  law  in
    allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds, in the  absence
    of any findings at all that the Appellant being at risk  on  return  to
    his home area, for the purposes of Article 15(c) or  otherwise  and  in
    any event, in the absence of any findings in  relation  to  the  proper
    test for internal relocation to Kabul.  The assessment of  humanitarian
    protection in the decision under  appeal  simply  failed  to  make  any
    findings which could justify the appeal being allowed  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow
    the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds  must  therefore  be  set
    aside and remade.  In the absence of any challenge by either  party  to
    the findings in relation to the asylum claim,  those  factual  findings
    are preserved, as is the dismissal of the appeal on asylum grounds.

 6. At the oral hearing, the parties agreed that the  further  findings  of
    fact required to remake the appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds
    were limited, such that the appeal could appropriately be retained  and
    remade in the Upper Tribunal in accordance with the practice direction.
     In light of first, the imminent re-hearing  of  the  country  guidance
    decision in AS (Afghanistan), AA/03491/2015 listed for this  month  and
    secondly, Mr Allison's indication that an updated medical report may be
    required as to the Appellant's current mental health; it is appropriate
    to stay listing of a further hearing to remake the decision  until  the
    new year.  For the additional reasons that follow,  a  case  management
    hearing  will  be  listed  initially  to  deal  with  any   outstanding
    preliminary issues and to allow for further directions to be given  for
    the re-making.

 7. The issue of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  was
    raised by Mr Allison on behalf of the  Appellant,  on  the  basis  that
    before the First-tier Tribunal, it was said that the  Appellant  relied
    specifically  on  there  being  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
    reintegration in Afghanistan and the relevant provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules, albeit no decision was  made  on  this
    point by the First-tier Tribunal.  This could be relevant if the appeal
    ultimately fails on humanitarian protection as well as asylum  grounds,
    albeit the matter was not raised at all in the Rule 24 response nor has
    there been any application for permission to appeal on this basis.

 8. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal referred to section  6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998, but the only particularised grounds  were
    in relation  to  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection.   The  skeleton
    argument on behalf of the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, did
    however specifically deal with Article 8 of the European Convention  on
    Human Rights in paragraphs 52 to 56, in which it was asserted,  without
    reference  to  any  specific  facts  and  only  in  light  of  all  the
    circumstances, that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration in Afghanistan.

 9. In accordance with the decision in  Smith  (appealable  decisions;  PTA
    requirements; anonymity) [2019] UKUT 00216 (IAC), the Appellant was not
    required to seek permission to appeal on the Article 8 point given that
    a determination in his favour on that issue would not have conferred on
    the Appellant any material or tangible benefit, compared to the benefit
    flowing from  his  appeal  being  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.  However, the matter should still have been raised in the Rule
    24 response on behalf of the Appellant and it was not, the consequences
    of which will need to be considered further, as will the further  issue
    of the fact that the First-tier Tribunal  simply  failed  to  make  any
    decision on the Article 8/human rights appeal (as opposed to  expressly
    declining to do so, as  in  Smith).   It  is  appropriate  for  further
    submissions to be made by the parties on the scope of the re-hearing of
    this appeal and any required procedural formalities.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions

 1. The appeal be stayed pending the  outcome  of  the  re-hearing  of  the
    country guidance case of AS (Afghanistan), AA/03491/2015.

 2. A case management hearing with a time estimate  of  30  minutes  to  be
    listed on the first available date 14 days after  the  promulgation  of
    the decision in AA/03491/2015, before UTJ Jackson with reference to the
    availability  of  the  parties'  representatives.   That   hearing   to
    determine, inter alia, the scope of the re-hearing of the  appeal  with
    regard to human rights and Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights in particular; as well  as  any  further  evidence  to  be
    relied upon by either party.

 3. The parties are required, no later than three days  before  the  listed
    case management hearing to:

      i) make written submissions as to the scope of the re-hearing of  this
         appeal with regard to human rights grounds; and

     ii) list any further directions required for  the  re-hearing  of  this
         appeal (including, but not limited to a time estimate,  whether  an
         interpreter is required, whether oral evidence is to be called  and
         any further evidence to be relied upon);

irection Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]         Date     4th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
