
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00527/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On:  24th January 2017               |On: 25th January 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     DU
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Wass, Counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on the 4th June 1996.

    Anonymity Order

 2. This is a claim for international protection. Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.  I  make  an
    order in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    Background and Matters in Issue

 3. The Appellant asserts a well-founded fear of persecution in  Sri  Lanka
    for reasons of his imputed political opinion. In summary the account is
    that the Appellant left  Sri  Lanka  because  the  army  in  his  local
    district were trying to forcibly recruit him. When  he  resisted,  this
    was perceived as being "against the country".  He was  threatened  that
    he had to join the military otherwise he would be shot,  prosecuted  or
    otherwise subjected to serious harm. Since the Appellant arrived in the
    United Kingdom, his case had developed. That  is  because  he  was  now
    wanted in Sri Lanka for having supplied funds to a former  LTTE  cadre,
    by the name KR.

 4. The account was rejected by the Respondent, and then by the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Wedderspoon), which dismissed  his  appeal  by  way  of
    decision dated the 31st October 2016.

 5. The Appellant now has permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    determination is flawed for the following material errors of law:

              i) Failure to take material evidence into account

             ii) The Tribunal erred in attaching "little weight to  evidence
                 based on unreasonable observations"

    My Findings

 6. It is alleged that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  take
    material evidence into account.  There are two limbs to this ground  of
    appeal. It is first alleged that in reaching its  decision  the  First-
    tier Tribunal entirely omitted to address key  items  of  corroborative
    evidence.   Second,  it  is  submitted  that  in  conducting  its  risk
    analysis, the Tribunal  failed  to  take  relevant  country  background
    material into account.  I deal first with the corroborative materials.

 7. The Appellant had produced a  letter  dated  2nd  September  2016  from
    Attorney-at-Law Dambure Liyanage Chaminda Kithsiri.  This  document  is
    printed on headed notepaper containing contact details, and  is  signed
    and stamped by Mr Kithsiri. The  letter  is  detailed  but  in  essence
    confirms that Mr  Kithsiri  has  made  enquiries  with  the  police  in
    Kilinochchi about a case brought against the Appellant. These enquiries
    led Mr Kithsiri to Kilinochchi Magistrates Court. Mr Kithsiri was  told
    by a police officer that enquiries are continuing  into  the  Appellant
    and  a  "rehabilitated  LTTE  member  Kanthasamy  Ratheeskumar",  those
    enquiries now being led by the  Special  Branch.  Mr  Kithsiri  further
    confirms that he has personally attended the Human Rights Commission of
    Sri Lanka along with the Appellant's father and assisted him in lodging
    a complaint there.

 8. The Appellant further relied on a witness statement of a man named  RS,
    who claims to be the brother of  RK.  The  witness  statement  details,
    inter alia, how  the  Appellant  has  been  taking  part  in  political
    activities in the diaspora, how RS himself was arrested upon landing in
    Colombo in August 2016 and accused of helping the Appellant raise funds
    for the LTTE. RS asserts  that  during  questioning  by  the  Terrorist
    Investigation Division he was shown photographs of the Appellant  taken
    covertly when he was attending protests in the United Kingdom.

 9. At pages 72-80 of the Appellant's bundle there is  a  letter  from  the
    Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka acknowledging that a complaint has
    been lodged.

10. None of the three  documents  summarised  above  feature  in  the  risk
    analysis conducted by Judge Wedderspoon. There are a  number  of  other
    documents in the file which are similarly ignored. Before me Mr McVeety
    agreed that these documents were plainly relevant  to  the  matters  in
    hand and that the failure to address  this  evidence  was  an  omission
    grave enough  to  warrant  an  immediate  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the matter to be re-heard.

11. The second limb of this ground related  to  the  failure  to  have  any
    regard to the current country background material, or indeed the extant
    country guidance given in GJ and  Others  (post-civil  war;  returnees)
    [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC): although the case is fleetingly mentioned it  is
    apparent from the findings that no regard was had to its contents.   Mr
    McVeety agreed that this too must be an error.

12. It follows that I need not deal with the remaining ground.  The parties
    are in agreement that the decision should be set aside and  the  matter
    remitted for proper findings of fact  to  be  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

    Decisions

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  errors  of  law
    such that it is set aside.

14. The decision in the appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

15. There is an order for anonymity.

                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           24th January 2017
