
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00553/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th December 2019                |On 9th January 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MMB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. V Madanhi, CB Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. As this a protection claim, it is appropriate that an anonymity
      direction is made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs
      otherwise, MMB is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.
       This direction applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to
      comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
      proceedings.


   2. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is MMB.
       However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I
      adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to MMB as
      the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


   3. The appellant is a national of Sudan.  He arrived in the United
      Kingdom in August 2016 and claimed asylum. His claim was refused by
      the respondent for the reasons set out in a decision dated 7th
      December 2017. His appeal against that decision was heard by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Phull ("the judge") and allowed for the reasons
      set out in a decision promulgated on 17th July 2018.


   4. On 13th August 2018, the respondent was granted permission to appeal
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen.  The matter comes before me to
      determine whether the decision of the FtT judge is vitiated by a
      material error of law, and if so to remake the decision.


   5. In her decision of 7th December 2017, the respondent referred to a
      language analysis interview that was completed on 31st January 2017 to
      ascertain the appellant's linguistic origin. The analysis established
      that the appellant's linguistic behaviour is consistent with an Arabic
      linguistic community that is represented in Khartoum, Sudan.  The
      respondent noted that the appellant, when interviewed, had been unable
      to describe to the interviewing officer which areas he had lived in.
      The respondent stated that although the appellant's local knowledge of
      Sudan came across as incoherent and uncertain, it is accepted that he
      is a national of Sudan. The respondent emphasised that the appellant
      had been unable to demonstrate knowledge of the area of Sudan from
      which he claims to have originated. The respondent indicated her
      belief that the appellant is from the Khartoum area of Sudan.  The
      respondent considered the appellant's claim that he is a member of the
      Sudanese Zaghawa tribe.  He was asked during interview, a number of
      questions regarding that tribe in order to assess his claim. The
      respondent rejected the appellant's claim that he is a member of the
      non-Arab Zaghawa tribe.


   6. In her decision promulgated on 17th July 2019, FtT Judge Phull
      summarised the background to the appellant's claim for international
      protection at paragraphs [7] to this [12] of her decision. At
      paragraph [16], the judge noted the respondent does not accept that
      the appellant is a non-Arab Darfuri of the Zaghawa tribe.


   7. The judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [17] to
      [28] of her decision.  The judge starts off her consideration of the
      claim as follows:


         "I find and the respondent accepts the appellant's nationality,
         identity and ethnicity as a Zaghawa from Sudan..."

   8. Although no rule 24 reply has been filed by the appellant, before me
      Mr Madhani, rightly in my judgment, accepts there is an error of law
      in the decision of the FtT Judge.  He accepts the respondent had only
      conceded the nationality and identity of the appellant.  The
      respondent had not conceded the appellant is a member of the Zaghawa
      tribe.  Mr Madhani candidly accepts the ethnicity of the appellant has
      an impact upon the assessment of the risk upon return.  He accepts the
      issue of ethnicity is important when one considers the risk upon
      return in accordance with the country guidance.  Mr Madhani accepts
      the decision of the FtT is infected by an error of law and should be
      set aside.  The decision will need to be remade and he submits, the
      other findings made by the FtT judge could be preserved.


   9. It is common ground that the respondent had not accepted the
      appellant's ethnicity as a Zaghawa from Sudan and had set out at some
      length in her decision letter, why that is so.  If the Judge proceeds
      upon the basis that the respondent had accepted the appellant's
      ethnicity, she did so in error. Insofar as the opening line of
      paragraph [17] suggests the judge makes a finding that the appellant
      is a Zaghawa from Sudan, that finding is devoid of any reasoning and
      fails to engage with any of the reasons given by the respondent for
      rejecting the appellant's claim that he is a member of the non-Arab
      Zaghawa tribe.  It is now well established that it is generally
      unnecessary and unhelpful for FtT decisions to rehearse every detail
      or issue raised in a case, and laborious recitation of every piece of
      evidence is not necessary or desirable.  It is, however, necessary for
      judges to identify and resolve key conflicts in the evidence and
      explain in clear and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties
      can understand why they have won or lost.  In the absence of a
      concession by the respondent, paragraph [17] of the decision fails to
      identify any reasons to support a finding that the appellant is an
      ethnic Zighawa from Sudan.


  10. I have carefully considered the submission made by Mr Madhani that
      notwithstanding any error as to the appellant's ethnicity, it is still
      possible to preserve the positive credibility finding made by the
      Judge, particularly regarding his account of events in Sudan.  At
      paragraph [19], the Judge accepted the appellant's evidence that he
      was arrested, detained, tortured and interrogated by the Sudanese
      authorities about his association with the opposition "... because the
      background evidence corroborates that there are attacks on non-Arab
      Darfuris by the authorities or groups aligned with the authorities.".
      In effect, it appears the judge accepted the account given by the
      appellant because it is supported by background material regarding the
      treatment of non-Arab Darfuris. The acceptance by the Judge of the
      appellant's account of events is intrinsically linked to the judge's
      belief that the appellant is a Zaghawa from Sudan and thus a non-Arab
      Darfuri.  It is far from clear that the judge would have reached the
      same view of the appellant's account if she had rejected his claim
      that he if of the Zaghawa tribe.  In my judgement, the appropriate
      course is for the decision to be remade, with no findings preserved.


  11. The assessment of a claim for asylum such as this is always a highly
      fact sensitive task.  In all the circumstances, I have decided that it
      is appropriate to remit this appeal back to the FtT for hearing
      afresh, having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's
      Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  The nature and extent of
      any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The parties
      will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due
      course.








Notice of Decision


  12. The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.  The decision of FtT
      Judge Phull promulgated on 17th July 2019 is set aside, and I remit
      the matter for re-hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, with no
      findings preserved.






      Signed                                                 Date: 20th
      December 2019


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

