
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00939/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2020                            |On 31 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     h S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L King instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure of publication of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
    public identifying the  appellant.   A  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on  21  June  1958.
    She last arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 April 2018.   On  23  April
    2018, she claimed asylum with her husband as her dependant.

 3. On 18 January 2019, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the  ECHR.



 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 23 August  2019,  Judge  Trevaskis  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 5. The appellant was initially refused permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal by the First-tier Tribunal  (DJ  Woodcraft)  on  24  September
    2019.  However, on 23  October  2019  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Gill)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 6. The respondent did not file a rule 24 response.

The Appellant's Claim

 7. The appellant's claim is that she is a Christian who has  been  accused
    of blasphemy.  On 20 February 2018, she was working as  a  carer  in  a
    private home when three women were visiting.  The appellant says  that,
    having left the room and returned, she was  accused  by  the  women  of
    having thrown the Koran on the floor and thereby insulted it.

 8. The following day two men came to her home on a motorcycle seeking  the
    appellant because she had insulted the Koran.  When confronted with the
    appellant's son and other Christians from the  neighbourhood,  the  men
    left.

 9. Between 7 March 2018 and 9 March 2018, the appellant  claims  that  she
    received three threatening  letters  including  a  fatwah  against  her
    family.

10. On 9 March 2018, she was approached by two  men  on  a  motorcycle  who
    attempted to grab her.  A gun was fired but  she  escaped  when  nearby
    workers intervened.  The appellant made a complaint to  the  police  on
    that day and they registered the case but no  action  was  taken.   The
    appellant relied upon a newspaper report which reported the incident.

11. On 16 March 2018, the appellant moved to Gujranwala in Punjab province.
     On 25 March 2018, the appellant was again confronted  by  two  men  on
    motorcycles who were armed.  Again, she managed to escape when a  crowd
    formed.  She again reported this incident to the police.

12. On 31 March 2018, the appellant petitioned the  court  because  of  the
    lack of police action in relation to her complaint.

13. On that day also, the appellant moved to Shahkot.  There,  on  2  April
    2018, she was again confronted by two armed unknown men on  motorcycles
    brandishing their firearm and she again managed to escape when a  crowd
    formed.

14. On 7 April 2018, the appellant again filed a petition complaining about
    the lack of police action.

15. The appellant also relied upon a document (an 'Order for  Appearance'),
    in effect a summons, requiring the appellant to report  to  the  police
    which, she claimed, related to a complaint that had been lodged against
    her.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

16. Judge  Trevaskis  rejected  her  asylum  claim.   He  made  an  adverse
    credibility  finding.   In  reaching  that  finding,  Judge   Trevaskis
    approached the assessment of credibility  applying  para  339L  of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  His principal reasons  were  as
    follows.

17. First, the judge accepted the respondent's evidence, in  four  Document
    Verification Reports ("DVR") that four of the documents relied upon  by
    the appellant were not genuine: namely, the  appellant's  complaint  to
    the police on 9 March 2018 in relation to the incident that occurred on
    that date; the complaint to  the  police  made  on  25  March  2018  in
    relation to the incident on that date; the complaint to the police on 2
    April 2018 in relation to the incident that occurred on that date;  and
    the "Order for Appearance"  (the  summons)  to  report  to  the  police
    station (see K82-90 of the respondent's bundle).

18. Secondly, as regards the newspaper reports the  judge  noted  that  the
    background evidence indicated that it was possible  to  "have  anything
    published in a newspaper  for  a  price"  and  that  the  existence  of
    newspaper reports "does not of itself prove the truth  of  the  matters
    contained in them".

19. Thirdly, the  judge  relied  upon  inconsistencies  identified  by  the
    respondent in the refusal decision and that the appellant's account  of
    the initial incident that had led to her being accused of blasphemy was
    not plausible.

20. Fourthly, the judge relied upon what he described as the  "unacceptable
    level of coincidence" in the three incidents  when  the  appellant  was
    confronted by armed men on motorcycles on 9 March 2018, 25  March  2018
    and 2 April 2018.

21. Fifthly, the judge noted that there was no supporting evidence from the
    appellant's  husband  who  had  been   present   during   the   claimed
    confrontations.   Finally,  the  judge  took  into  account  that   the
    appellant had not claimed asylum on arrival at the airport.

22. At paras [95]-[97], the judge summarised his reasons as follows:

         "95. I have also considered whether her credibility is  damaged  by
             presentation of false documents.  I have found those documents
             to be nongenuine,  and  therefore  I  find  that  her  general
             credibility is damaged by their production.

         96.  I have considered the general credibility  of  the  appellant,
             and I find that it has not been established  to  the  required
             standard.  She has made claims which I have found  lacking  in
             plausibility, supported by documents which I have found to  be
             nongenuine.  Her husband's potentially important evidence  has
             not been provided.  The other letters and supporting documents
             are self-serving and based upon information  provided  to  the
             authors by the appellant.

         97.  In light of the above findings, I am not  satisfied  that  the
             appellant should be given the benefit of the doubt in relation
             to her asylum claim in accordance with paragraph 339L."

The Appellant's Challenge

23. The appellant's challenge to the judge's adverse  credibility  findings
    is set out in the grounds of appeal and  Ms  King's  skeleton  argument
    which she developed in her oral submissions:

      1) The judge made a number of factual errors in paras [12] and [24] of
         his decision and, in para [30], finished a sentence with  "entirely
         random and unintelligible remarks";

      2) The judge was wrong to rely upon the absence of evidence  from  the
         appellant's husband given that he was informed that the appellant's
         husband was too unwell on the day of hearing to attend;

      3) In finding that the documents relied upon by the appellant were not
         genuine the judge failed properly to engage with the expert  report
         of Waheed Ahmad;

      4) The judge failed to identify the inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
         upon which he relied which were, in any event, limited to two minor
         inconsistencies in the refusal letter;

      5) The judge was wrong to rely  upon  the  "unacceptable  evidence  of
         coincidence" in the three events relied upon by the appellant.

24. In addition, Ms King referred me  to,  but  did  not  pursue  with  any
    vigour, para 11 of the grounds which criticised the judge  for  failing
    to consider under Art 8 the impact upon  the  appellant's  family  life
    with her son and his family in the UK.

Discussion

25. Whilst I do not accept the appellant's case on all five of  the  points
    raised,  I  am  satisfied,  for  the  reasons  I  will  give   shortly,
    principally based upon point (3) and part of point (1), that the  judge
    did materially err in law in reaching his adverse credibility  finding.



26. The crucial error lies,  in  my  judgment,  with  the  judge's  failure
    properly to engage with, and take into account in reaching his  adverse
    credibility finding, the expert report of Waheed Ahmad.  As Mr  Howells
    recognised in his submissions, the authenticity of the documents relied
    upon, in particular the summons, was central to the  judge's  rejection
    of  the  appellant's  claim.   At  [87],  the  judge  noted  that   the
    appellant's claim that she had  been  accused  of  blasphemy  made  "no
    sense" if the summons was not genuine.

27. The judge set out a summary the report of Waheed Ahmad at  paras  [46]-
    [56] as follows:

         "46. The author of this report is  a  lawyer  in  Lahore.   On  the
             instructions of the appellant's representatives  he  undertook
             the following enquiries.

         47.  On 15 July 2019 he went to the court in  Gujranwala  where  he
             confirmed that a petition by the appellant against the  police
             was filed on 31 March 2018 and a hearing date of 6  April  was
             fixed.

         48.  On 17 July he visited the court in Shahkot where he  confirmed
             that a petition by the appellant against the police was  filed
             on 7 April 2018 and a hearing date fixed for 11 April 2018.

         49.  On 18 July 2019 he  visited  the  office  of  daily  newspaper
             Muqabla, where it was confirmed that the newspaper produced by
             the appellant dated 10 March 2018 Lahore was genuine.

         50.  On 18 July 2019 he visited the office of daily newspaper Waiz,
             where it was confirmed that  the  newspaper  produced  by  the
             appellant dated 30 March 2018 Lahore was genuine.

         51.  On 19 July 2019  he  visited  the  court  in  Lahore  to  seek
             verification of the affidavit of the appellant dated 31  March
             2018.  The court was unable to  verify  the  document  because
             they do not hold a copy of the petition.

         52.  On 17 July 2019 he visited the police  station  Sadar  Shahkot
             for verification of the application submitted by the appellant
             dated 2 April 2018.  He was told that without the diary number
             and stamp of the police station they were not in a position to
             verify the application.  He then visited  the  office  of  the
             Commissioner for oaths whose stamp appeared on  the  document,
             where it was confirmed that the stamp is genuine.

         53.  In the opinion of the  author  of  the  report  it  is  common
             practice in  Pakistan  that  the  police  avoid  giving  diary
             numbers to complaints so that they are not compelled  to  take
             action on the complaint or to be accountable for failing to do
             so.  He said there  are  thousands  of  petitions  pending  in
             courts against the behaviour of the police.

         54.  On 15 July 2019 he visited  the  police  station  Jinnah  Road
             Gujranwala for verification of the  application  submitted  by
             the appellant dated 25 March 2018.  The police were unable  to
             verify the application because it does not have a diary number
             or police station stamp.

         55.  On 23 July 2019 he visited the  police  office  in  Lahore  to
             verify the order for appearance by the appellant but they were
             unable to verify it because no date was mentioned.

         56.  On 24 July 2019 he visited the police station in Liaqatabad to
             verify the application filed by the appellant  dated  9  March
             2018 but this could not be verified  due  to  the  absence  of
             diary number or stamp."

28. It is not suggested that Mr Ahmad is not an expert and that his report,
    both in relation to the police documents and also in  relation  to  the
    newspaper reports, was other than expert evidence that had properly  to
    be taken into account.  As set out  in  the  judge's  determination  at
    paras [52], [54]-[56], Mr Ahmad reported that, because of  the  absence
    of information on the documents, the relevant authorities  were  unable
    to verify whether or not the documents were genuine.   As  regards  the
    newspaper reports, Mr Ahmad reported that they  had  been  verified  as
    genuine newspaper reports by the relevant papers.

29. Having set out Mr Ahmad's  report  in  summary,  the  judge  noted  the
    respondent's DVRs at para [57] as follows:

         "Enquiries made from the British High Commission  in  Islamabad  by
         telephone to the  relevant  police  stations  regarding  the  three
         complaints by the appellant and  the  summons  for  her  appearance
         revealed that they were not able  to  be  verified  as  genuine  by
         reference to police records."

30. The judge dealt with the documentary evidence  under  the  heading  "My
    Findings" at paras [87]-[88] as follows:

         "87. The appellant has produced documents which  she  says  support
             her claim.  The police documents have been identified  by  the
             respondent as nongenuine, and the  appellant's  enquiries  are
             unable to verify the documents.   It  is  suggested  that  the
             police  are  [sic]  deliberately  failed   to   register   the
             complaints.  Significantly, it appears that the summons  which
             the appellant claims to have received from the police is  also
             nongenuine.  If, as she claims, she is someone  who  has  been
             accused of blasphemy, it makes no sense that the summons would
             be non-genuine.  The fact that it is leads me to conclude that
             it has been fabricated in order  to  bolster  the  appellant's
             claim.  With regard to her complaints against the  police  and
             subsequent court proceedings, in the absence of  any  evidence
             verifying those documents, I attach no weight to them.

         88.  With regard to the newspaper reports,  background  information
             indicates that it is possible to have anything published in  a
             newspaper for a  price.   Therefore  the  existence  of  these
             newspaper reports does not of itself prove the  truth  of  the
             matters contained in them."

31. It is plain to me that the judge has taken the  DVR  findings  at  face
    value, namely that in each case the documents were found  to  be  "Non-
    Genuine & False".  It is equally clear that in  each  instance,  unlike
    the situation reported by Mr Ahmad, the absence of the  information  in
    the documents does not appear to have  prevented  the  police  checking
    whether the documents were held by them.  I should add that, apart from
    the report into the summons, each of the enquiries was by telephone and
    only in the case of the summons was, as Mr Howells informed me, a  copy
    (in all probability redacted) provided by the respondent to the police.



32. On the face of it, there is a clear issue that arises from  the  report
    of Mr Ahmad and the DVRs.  On the one hand, Mr Ahmad  reported,  having
    provided the documents to the police, the lack of information prevented
    them making any checks.  By  contrast,  including  in  three  cases  by
    telephone only, the absence of that information  did  not  prevent  the
    authorities  checking  for  the  documents  when   contacted   by   the
    respondent.  The judge made no reference to Mr Ahmad's  report  in  the
    relevant paragraphs setting out his reasons for  finding  the  document
    not to be genuine.  That was a clear error of  law  particularly  given
    that there was the issue that I have identified  which  the  judge  was
    required to grapple with before either accepting what was said  in  the
    DVRs or not.

33. As I pointed out at the hearing, the respondent carried the  burden  of
    proof that these documents were  not  genuine.   The  judge  could  not
    simply, in the circumstances of this case, accept, without  more,  what
    was said in the DVRs.  It may well be that,  if  the  judge  could  not
    resolve the inherent contradiction in the evidence as  to  whether  the
    documents could, in fact, be checked, then the  respondent  would  have
    failed to produce  evidence  sufficient  to  discharge  the  burden  of
    establishing that they were not genuine and were false documents.

34. In my judgment, therefore, the judge  erred  in  law  in  reaching  his
    finding that the documents,  which  were  central  to  the  appellant's
    claim, were not genuine and were false documents.   The  centrality  of
    the genuineness of the summons was noted by the judge himself  in  para
    [87] of his determination.  The judge's error in finding  the  document
    to  be  not  genuine  was,  in  my  judgment,  in  itself  sufficiently
    significant in assessing the appellant's credibility that it  leads  me
    to conclude that the error was material and,  that  despite  any  other
    reasons he may have given, it leads me to  conclude  that  his  adverse
    finding and decision to dismiss the appeal cannot stand.

35. It is not, therefore, strictly necessary for me to deal  with  each  of
    the other grounds in detail.  It suffices if I deal with them  in  this
    way.

36. As regards point (1), the judge did make two factual  errors  in  paras
    [29] and [44].  In para [29] he wrongly stated that the appellant  had,
    having returned from the UK to Pakistan in February 2018, obtained  her
    nursing job within "two days" when it should  have  said  "two  weeks".
    Further, in para [44] he wrongly stated that her husband had  undergone
    heart bypass surgery when he was "19" when, in fact,  it  was  nineteen
    years ago when he was 43.  However, neither of these  misstatements  of
    the facts were, in  any  way,  material  to  the  judge's  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeal.

37. More problematic, however, is what the judge says in para [30].  There,
    he is summarising the  appellant's  evidence  of  the  incident  on  20
    February 2018 which was, on her claim, the basis upon  which  she  said
    that she had been accused  of  blasphemy.   The  judge  said  this  (my
    emphasis):

         "Her accusers were 3 women who were visiting  the  female  patient.
         She left the patient's room to make  tea  for  them  and  when  she
         returned she found the Koran  on  the  floor.   The  women  started
         shouting at her, accusing her of throwing it on the floor and  they
         abused her verbally and physically.  Two or  three  other  servants
         came when they heard the noise.  One of the women made a  telephone
         call.  The appellant was able to escape after 4 - 5 minutes because
         she knew the exit doors.  The three women  were  the  daughter  and
         another relative of the patient and  an  old  woman  sitting  in  a
         strong terrace and  take  Cassidy  in  relation  to  Ross's  murder
         thereof shall always forward bridging  just  an  awareness  of  the
         leading shouting weeds away always everything was  a  security  100
         shouting in cry baby shortly new chair."

38. The italicised words not only have no relevance to this appeal but make
    no sense in any context.  They almost  have  the  characteristic  of  a
    random set of words.  In one sense, as Mr Howells submitted, they might
    be seen as irrelevant to the judge's final decision.   However,  as  Ms
    King submitted, they appear to replace part of the appellant's  account
    as to what happened on 20 February 2018 and which led, she claimed,  to
    the subsequent events and accusation of  blasphemy.   The  judge  never
    returns to deal with the appellant's account on 20 February 2018 and it
    is unclear, therefore, whether he fully had in mind what the  appellant
    said happened to her.  In itself, the error  would  not  undermine  the
    judge's adverse conclusion.  The error is,  however,  of  some  concern
    given that it leaves uncertain whether  the  judge  fully  grasped  the
    appellant's account of events on 20 February 2018.

39. As regards point (2), in para [86] the judge noted  that  he  had  "not
    heard or read evidence from [the appellant's] husband, which would have
    been helpful, since he was present during the claimed  confrontations".
    Ms King submitted that there was an explanation for the absence of  the
    appellant's husband at the hearing because he was ill.  That,  however,
    did not explain why there was no written evidence from the  appellant's
    husband.  That was a matter which the judge could take into account  as
    it was evidence which could reasonably be expected to be provided  (see
    TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40).  In my judgment, that  is  all
    that the judge meant when in para [89] he said this:

         "Given the nature and form of the threats, I am  not  satisfied  to
         the required standard that the appellant has submitted all material
         factors at her disposal."

40. I do not accept Ms King's submission that the judge did not make  plain
    what 'missing' information he is referring to.  He is not referring  to
    the documents which were submitted  (but  which  he  found  not  to  be
    genuine), he is clearly referring to the absence of  evidence  and  the
    only evidence to which he makes reference in that regard is that of the
    appellant's husband.  Indeed, if clarity was  required,  he  made  this
    plain at para [96] when he said: "Her husband's  potentially  important
    evidence has not been provided."

41. As regards point (4), the  judge  stated  at  para  [90]  that  he  had
    "considered the inconsistencies relied upon by the  respondent  in  the
    refusal decision".  He did not explain what those inconsistencies were.
     Ms King pointed out that the two  inconsistencies  related  to  first,
    evidence given by the appellant at her  interview  that,  after  the  9
    March 2018 incident, she had not told her husband  when  she  got  home
    because he had a heart condition but that she also said  that  she  had
    told him later; and  secondly,  in  her  screening  interview,  despite
    stating that she had been accused of blasphemy, when asked whether  she
    had committed an offence she had said 'no' but had later explained that
    she thought the question was directed to other offences.

42. Because  the  judge  does  not  set  out  the  inconsistencies  in  his
    determination, it is unclear what he made of them and  any  explanation
    that  the  appellant  had  given.   However,  equally  clearly,   these
    inconsistencies did not form a significant part of the judge's  reasons
    for his adverse finding.  I am  unpersuaded  that,  even  accepting  Ms
    King's criticisms, that the judge materially erred in law  in  reaching
    his adverse finding  when  he  stated  that  he  had  "considered"  the
    inconsistencies relied upon.

43. As regard point (5), Ms  King  submitted  that  it  was  not  a  factor
    counting against the credibility of the appellant's  account  that  the
    three events she relied upon were consistent.  She submitted  that  the
    judge  had  failed  to  explain  what  the   "unacceptable   level   of
    coincidence" was and, in any event, consistency was a  positive  factor
    in favour of the appellant.

44. I agree with Mr Howells' submission that the argument that  consistency
    of an account is a positive feature in favour of a positive finding  on
    credibility, is not the issue in this appeal.

45. Of course, it  is  relevant  in  determining  whether  an  individual's
    account is credible and to be believed that  over  time  at  least  the
    essential elements of that account are consistently  recounted  by  the
    individual.   It  gives  some  positive  support  to  the  individual's
    credibility.  That was not the issue in this appeal.  Here,  the  judge
    was  not  wrongly  counting  against  the  appellant   that   she   had
    consistently told the same account over time, for example repeating  it
    at interview, in witness statements and in oral  evidence.   Here,  the
    judge was, in effect,  concluding  that  the  striking  similarity  and
    coincidences in the single overall account of  the  appellant  of  what
    happened to her in Pakistan called into question whether  that  account
    was to be believed.  In  effect,  the  judge  considered  that  it  was
    implausible that the appellant would have been confronted in  precisely
    the same way on three occasions with precisely the same outcomes.   So,
    at paras [90]-[93] the judge said this:

         "90. ... She then  describes  three  occasions  on  which  she  was
             confronted by unknown males and  either  told  to  attend  the
             mosque  for  conversion  or  being  threatened   with   death.
             Remarkably,  the  circumstances  of  each  confrontation  were
             identical, involving men on  motorcycles  with  guns  shouting
             loud enough to attract the attention of  bystanders,  by  whom
             they are intimidated into leaving without having  accomplished
             their mission.

         91.  When the appellant reports the incidents to the police in each
             of three completely separation locations, on each occasion the
             officer taking the report makes up the description of the guns
             without any prompting by the appellant or  any  of  the  three
             different pastors by whom she was accompanied  to  the  police
             station.  She is also able to provide them  with  descriptions
             of the motorcycles of two different types.

         92.  The men who  she  claims  confronted  her,  all  of  whom  are
             apparently linked by their shared desire to do  the  appellant
             harm, make no attempt to abduct  or  to  harm  the  appellant,
             despite having ample opportunity to do  so.   Considering  how
             easy it was for them to locate her, it is surprising that  her
             accusers, having reported her blasphemy to  the  police,  were
             not able to inform the police of  her  location  so  that  the
             summons which she claims was sent to her could be  transferred
             to the police in her locality.

         93.  Given the unacceptable level of coincidence her claims and the
             other inconsistencies identified in the refusal  decision  and
             in the above findings, I  reject  the  appellant's  claims  as
             being not credible."

46. The legal issue is whether it was properly open to the judge reasonably
    or rationally to conclude that the striking  similarity  between  these
    three events should not be put down to coincidence but, in  effect,  to
    concoction  by  the  appellant  of  her  account.   The  judge  clearly
    identified at paras 90-93 the elements of  the  three  incidents  which
    gave rise, for him, to the "unacceptable level of coincidence".   I  am
    unpersuaded that the judge's reasoning, in that regard, was  irrational
    in the sense that no reasonable judge could properly take that view.

47. That then deals with the points  raised  in  relation  to  the  adverse
    credibility finding and the dismissal  of  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.

48. For the reasons I have given above, the judge materially erred  in  law
    in reaching his adverse  credibility  finding  and  in  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  That decision must be set  aside
    and re-determined, it was accepted by the representatives before me  if
    that was my decision, on remittal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de
    novo rehearing.

49. As regards the Art 8 point raised in  the  grounds,  Ms  King  did  not
    pursue that point before me with any enthusiasm.  She accepted that Art
    8 had not been raised in the grounds before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    although she had referred to it in her skeleton argument.  However, she
    had not pursued Art 8 before the judge on any basis other than the risk
    on return.  She did not seek to make any additional submissions  before
    me.

50. In these circumstances, I am unpersuaded that the judge erred in law in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 8.  Of  course,  since  the
    appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, it will be open to
    the appellant, if she so wishes, to rely upon Art 8  again  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

51. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision is set aside.

52. Having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement
    and the nature and extent of fact-finding required, the proper disposal
    of the appeal is that it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Trevaskis.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             27 January 2020

