
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00519/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2019                   |On 6 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                      LENA JULIAMAREIKER AMENOPE FUMEY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. By a decision promulgated on 4 December 2018, I set aside the  First-
       tier Tribunal decision. My reasons for doing so were as follows:

           "1.    The appellant, Lena Juliamareiker Amenope Fumey, was born
           on 8 June 1996 and is a female citizen of Togo.  She entered the
           United Kingdom on a visit visa 25 March 2015.  On 22  May  2015,
           she claimed asylum.  By a  decision  dated  30  June  2015,  the
           Secretary of State refused her application.  An  appeal  to  the
           First-tier Tribunal was dismissed  but  that  decision  was  set
           aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis in a decision dated 19
           October 2016.  Judge Alis (then sitting as a Judge of the First-
           tier Tribunal) reheard the case on remittal and promulgated  his
           decision on 30 August  2017.   He  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
           appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

           2. This litigation has encountered procedural difficulties.  The
           appellant speaks English but her first language is Ewe.  She has
           been assisted both in her asylum interviews and also before  the
           First-tier Tribunal by the same interpreter.  It transpires that
           that interpreter  was  the  only  interpreter  in  Ewe  language
           operating in the United  Kingdom.   Unfortunately,  he  has  now
           moved to another job.  The  Upper  Tribunal  have  been  unable,
           despite  considerable   efforts,   to   identify   another   Ewe
           interpreter.  Notwithstanding that difficulty, I  directed  that
           the appeal should remain in my list at Manchester on 5  November
           2018.  The appellant attended with a social worker, Ms  Scraggs.
           I spoke to the appellant in English and am  satisfied  that  her
           proficiency in English is sufficient for her to  give  evidence.
           Indeed, the appellant did not suggest otherwise.  I am  grateful
           for the assistance provided to the Tribunal by  Ms  Scraggs  who
           has indicated that she  will  endeavour  to  attend  any  future
           hearing before the Tribunal to support the appellant.

           3. Granting permission in the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal
           Judge Plimmer wrote:

                "(1)   It is arguable the First-tier Tribunal made a mistake
                of fact which has caused unfairness as contended  in  ground
                4.

                (2)    It is also arguable that given the crucial importance
                attached to omissions within the evidence  it  was  arguably
                procedurally unfair to not  seek  an  explanation  from  the
                appellant or her father as contended in grounds 2 and 5.

                (3)    All grounds are arguable."

           4. The appellant contends that the judge  wrongly  rejected  the
           statement of a security guard who witnessed the appellant  being
           apprehended by police in 2015 on the grounds that the  appellant
           had not mentioned his involvement in the incident of 2015 in her
           written witness statement.  The appellant contends that this was
           never put to her and  she  had  no  opportunity  to  provide  an
           explanation.  Further, the appellant contends that  neither  the
           Presenting Officer nor the judge asked  the  appellant's  father
           (who gave oral evidence before the  Tribunal)  why  he  had  not
           mentioned that a chief had witnessed his  daughter's  arrest  in
           2015.  In his first written  statement  the  appellant  contends
           that her father was only asked why he had not obtained  "written
           evidence" earlier to which he replied he had not been  asked  to
           obtain anything until 2017.   The  appellant  asserts  that  her
           evidence that in July 2017 the appellant's solicitor did ask her
           father to gather written evidence whilst on a trip to  Togo  has
           not been challenged by  the  respondent.   Notwithstanding  that
           fact, the judge had failed to give weight  to  that  uncontested
           evidence.

           5. Upon reading the  decision  and  the  Record  of  Proceedings
           carefully, I find that there is some merit  in  the  appellant's
           contentions.  It is, of course, not always possible to  seek  or
           obtain an explanation as regards every single point which may be
           taken as to credibility.  However, as Judge Plimmer pointed out,
           the omissions in the evidence identified by Judge Alis appear to
           have been highly material and, at least  in  part,  led  him  to
           reject the credibility of the appellant's account.  I find  that
           the judge should have given the  appellant  the  opportunity  to
           deal with the concerns which he  had  regarding  these  apparent
           weaknesses in the evidence.  In the circumstances, I  set  aside
           the decision.

           6.  I  am  concerned  that  this  litigation  should   reach   a
           conclusion; the initial claim for asylum was made several  years
           ago.  I am concerned also that, if I were to remit the appeal to
           the First-tier Tribunal, that Tribunal may attempt  in  vain  to
           locate the services of an Ewe interpreter.  I was  told  by  the
           appellant that her father no longer supports her appeal and will
           not be giving oral evidence.  The only witness will,  therefore,
           be the appellant.  Further, I have  satisfied  myself  that  the
           appellant has a sufficient grasp of  English  to  give  her  own
           evidence and be cross-examined  in  that  language.   For  these
           reasons, I will remake the decision in the Upper Tribunal at  or
           following a reserved hearing at  Manchester  on  a  date  to  be
           fixed.

           Notice of Decision

           The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on
           30 August 2017 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall
           stand.  Upper Tribunal Judge Lane shall remake the  decision  at
           or  following  a  resumed  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  at
           Manchester Civil Justice Centre on a date to be fixed (two hours
           allowed: no interpreter).  Both parties may send to  each  other
           and file at the Upper Tribunal copies of  any  written  evidence
           upon which they may respectively seek to rely no later  than  10
           days prior to the resumed hearing."

    2. At the resumed hearing at Liverpool on 7 November 2019, the appellant
       was represented by Mr Holmes of counsel. The hearing was conducted in
       English. As I recorded in my error of law decision, it has  not  been
       possible to obtain the services interpreter in the appellant's  first
       language. No objection was raised by the appellant or by her  counsel
       regarding the use of English throughout the Upper Tribunal and I  was
       entirely satisfied that the appellant understood  all  the  questions
       which were put to her and that she was able to articulate her answers
       to those questions such that all present understood her.

    3. The burden of proof is on the appellant. The  standard  of  proof  is
       whether  there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that   the
       appellant will face a real risk of persecution or Article 3 ECHR ill-
       treatment upon  return  to  Togo.  I  have  taken  into  account  the
       provisions  of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International
       Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 together with  Paragraphs
       327 to 339 of HC 395 (as amended). I have sought to identify the core
       parts of the appellant's evidence and have assessed each item of that
       evidence before considering the evidence as a totality.

    4. The appellant adopted her  witness  statements  as  her  evidence  in
       chief. She was cross-examined by  Mr  Bates,  who  appeared  for  the
       Secretary of  State.  Having  heard  the  oral  submissions  of  both
       representatives, I reserved my decision.

    5. I do not find the appellant to be a witness of truth. I find no  part
       of her account of past events in Togo may  be  relied  upon.  I  have
       reached those findings for the following reasons.

    6. First, it was striking that the appellant appeared to be very largely
       unaware of the evidence  given  by  her  father  who  had  previously
       supported her asylum appeal. By the time the appeal reached the Upper
       Tribunal, the father of the appellant was no longer offering support.
       Notwithstanding  that  fact,  the  appellant  was  unaware  in  cross
       examination that her father had stated in written  evidence  that  he
       had travelled in 2017 to Togo in  order  to  locate  the  appellant's
       uncle who the appellant claims had fled from the Togo authorities  in
       February 2015. At that time, the appellant claimed that she had  been
       distributing leaflets for the Togo opposition party with  her  cousin
       but had been seized by the police and taken to her uncle's home.  The
       appellant's uncle (who only has one leg) had been able to escape from
       the police as had the appellant who shortly after  had  travelled  to
       the United Kingdom. In the context of that claim, I do  not  find  it
       credible that the appellant should be unaware that  her  own  father,
       previously a supporting witness in her claim and appeal, should  have
       travelled to Togo in 2017 to look for the appellant's uncle. Had  the
       appellant been telling the truth, I find that  she  would  have  been
       aware  of  the  details  of  her  own  claim  for  asylum,  including
       particulars provided by supporting witnesses; her ignorance and  lack
       of interest in her own appeal leads me to conclude that  the  account
       provided to the IAC and the respondent is the invention  not  of  the
       appellant but others seeking to obtain for her immigration status  in
       the United Kingdom. When asked why she had not discussed her father's
       evidence in her appeal, the appellant replied that, '[my father] just
       provided evidence which I hadn't even read through and did not know.'
       It had been the father's evidence also  that  the  appellant's  uncle
       had,  following  an  escape  which  is  itself  unlikely  given   his
       disability, relocated to the capital of Togo.  I  accept  Mr  Bates's
       submission that, had the uncle, whom the appellant claims is a member
       of the ANC opposition party in  Togo,  had  problems  with  the  Togo
       authorities, he would not have relocated to the capital city.

    7. Secondly, as regards the leaflets  which  she  claims  to  have  been
       disputing, the appellant said that she was aware  that  the  leaflets
       demanded a change of government and had she had no  idea  what  other
       opinions or ideologies were being advanced. I do not find it credible
       that the appellant, who appears to be  an  intelligent  and  educated
       woman, would have engaged in the potentially  dangerous  activity  of
       distributing leaflets for an organisation the aims of which  she  had
       not even sought to comprehend.

    8. Thirdly, the  appellant  gave  inconsistent  evidence  regarding  the
       involvement of her cousin in the February 2015 incident involving the
       Togo authorities. In oral evidence before the Tribunal, the appellant
       said that her cousin had not  been  with  her  when  the  police  had
       stopped her although he had been in the  vicinity  of  the  incident.
       However, in previous evidence, she had  said  that  cousin  had  been
       aware what was going on and, in order to avoid being apprehended,  he
       had run away. Had the appellant telling the truth, I  find  that  she
       would have been able to have  given  a  consistent  account  of  past
       events when asked to recount them.

    9. The appellant relies upon the expert report of Dr  Benjamin  Lawrance
       of  the  University  of  Arizona.  However,  the  expert  report   is
       problematic. First, at [20], the expert describes  the  appellant  as
       having  been  'seriously'  beaten  and  'maltreated  physically   and
       mentally' by government agents in February 2015. The appellant's  own
       evidence was that she was dragged by the collar and by  her  arm  but
       not otherwise assaulted. It would appear that  the  expert  has,  for
       reasons  which  are  not  apparent,  added  his  own  gloss  to   the
       appellant's evidence of the incident. Secondly, at [32],  the  expert
       claims that, were the appellant to attempt  to  relocate  to  another
       part of Togo, she would encounter difficulties because of  her  name,
       accent and her use of the Ewe language. These  characteristics  would
       lead strangers to assume that she is 'an opponent of the illegitimate
       regime of Faure Gnassingbe.' However, it has never been part  of  the
       appellant's claim that she would face any difficulties in any part of
       Togo on account of her tribe identity or ethnicity.  Mr  Holmes,  who
       appeared for  the  appellant,  submitted  that  the  expert  was  not
       restricted  to  matters  raised  only  by  the  appellant   and   her
       representatives in their instructions to him and had been  instructed
       to comment of matters of ethnicity. I accept that may  be  the  case,
       but I find that it is significant  that  the  appellant  herself  has
       never claimed that she would face tribal/ethnicity problems  in  Togo
       and I find that, notwithstanding the expert's comments,  she  has  no
       subjective fear in that  regard.  In  any  event,  I  find  that  the
       appellant faces no real risk of ill-treatment should  she  return  to
       her home area of Togo where the problems  identified  by  the  expert
       will not pertain.

   10. The expert report also contains reference to a number of other asylum
       cases involving individuals from Togo, including one case  which  has
       yet to be completed but is pending in the courts of the United States
       of America. It is difficult to see how these  references  assist  the
       Tribunal at all. Viewed as a whole, I  find  that  I  agree  with  Mr
       Bates's description of the expert report as  consisting  to  a  large
       extent of advocacy for the appellant's appeal rather  than  objective
       evidence, properly sourced. I have attached  limited  weight  to  the
       report accordingly.

   11. In the light of my findings and observations, I have  concluded  that
       the incident in February 2015 that did not take place as described by
       the appellant. I find the appellant has never come to  the  attention
       of the Togo authorities, either as described in  her  account  or  at
       all. I find that the appellant's uncle is not  a  member  of  a  Togo
       opposition party and that the appellant has no profile whatever as  a
       supporter of opposition politics in Togo.  I find that the  appellant
       may return without risk to her home area of Togo and that  she  would
       there not face any risk on account of her political opinions,  tribal
       characteristics or ethnicity, in the latter case because she would be
       living with others having the same characteristics and ethnicity.

   12. No appeal in the Upper Tribunal is advanced  on  grounds  other  than
       asylum/Article 3 ECHR. I dismiss the appellant's appeal  against  the
       decision of the Secretary of State dated 30 June  2015  refusing  her
       international protection




       Notice of Decision

       This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

