
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00967/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|business                             |                                      |
|On 6 November 2020                   |On 12 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                        MA (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Janjua, solicitor instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Barker) (hereinafter referred to as the
         "FtTJ") who dismissed his protection appeal in a decision
         promulgated on the 7 September 2020.

      2. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14 of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as the
         proceedings relate to the circumstances of a protection claim.
         Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction applies
         both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic the Upper Tribunal issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could take place via Skype. Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for the hearing to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

      4. The hearing took place on 6 November 2020, by means of Skype for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected to by the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held because it was not
         practicable, and both parties agreed that all issues could be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video as did
         the appellant. There were no issues regarding sound, and no
         substantial technical problems were encountered during the hearing
         and I am satisfied both advocates were able to make their
         respective cases by the chosen means.

      5. I am grateful to Mr Janjua and Mr Diwnycz for their clear oral
         submissions.

Background:

      6. The appellant's immigration history and claim are summarised in the
         decision of the FtTJ.

      7. The appellant is an Iraqi citizen of Kurdish ethnicity from xxx in
         Sulaymaniyah. He entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 5
         March 2018 and claimed asylum on 6 March 2018. His claim was
         refused by the Secretary of State in a decision letter dated 1
         August 2018.

      8. The appellant appealed that decision, and the appeal came before
         the FtT (Judge Phull) on 6 September 2018.

      9. The basis of the factual claim made by the appellant is set out in
         the decision of Judge Phull and exhibited in the respondent's
         bundle at "B".

     10. The appellant lived in the IKR along with his parents, two sisters
         and a brother. He was a student and also worked with his father, as
         a labourer.

     11. He set out that his fear was of the Kurdish Democratic Party
         (hereinafter referred to as the "KDP"). On 5 January 2018 his
         friend R, introduced him to BS, a high-ranking man in the Patriotic
         Union Party ("PUK"). The man identified as R used to be BS's
         bodyguard. The appellant wanted to work as a bodyguard for BS and
         asked him for a salaried job. BS agreed to find him work and they
         exchanged details. Two days later BS called him with an offer of an
         illegal job and asked him to collect a letter from the KDP member,
         F, to give it to him. The appellant agreed to do the job.

     12. The appellant met F and was given a letter for BS which he was told
         was top secret. The appellant delivered the letter to BS the same
         day and was paid $1500 for the job. Two days later he was given
         another job to pick up a letter from F. He delivered the letter to
         BS who paid another $1500 plus $100 in tips.

     13. The next day the appellant received a call from R who told him that
         F had been arrested and had given the appellant's name to the
         authorities. BS told him to hide. He went to his friend's house and
         shouted there hiding for 5 to 7 days. R told him that BS would pay
         for his journey to leave the country. He was taken to the airport
         and he flew to Turkey with the assistance of an agent and then to
         the UK. The agent took his passport and said he would return it to
         his family.

     14. The appellant claimed that if returned to Iraq his life would be at
         risk from the KDP .

    The first decision of FtTJ Phull:

     15. The FtTJ set out his findings of fact and assessment of the
         evidence at paragraphs [18]-[24].

     16. The factual findings can be summarised as follows:

          1) The FtTJ accepted that he was an Iraqi national of Kurdish
             ethnicity from Sulaymaniyah.

          2) Beyond that, the FtTJ did not find the appellant had given a
             credible account.

          3) The judge took into account the appellant's evidence that he
             was a student and that it helped his father as a labourer and
             that he had no work experience as a bodyguard, nor has he
             undertaken any training for that role. The FtTJ did not accept
             that it was credible that a high-ranking person of the PUK
             considered him for a role of bodyguard given that he had no
             prior experience or training for such a role (at [21]).

          4) The judge rejected his account that he carried out a illegal
             work for BS on the basis that a high-ranking official of the
             PUK would not reasonably likely entrust the task of picking up
             letters that were top secret to an ordinary civilian with no
             experience of such a role.

          5) The judge therefore rejected his account that he collected
             letters for BS from  a KDP member.

          6) The judge therefore found that he was not of adverse interest
             to the KDP in Iraq.

          7) The judge considered his factual history and that he remained
             in Sulaymaniyah at his friend's house in hiding for 5 to 7
             days before he left the country. The judge found that he was
             able to stay at his friend's house for a number of days before
             he left the country without attracting adverse attention
             because he was not a person of any interest.

          8) The judge found that he uses own passport to leave the IKR and
             then Baghdad which demonstrated that there was nothing in his
             profile that could have alerted the Iraqi authorities at the
             airport. He was able to pass through airport controls because
             he was not a person of interest to the KDP.

          9) The judge rejected his claim that he was falsely accused of
             being a spy for the PUK and therefore attracting adverse
             attention of the KDP (at [24]).

     17. The FtTJ went on to consider return to the IKR and Baghdad. The
         judge had regard to the relevant decisions (AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA
         Civ 944 and also AAH (Iraq). The judge noted that he originated
         from Sulaymaniyah in the IKR and that he would be returned to Erbil
         in the IKR, a non-contested area and where the PUK are in control
         (CPIN 2017).

     18. The appellant's evidence was that he had no contact with his family
         and did not want to contact them because he feared for his safety.
         The judge had given reasons why he had rejected his account that he
         would be at risk from the KDP and also did not accept his account
         that he was not in contact with his family because the Kurdish
         authorities may be monitoring them. The judge found that he was in
         contact with his family because it was "inconceivable that he would
         not have contacted them to tell them that he had arrived safely in
         the UK." Furthermore, the judge took into account his interview
         record in which he said he had travelled to Turkey using his own
         Iraqi passport and that the agent had "took it back to my family.
         He said he would return it to my family, he was angry with me"
         (question 168). The judge found there was no suggestion that the
         appellant did believe the agent or report the passport was stolen
         and it is interview had also spoken to his brother when he left
         Iraq. Thus, the judge found that the appellant knew that the agent
         had taken his passport back to his family and furthermore that his
         CSID document was at the home of his parents. The judge found that
         he could contact his brother as he done previously to request a
         copy of his CS ID document/passport be sent to him and that if he
         could not return to the IKR directly, he could return to the IKR
         via Baghdad once he is in possession of his CSID and passport.

     19. The judge also found that he could return to Erbil or Sulaymania
         where as an ordinary citizen he would receive the same level of
         protection and could turn his family for support. His previously
         worked there and studied it could take up the same work again with
         his father.

     20. The FtTJ therefore dismissed his appeal.

     21. He sought permission to appeal that decision, but permission was
         refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 9 November 2018 and also by
         the Upper Tribunal on 28 January 2019. Thus, by 4 February 2019 he
         was appeal rights exhausted.

The Further submissions:

     22. On 21 November 2019, the appellant submitted further submissions as
         a fresh claim.

     23. They are set out in the respondent's bundle at "C". The letter
         stated that the appellant "maintained he fears the authorities in
         Iraq and members of the KTP and the PUK... Maintained that his fear
         is genuine, and he did not fabricate a story for the purpose of
         claiming asylum... He still maintains he worked as a bodyguard for
         BS who was a senior PUK official".

     24. The documents in support of his fresh claim consisted of a witness
         statement from his father, and a document described as "Amnesty
         International report with translation" and some further articles
         and reports relating to Iraq. The further submissions asserted that
         the appellant had obtained new evidence that directly rebutted the
         presumption of the judge which was a report from Amnesty
         International Iraq who would confirm that the appellant was at risk
         upon return and that he was accused of being a spy and handling
         illegal documents for BS. It was stated that the evidence was
         consistent with his claim that he worked as a bodyguard who was a
         high-ranking PUK member and that the KTP were looking for invite
         harassing his family members. The further submissions state "the
         document has been sent to him by his family".

     25. The further submissions also referred to an updated witness
         statement from the appellant that he was at risk upon return from
         the KTP, PUK and Al Hash Al Shaabi.

     26. In terms of relocation he said he could not speak Arabic and that
         the Shia Muslim militia controlled large swathes of Iraq. Further
         background evidence was cited in the further submissions.

     27. Those further submissions were refused in a decision letter dated
         16 January 2020.

     28. The decision set out the previous factual findings made by FtTJ
         Phull and that in a very careful and detailed decision, the judge
         properly analysed all the relevant evidence but was not prepared to
         accept that he had been threatened or there was any risk of harm
         from the KDP and that he could return to Iraq. The decision then
         went on to consider the further evidence since that decision and in
         particular the documentary evidence that the appellant relied upon
         at [17] and in the context of the decision in Tanveer Ahmed. A
         number of reasons were given for reaching the conclusion that
         little weight should be attached to those documents. In particular,
         there was no independent evidence that they were official documents
         from within Iraq, a search had been undertaken in January 2020 it
         was noted that the website that was given on the documents provided
         no contents. As further noted that the documents had been stamped
         with the words "Amnesty International Iraq and Kurdistan" alongside
         a symbol of the candle wrapped in wire, the symbol recognised as a
         symbol for Amnesty International although there is no known
         affiliation between the two websites. Furthermore, when the
         respondent conducted a search for the director with the name given,
         the director was not listed within the Amnesty website.

     29. The appellant's sur place claim was also considered at [23 - 25]

     30. Consideration was also given to Article 15 (c)  in the light of the
         country guidance decision in  SMO, KSP and IM (Article
         15(c);identity documents) Iraq CG [20199] UKUT 00400  Specific
         consideration was given to documentation and feasibility of return
         (excluding the IKR) and internal relocation within Iraq including
         the IKR. His claim was therefore refused on all grounds.

     31. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal against that decision.

The second decision; FtTJ Barker:

     32. A case management review was held on 24 June 2020. At paragraph (e)
         reference was made for time granted to the appellant's
         representatives to file and serve a verification report relating to
         the report from Amnesty International Iraq -Kurdistan. There is no
         report in the papers.

     33. The appeal came before the FtTJ on the 28 August 2020 and in the
         decision promulgated on 7 September 2020 his appeal was dismissed.

     34. The FtTJ set out his analysis of the evidence and his findings of
         fact at paragraphs [39 - 111] on all issues. In that analysis he
         set out the previous findings made by Judge Phull noting that they
         were the "starting point" but that in this case there was fresh
         evidence which he was required to consider. He undertook a careful
         analysis of that material, which included documentary evidence that
         was said to emanate from Kurdistan (Amnesty International Iraq -
         Kurdistan) and evidence from his father. Having considered that
         evidence in the light of the oral evidence of the appellant and the
         other documentary evidence, he reached the conclusions at
         paragraphs [60 - 75] that the documents lacked "credibility and
         reliability".

     35. The FtTJ also noted that he claimed to be at risk on return from
         the PUK as well as the KDP a claim which the judge found to be a
         new claim and had not been referred to before (see [76 - 77]).

     36. The FtTJ concluded at [78] that the appellant was not at risk on
         return as a result of any activity undertaken in Iraq and did not
         accept, to the lower standard, the appellant worked for the PUK or
         is at risk from them or any other authority in Iraq as a result.

     37. At paragraphs [79]-[94] the FtTJ set out his analysis of the
         appellant's sur place claim. The FtTJ concluded that on the
         evidence he was not satisfied that those activities, in the form of
         Facebook postings and attendance of three demonstrations was
         sufficient to indicate that the authorities in Iraq would have any
         knowledge of the appellant, or interest in him as a result.

     38. As to return to Iraq and considering the CG in SMO (as cited) in
         terms of documentation to assist return, the appellant accepted in
         evidence that his Iraqi passport was at his home with his parents.
         He had recent contact with his father to obtain the documents in
         support of the claim and that he had not lost contact with them.
         Given that he had a contact with his family the judge found that he
         could obtain his passport with relative ease and could thus obtain
         a CSID card within a reasonable time. Other findings were also made
         in respect of return.

     39. The FtTJ therefore dismissed his appeal.

     40. Permission to appeal was issued and permission was granted on the
         25 September 2020 by FtTJ Nightingale.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     41. Mr Janjua on behalf of the appellant relied upon the written
         grounds of appeal. There were no further written submissions on
         behalf of the appellant.

     42. No Rule 24 response was filed on behalf of the respondent. I also
         heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful for
         their assistance.

Decision on error of law:

     43. It is not necessary to set out the submissions of each of the
         parties in full as I will set out the relevant aspects of those
         submissions when dealing with the grounds advanced on behalf of the
         appellant and my consideration of those issues.

     44. There are two grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant.

    Ground 1:

     45. Dealing with ground 1, Mr Janjua relied upon the written grounds.
         The grounds submit that the judge erred in consideration of the
         appellant's evidence.

     46. In particular at [65] the judge considered the report relied upon
         by the appellant referred to as the "Amnesty International Iraq
         Kurdistan". The grounds set out that at [65] the judge found the
         document to be unreliable because he said "it is not produced by
         anyone from the organisation, and does not come with any covering
         letter or statement explaining the details of precisely
         investigation or enquiry they carried out".

     47. The grounds assert that the document was dated and signed by NA who
         is a director of Amnesty Kurdistan. Furthermore, the evidence
         provided a committee of seven members who investigated the
         appellant's matter.

     48. The grounds go on to state that the assessment made at [66] was in
         error. The judge stated "even if the report itself is legitimate,
         the complaint comes wholly from the account of the appellant's
         father. In my view there are inconsistencies in the evidence which
         me that I cannot accept the appellant's father's account to Amnesty
         International Iraq - Kurdistan as accurate." However, the grounds
         submit that the evidence from Amnesty Kurdistan states that the
         committee was created in order to investigate the case and resolve
         it. The evidence states that the case exists, and the speeches were
         correct. In a letter from Amnesty Kurdistan dated 3/2/20 it states
         that the problems have still not been resolved.

     49. Therefore, it is submitted on behalf of the appellant he provided
         all evidence that was available to substantiate his claim and the
         judge failed to place any weight on the evidence provided and also
         applied a higher standard when assessing that evidence.

     50. In his oral submissions Mr Janjua submitted that the judge was
         wrong in his findings and that he had not appreciated that the
         document was signed, and that email contact had been provided. He
         submitted that there was reference at [71] in the decision that
         there was limited information but that there was a name and
         signature of the men who investigated the matter. He submitted that
         there was a material error of law which rendered the whole decision
         unsafe and that it should be remitted to the FtT.

     51. He further submitted that whilst he accepted the decision of
         Devaseelan, this was a fresh claim and because the SSHD had
         accepted it as a fresh claim under paragraph 353 there was a
         realistic prospect of success.

     52. Mr Diwncyz made reference to the document and submitted that it did
         not look as if there had been a signature and that what was on the
         document could have been the signature of the translator.

     53. I have carefully considered both the written and oral submissions
         made on behalf of the appellant. Having done so, I am not satisfied
         that the decision of the FtTJ discloses the making of an error on a
         point of law in the way that the grounds assert. I will set out my
         reasons for reaching that view.

     54. The FtTJ made reference to the fresh material which was before the
         Tribunal at [55].  At [59] he returned to the issue of the fresh
         evidence and in particular recited the further information
         contained in the document from Amnesty international Iraq -
         Kurdistan. At [60-62] the FtTJ highlighted the significance of this
         material and the document headed "final report" which detailed the
         complaint made by the appellant's father recorded on 27 November
         2018 (see report dated 3/2/19) and set out what the report had
         stated. The judge said as follows "it details that the appellant's
         father's life, along with that of his wife, have been threatened by
         the parties of Kurdistan because his son worked with BS, a powerful
         person in the PUK, and specifically delivered a secret letter from
         a member of the KDP to BS. When the member of the KDP who wrote the
         letter was arrested, he named the appellant the authorities and as
         a result the appellant has been threatened with arrest and killing
         by Erbil security and the KDP and the PUK, and because of the risk
         of the appellant giving BS's name if arrested, the appellant was
         also at risk of death from him. The report goes on to say that
         after the appellant left Iraq, his father's home was attacked and
         be has threatened him a lot. The report concludes stating that
         Amnesty International Iraq - Kurdistan have investigated this claim
         and ask the Iraqi authorities and Kurdistan regional government to
         protect the appellant's father and his family. It states the life
         of the appellant and his wife are in danger as a result of the
         threats from the PUK and the KDP."

     55. It is not submitted by Mr Janjua on behalf of the appellant that
         the judge inaccurately or misstated that evidence.

     56. At [64 - 74] the FtTJ gave reasons as to why he concluded at [75]
         that the documents relied upon lacked "credibility and
         reliability". As can be seen by the decision when read as a whole,
         the judge gave a number of reasons as to why that documentary
         evidence was unreliable. The grounds only appear to challenge the
         findings at [65]-[66].

     57. The challenge to paragraphs [65] and [66 ]is that at [65 ]the judge
         had stated that the document had not been produced by anyone from
         the organisation, did not come with a covering letter or statement
         explaining the details of precisely what was investigated or the
         enquiries they carried out. It is submitted that the document had
         been dated and signed by NA, who is a director of Amnesty Kurdistan
         and there was also evidence which showed  a committee of seven
         members who investigated the appellant's matter. In respect of [66]
         the grounds criticised the finding made by the judge where he
         stated that "even if the report itself is legitimate, the complaint
         comes wholly from the account of the appellant's father. In my view
         there are inconsistencies in the evidence which mean that I cannot
         accept the appellant's father's account to Amnesty International
         Iraq - Kurdistan as accurate". The ground state that the evidence
         from Amnesty Kurdistan had stated that a committee was created in
         order to investigate the case and resolve it and that the further
         letter 3/220 stated that the problems and still not been resolved.

     58. However, the grounds wholly ignore the findings of the FtTJ and his
         assessment of the documentary evidence in a number of important
         respects.

     59. The full assessment is undertaken at [64]-[74] and in my judgement
         was wholly consistent with the decision of Tanveer Ahmed. The FtTJ
         considered the reliability of the document in the light of its
         contents and in the round and with the other evidence including
         that given by the appellant and his father.

     60. Whilst the report does have the name of NA on the document at the
         bottom and there is a document with what is said to be a number of
         other individuals calling themselves the committee, it does not
         undermine the other findings at [65].  The documents do not explain
         or give details of precisely the investigation was carried out or
         the nature of the enquiries that were carried out. I cannot accept
         the submission made on behalf of the appellant that the document
         stated that the committee was created in order to investigate the
         case and resolve it and that a further letter dated 3/2/20 stated
         the problem still not been resolved. That wholly ignores the point
         made by the judge that no details were given any explanation as to
         what precisely they had investigated or the nature of the enquiries
         that they carried out. At [71] the judge returned to this issue
         observing that he was concerned about the investigation and the
         report because they were "vague and lacking any detail". The judge
         stated "I have been provided with no detail of how the organisation
         carried out any such investigation, other than the limited
         information provided in the report. There is nothing to demonstrate
         that the organisation is that any more than record the complaint of
         the appellant's father in drawing conclusions from it. This further
         affects the way that I can attach the report relied on by the
         appellant." In my judgement, that was a finding wholly open to the
         judge to make when making an assessment of the documents.

     61. The grounds also ignore the other findings made by the judge.

     62. At [66] the FtTJ found that the complaint came wholly from the
         account of the appellant's father and that in his view there were
         "inconsistencies in the evidence" which meant he could not accept
         the appellant's father's account to Amnesty International Iraq -
         Kurdistan is accurate. He set out those inconsistencies at [67 -
         69]. In reaching his conclusions he considered the letter from the
         appellant's father that was sent in support of the further
         submissions on 21 November 2019. In that letter it stated that the
         appellant's father "has suffered greatly in the hands of the
         authority" and "had no choice but to contact the human rights
         organisation on 27/11/2018 and made a complaint" (see Annex D). The
         judge did not consider that report in isolation but considered it
         in the context of the evidence that was elicited in cross-
         examination of the appellant. As recorded at [67] the appellant was
         cross examined by the presenting officer, but he gave no account of
         any suffering by his father. The judge recorded that the appellant
         was specifically asked a number of times if the complaint by his
         father had led to any problems, but the appellant had denied this
         saying that the authorities' problems with him not family. Even
         though it was clarified in re-examination the appellant's evidence
         as recorded by the judge was that he maintained that the only
         problem his family had since his exit from Iraq that the
         authorities "harassed them" trying to find the appellant, but he
         clearly said that his family had not suffered any problems
         themselves just that the authorities continue to look to the
         appellant and told his family that they would kill the appellant if
         returned to Iraq. The judge therefore concluded that "the evidence
         was clear that as far as the appellant was concerned, his family
         received no direct threats themselves, either in as a result of the
         appellant's actions or because of the report to Amnesty
         International Iraq - Kurdistan."

     63. At [68] the judge considered that evidence given by the appellant
         in the light of the evidence in the appellant's father's statement
         and that in the document from Amnesty international Kurdistan. He
         found "I do not find it credible that if the appellant's father and
         other family members had suffered at the hands of the authorities,
         they would not have told the appellant this. The appellant is
         concerned only with the risk he poses from the authorities and does
         not rely on any risk or claims that his family are under, in fact
         he made it clear to me in evidence that there is no risk to his
         family as the person the authorities seek is him and him alone." It
         is plain from that paragraph that the judge was highlighting the
         inconsistency between the appellant's evidence and that in the
         account given by his father in the written evidence. At [69] the
         judge also made a finding that there was no detail as to how he had
         "suffered greatly" at the hands of the authorities and that given
         that the appellant was in touch with his father, that evidence
         could have been obtained with relative ease. Those were findings
         that were open to the judge having considered the documentary
         evidence in the light of the oral evidence given by the appellant.
         That was an entirely permissible approach to the evidence.

     64. At [72] the judge also considered evidence given by the appellant
         himself which damaged the reliability of the report. Whilst the
         judge accepted that the appellant was not a party to the
         investigation and does not appear to have been contacted by them
         which the judge found to be concerning. Furthermore, he did not
         accept claim by the appellant that an organisation such as Amnesty
         International would simply approach the PUK or the KDP or any other
         authority in Iraq and accuse them of wanting to kill the appellant.
         The judge found that on the evidence before him, could not find
         that those same authorities (that is, KDP or the PUK) has confirmed
         to Iraq - Kurdistan that it was their intention to kill the
         appellant.

     65. The judge also highlighted further discrepancies in the report at
         [74] where the report concluded by saying that the "appellant and
         his wife at risk the authorities in Iraq", the judge assumed that
         they are fact that the appellant's father and his wife because the
         appellant himself did not have a wife in Iraq or anywhere else. At
         [73] the judge also highlighted a further inconsistency between the
         appellant's evidence and that recorded in the documentary evidence.

     66. There is no merit in the submission that because the respondent
         accepted this as a fresh claim that this was bound to succeed or
         had realistic prospects of success in the way that Mr Janjua
         submitted. The fact that the fresh evidence resulted in a hearing
         before the FtTJ was not a concession as to its merits but to give
         the opportunity for a hearing before a judge who was to assess that
         evidence and make a decision upon that evidence. That was precisely
         what the FtTJ undertook during the hearing of this appeal and his
         assessment and analysis of the evidence as a whole.

     67. Consequently, when those paragraphs are read together and in the
         light of the documents that were before the FtTJ, I am satisfied
         that the judge gave adequate and sustainable reasons consistent
         with the decision in Tanveer Ahmed, as to why the documents were
         unreliable and that he could not place weight upon them. I am
         satisfied that is no error of law in his approach to that evidence.

    Ground 2:

     68. As to ground 2, it is submitted that the FtTJ has not considered
         the evidence in the round and that he placed undue weight on the
         fact that the appellant's previous asylum claim and the
         inconsistencies outlined in the previous judgement despite the fact
         that the crux of the case was broadly consistent. Thus, it is
         submitted that the judge failed to give an independent decision
         impartial from the previous determination.

     69. It is submitted that the appellant gave an account was broadly
         consistent with the background evidence and that the judge had
         failed not properly follow the guidance in the case of Chiver which
         is cited at paragraph 3 of the written grounds.

     70. In summary it was submitted that the judge made material errors of
         law and did not give "anxious scrutiny" to the factual account and
         the evidence provided.

     71. As Mr Janjua submitted, the second ground relies on the first
         ground and that if the Tribunal did not accept there was any error
         of law on the basis of the first ground, then the second ground
         could not realistically succeed. I am satisfied that is the
         position. In the light of my conclusion that the FtTJ was entitled
         to reach the findings he did in respect of the documentary evidence
         said to emanate from Iraq, which was the fresh evidence relied
         upon, then it must follow that his assessment  overall was one that
         was open to him to make.

     72. In my judgement it is plain from reading the decision that the FtTJ
         began his consideration with the findings made by the previous
         judge and that they were his "starting point" which is entirely
         consistent with the guidance given in the case of Devaseelan(second
         appeals - ECHR-extraterritorial effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT
         00702.  The FtTJ lawfully directed himself to that decision at [51]
         and further observed at [52]-[53] that" there will be occasional
         cases where the circumstances surrounding the first appeal was such
         that the second Tribunal to look at the matter as if the first
         determination ever been made" and also that in accordance with
         those guidelines and as counsel then appearing for the appellant
         accepted, that the findings were the starting point but "I am of
         course not bound by them" (see paragraph 53]].

     73. In my judgement his approach to the appeal was entirely lawful and
         consistent with the case law. At [54]-[59] the FtTJ then set out
         the fresh evidence that was relied upon by the appellant and then
         went on to consider that the substantively within his decision. As
         I have set out above, the judge gave adequate and sustainable
         reasons for reaching the overall conclusion at [75] that the
         documents lacked credibility and reliability and thus his decision
         at [78] that they did not undermine the previous credibility
         findings made was a decision that was wholly open to him to make.
         Despite the claim on the grounds that the judge applied a "higher
         standard of proof" that is not demonstrated by careful reading of
         the report and it is further plain that the judge properly
         considered the evidence "in the round" before he reached his
         findings of fact.

     74. The FtTJ went on to consider the appellant's evidence in relation
         to his sur place activities at [79 - 96]. Those findings of fact
         and assessment have not been challenged in the grounds nor has the
         assessment made of return in light of the country guidance case of
         SMO, see [99 - 109].

     75. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law. The decision of the FtT shall stand.




         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall
         stand.

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction applies
         both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




              Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


              Dated 9 November 2020







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


         1.   A person seeking permission to appeal  against  this  decision
         must make a written application to the  Upper  Tribunal.  Any  such
         application must be received  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  within  the
         appropriate period after this  decision  was  sent  to  the  person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as  follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the  way  in  which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


         2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for  permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention  under  the  Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10  working  days,
         if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         3.   Where the person making the application is in detention  under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working  days  (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time  that  the  application  for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days, if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


         6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the
         covering letter or covering email.

