
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00647/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14th June 2017                     |On 03 July 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                  mrs h K a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Sidhu, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  1st  January  1970.
    She has three dependants, her husband T born on 1st  January  1965  and
    her two children D born 1st January 1999 and I born 1st  January  2006.
    The three dependants are not specifically referred to insofar  as  they
    do not have individual file numbers but such claims they may  have  are
    intrinsically linked to that of the Appellant.

 2. The Appellant applied for asylum based upon a fear that if returned  to
    Afghanistan she would face mistreatment due to her religion as a  Sikh.
    Her application was refused by Notice of Refusal from the Secretary  of
    State dated 11th January 2016.  The Appellant appealed and  the  appeal
    came before Immigration Judge Graham  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  31st
    October 2016.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  6th  December
    2016 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 16th December 2016 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 23rd February 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson
    refused permission to appeal.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged on
    2nd March 2017.

 4. On 21st March 2017 Mr Justice Mitting  granted  permission  to  appeal.
    The Honourable Judge concluded that it  was  reasonably  arguable  that
    there were flaws in the fact-finding and reasoning  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that led  him  to  reach  a  perverse,  and  so  legally
    erroneous, conclusion.  He set out the following factors that were open
    to criticism:

      i) His conclusion in paragraph 27 that the use of forged documents  to
         gain  access  to  the  United  Kingdom   taints   the   Appellant's
         credibility.

     ii) His analysis of  the  names  of  participants  in  the  applicant's
         account in paragraphs 29 and 31 is unconvincing and appears  to  be
         insecurely founded.

    iii) His conclusion in paragraph 32 that no doctor or police officer  in
         Jalalabad was involved in the aftermath of the alleged death of the
         Appellant's daughter is  speculative  and  unfounded  on  objective
         evidence about the current situation in Jalalabad.

     iv) His criticism of the  differences  in  the  reasons  given  by  the
         applicant for refusing to approach the police in nit-picking.

      v) His criticism  of  the  Appellant  for  stating  in  her  screening
         interview that her husband was mute and had had a mental  breakdown
         and was not able to give coherent evidence was unfair.  The  report
         from the general practitioner that her husband had told a colleague
         in December 2015 that he was stressed by the death of his  daughter
         to the extent that he was even unable to speak for a few months was
         not inconsistent with her claim that he was mute in  her  screening
         interview on 17th November 2015.

     vi) His rejection in paragraph 40 of the Appellant's claim that she and
         her husband had handed their shop and family home to  an  agent  to
         pay for their travel to the UK  was  implausible.   The  Honourable
         Judge went on to agree with Judge Hodgkinson that paragraph  43  of
         the decision on sufficiency of protection was arguably an error but
         unlike him did not  consider  that  the  error  was  material.   Mr
         Justice Mitting concluded that if there was no basis for  rejecting
         the Appellant's claim that she and her family had nowhere to return
         to because they had sold their shop  and  home  and  therefore  the
         error may matter.

 5. I have recited herein the basis for the grant of permission because  as
    Mr Justice Mitting sets  out  in  his  grant  they  do  not  correspond
    precisely with those set out in the Notice  of  Appeal.   The  parties'
    legal representatives however have indicated to me that they  are  both
    prepared to accept an amendment to the Grounds of Appeal so  that  they
    reflect the grant of permission.

 6. On 31st March 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Those  grounds  contended  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had directed himself appropriately.  They point  out  at
    paragraphs 3 to 6 those areas where clear findings are  stated  by  the
    judge and that the findings dismissing the  appeal  were  open  to  the
    judge to make.

 7. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me  for  determination
    as to whether or not there is a material error of law in  the  decision
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant  appears  by  her
    instructed Counsel, Mr Sidhu.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

Submission/Discussion

 8. Mr Sidhu submits that this case turns on issues of credibility  and  Mr
    Justice Mitting  in  granting  permission  found  the  decision  to  be
    perverse.  He takes me through the various bases upon which Mr  Justice
    Mitting has granted permission starting by pointing out that the  judge
    is correct to have concluded that people  use  illegal  documents  when
    they cross borders.  Mr Bates however reminds me that at  paragraph  28
    of the First-tier Tribunal's Judge's decision  he  has  not  based  his
    findings on credibility on the use of false documents alone and that he
    has found other factors which he sets out thereinafter to be  relevant.



 9. Mr Sidhu briefly addresses the various factors set out  by  Mr  Justice
    Mitting dealing with individual factors in general terms.   He  submits
    however that they are valid points and that the case law is clear  that
    the police are ineffective.  However whilst accepting  that  the  judge
    has made reference to the country guidance authority  of  TG  &  Others
    (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG  [2015]  UKUT  585  (IAC)  the
    judge has failed to consider the relevant passages to be  found  within
    that objective evidence.  Rather he submits that Mr Justice Mitting  is
    correct  in  his  attack  on  the  findings  of  credibility  and  that
    Immigration Judge Hodgkinson was wrong in his assessment  pointing  out
    that at paragraph 41 the judge  has  failed  to  give  due  and  proper
    consideration to the best interests of the child.  He asks me  to  find
    that overall the decision is not safe and asked me to remit the  matter
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

10. In response Mr Bates accepts paragraph 27 of the decision so far as  it
    relates to a finding on travel documents is an error but  submits  that
    that is overcome by the judge pointing out  at  paragraph  28  that  he
    found other factors to be relevant.  He submits  it  was  open  to  the
    judge to conclude that the names refer to paragraph 29 and 30 such that
    he was entitled to conclude that the names did not indicate  they  were
    one and the same person and submits that all the Appellant is doing  is
    merely disagreeing and that the  judge  had  given  clear  reasons  for
    accepting the main difference at those paragraphs.  Further he contends
    the documents regarding the Appellant's daughter's death went to issues
    of credibility and that the judge was entitled to reach the  conclusion
    that the documents were not reliable to rely upon in the round and that
    the judge made findings overall that he was entitled to with regard  to
    the Appellant's husband's mental health  albeit  that  he  acknowledges
    that this is in contradiction  to  the  view  expressed  by  the  judge
    granting permission.

11. Briefly turning to the issue of sufficiency of protection he points out
    that the finding on credibility has been rejected  and  that  generally
    when looked at in the round  the  submissions  mad  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant are mere disagreement.  He asked me to find that there is  no
    material error of law and to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. In this case the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  adverse  credibility
    findings.  A proper approach to credibility requires an  assessment  to
    the evidence and of the general  claim.   In  asylum  claims,  relevant
    factors are firstly the internal consistency of the claim, secondly the
    inherent plausibility of the claim and thirdly, the consistency of  the
    claim with external factors of the  sort  typically  found  in  country
    guidance.  I acknowledge it is theoretically correct  that  a  claimant
    need do no more than state his claim but that claim still needs  to  be
    examined for consistency and inherent plausibility and in nearly  every
    case external information against which the claim could be checked will
    be available.

15. The thrust of the submissions now made turn very largely  on  the  view
    expressed by the Honourable Mr Justice Mitting in  granting  permission
    to appeal.  It is the submission made by Mr Bates  that  there  are  no
    material errors of law, that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    findings that he did and that all that is  being  put  forward  on  the
    Appellant's behalf is mere disagreement with the original findings.

16. In granting permission to appeal the Honourable Mr Justice Mitting  has
    set out detailed basis  upon  which  he  challenges  those  credibility
    findings.  I am satisfied that those grounds justify the  finding  that
    there is a material error  of  law  in  that  if  they  are  looked  at
    differently then a judge may well come to a different conclusion.  I am
    not satisfied that they are as the judge describes  perverse  but  they
    are ones that perhaps if  looked  at  again  may  or  may  not  lead  a
    different judge to a different conclusion.

17. The case law is clear that generally Sikhs are discriminated against in
    Afghanistan  and  I  accept  the  submission  that  the   decision   of
    sufficiency of protection is arguably an error because if there was  no
    basis for rejecting the Appellant's claim that the  Appellant  and  her
    family had nowhere to return to and as no finding has  been  made  that
    the Appellant and her family  could  re-establish  themselves  back  in
    Afghanistan then there is a material error which may well have  bearing
    on the outcome of the appeal.

18. In such circumstances the correct approach is to find  material  errors
    of law, to set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  to
    remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  It  is
    however emphasised to the Appellant that this is not to  say  therefore
    on a rehearing of the matter and on consideration  of  the  facts  that
    another judge would ultimately come to a different conclusion  to  that
    of the original First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law.  The decision is set aside and the matter is  remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for rehearing.  The following directions are to apply:

 1) That on the finding that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision is set aside and
    the matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham on
    the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.

 2) That no findings of fact are to stand.

 3) That the appeal is to be heard before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    other than Immigration Judge Graham.

 4) That there be leave to either party  to  file  and  serve  up  to  date
    subjective and objective evidence upon which they intend to rely.  Such
    evidence to be served on the other party at least fourteen  days  prior
    to the restored hearing date.

 5) That a Punjabi interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  an  order  regarding  anonymity.   No
application is made by either party to vary that order and that  order  will
continue.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed  D N Harris                               Date: 28th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed  D N Harris                               Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
