
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00056/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 September 2016                  |On 23 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J L Blair instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria who was born on 12 February 1976.
     He first arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 December 1999 and applied
    for asylum.  That was refused on 2 October 2002 and a subsequent appeal
    was dismissed on 28 January 2004.  He became appeal rights exhausted on
    16 April 2004.  The appellant made further submissions on 16 April 2009
    and again on 24 January 2014 but both were rejected on 18 December 2013
    and 22 May 2014 respectively.

 3. Between 2000 and 2014, the appellant was convicted on nine occasions of
    a total of eleven offences.  On 30 May 2000 he was convicted of  affray
    and sentenced to a twelve months' community rehabilitation  order.   On
    10 August 2001, he was convicted of theft  and  was  sentenced  to  two
    months' imprisonment.  On 15 July 2003 he was convicted  of  theft  and
    fined �200.  On 4 June 2009 he was convicted of possessing an offensive
    weapon in a public place and sentenced to a  twelve  months'  community
    order.  On 2 December 2010 he  was  convicted  of  being  found  on  an
    enclosed premises for an unlawful purpose and was sentenced to a  three
    months conditional discharge.  On 7 September 2011 he was convicted  of
    possession of a class B  controlled  drug,  namely  cannabis,  and  was
    sentenced to one day's imprisonment.  On 23 May 2013, he was  convicted
    of criminal damage and was sentenced to a  twelve  months'  conditional
    discharge.  On 12 July 2013 he was convicted of theft and sentenced  to
    a period of six weeks' imprisonment suspended for fifteen months.

 4. The appellant's most recent conviction was on 29 September 2014 at  the
    Southwark Crown Court.  There he pleaded guilty to  two  offences.   He
    was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of three months for  handling
    stolen goods and a further one month's concurrent sentence for a  drugs
    offence involving cannabis.  As will become  clear  shortly  it  is  an
    issue whether he was convicted of the simple possession offence or more
    serious possession with intent to supply.  In addition, as  he  was  in
    breach of the earlier suspended sentence order, he was sentenced  to  a
    further consecutive period of three weeks' imprisonment.

 5. As a result of the appellant's offending history, on 5 December 2014 he
    was notified of his liability to be deported on the basis that  it  was
    conducive to the public good.  In response, the appellant claimed  that
    his deportation would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.   He  relied  upon  his
    private life in the UK and in particular  that  he  had  mental  health
    problems and suffered from epilepsy.

 6. On 10 April 2015, a deportation order was  signed  in  respect  of  the
    appellant.

 7. On 16  April  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant
    protection and human rights claim, in particular under Arts 3 and 8  of
    the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Suffield-Thompson and in a decision sent on 3 May  2016,
    she dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.   First,  she
    concluded that the appellant's deportation, though not subject  to  the
    automatic deportation provisions  in  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,  was
    nevertheless conducive to  the  public  good  under  s.3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 on the basis of the seriousness of his  persistent
    offending.  Secondly, the judge found that  the  appellant  would  have
    available to  him  medical  treatment,  in  particular  medication,  in
    Algeria for his mental health problems including his epilepsy.  It  was
    accepted before the judge that the appellant could not  succeed  either
    Art 3 or Art 8 on the basis of any disparity  in  the  availability  of
    treatment.

 9. The judge rejected the appellant's claim under Art  3  based  upon  the
    social stigma of mental health in Algeria and that there was a risk  he
    would be rejected by his family and would be  forced  to  live  on  the
    streets in circumstances which would engage Art 3 applying the approach
    in D v UK  (1997)  24  EHRR  423.   Finally,  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's claim under Art 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on four
    grounds.

11.  First,  the  judge  had  improperly  reached  the  finding  that   the
    appellant's  offending  was  sufficiently   "serious"   to   make   his
    deportation conducive to the public good.  She had failed to follow the
    approach of the sentencing judge, in particular by  characterising  the
    appellant's offending as more serious because the sentencing was unduly
    lenient (ground 1).

12. Secondly, the judge wrongly failed to give due  weight  to  the  expert
    psychiatric evidence first, by relying upon her own assessment  of  the
    appellant as showing no outward signs  of  suffering  from  discernable
    psychiatric issues (ground 2); and secondly, in disregarding the report
    on the ground that it was primarily based on  information  provided  by
    the appellant which it was not (ground 3); and further  the  judge  had
    failed to take the report into account  in  assessing  the  appellant's
    credibility and  inconsistencies  in  his  evidence  when  that  report
    identified the effects of the  appellant's  addiction  to  prescription
    drugs on his cognitive functions.

13. Thirdly, the judge had failed properly to take into account the country
    expert report from Ms Pargeter in assessing the risk to  the  appellant
    based, not upon a disparity in available treatment, but in  the  impact
    upon him of socio-cultural attitudes in Algeria  to  those  who  suffer
    from mental illness (grounds 5 and 6).

14. On 26 May 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J M Holmes)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

15. On 15 June 2016, the Secretary  of  State  filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the decision.

16. On 1 September 2016, the appellant filed a response to the Secretary of
    State's rule 24 document.

17. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

18. At the hearing, the appellant was  represented  by  Ms  Blair  and  the
    respondent by Mr Richards.

19. In her oral submissions, Ms Blair relied upon the grounds and  response
    to the rule 24 notice which she developed in her oral submissions.

20. Mr Richards sought to uphold the judge's decision on the basis that she
    had properly directed herself and taken into account all the  evidence.
    Her findings were entirely sustainable.

21.  Whilst  Judge  Suffield-Thompson's  determination  was  undoubtedly  a
    detailed assessment of the appellant's claim running to 87  substantive
    paragraphs, there are a number of aspects of her reasoning and approach
    raised in the grounds which have led me to conclude that  her  decision
    is flawed by material errors of law and cannot stand.

22. First, there is the issue of  whether  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant's offending made his deportation conducive to the public good
    is flawed.

23. Before turning to the specific issues raised by Ms Blair, it was common
    ground before Judge Suffield-Thompson that the appellant  was  entitled
    to raise the issue of whether  the  Secretary  of  State  had  lawfully
    determined that his deportation was conducive to the public good.  This
    was an appeal, however, that was governed by the new  appeal  provision
    introduced by the Immigration Acts 2014.  The appellant had no right of
    appeal against the decision to deport him.  His  right  of  appeal  was
    against the refusal of his human rights claim.  The only  grounds  upon
    which he could challenge the respondent's decision was, in  effect,  in
    the circumstances of his case, that  deportation  would  breach  either
    Arts 3 or 8 of the ECHR.  Nevertheless, even if the  issue  of  whether
    his deportation was "conducive to the public good" could  not  directly
    be challenged, the  judge's  finding  was  the  central  issue  in  her
    assessment  of  the  public  interest  relevant  in  carrying  out  the
    balancing exercise under Art 8 of the  ECHR.   It  is  clear  from  her
    determination that her reasoning and  conclusion  in  relation  to  the
    conducive to the public good issue was read across when considering the
    public interest  under  Art  8.2  (see  para  87).   In  that  context,
    therefore, the issues raised under ground 1 remain live.

24. The judge's reasoning in respect of the finding  that  the  appellant's
    deportation is 'conductive to the public good' is at paras 33-43 of her
    determination.

25. The appellant's offending history as set  out  above  illustrates,  the
    appellant had a significant record of conviction on nine occasions  for
    eleven offences between May 2000 and 29 September 2014.  Ms  Blair  did
    not take issue with the judge's assessment that  the  appellant  was  a
    persistent  offender.    Her   challenge   related   to   the   judge's
    consideration of the seriousness of the most recent  conviction  on  29
    September 2014.  In particular, Ms Blair submitted that in para  38  of
    her determination,  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to  characterise  the
    appellant's sentences as "lenient".  In particular, in relation to  the
    offences for which he was convicted on 29  September  2014,  the  judge
    had, in effect, reviewed the position of  the  sentencing  judge  whose
    remarks she set out at para 39 of the determination.

26. Ms Blair also pointed out  that,  on  reading  the  sentencing  judge's
    remarks in relation to the appellant's conviction for a class  B  drugs
    offence on 29 September 2014, it was clear that he had  been  convicted
    of the simple offence  of  possession  rather  than  the  more  serious
    offence of possession with intent to  supply.   Ms  Blair  acknowledged
    that throughout the case this point had not been raised.

27. In response,  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  although  there  was  some
    confusion over the nature of the offence for which  the  appellant  was
    convicted in  September  2014,  given  that  the  point  had  not  been
    previously raised and, indeed, Counsel's argument before the judge  was
    on the basis that the offence was one  of  possession  with  intent  to
    supply, it was not wrong for the  judge  to  consider  the  appellant's
    offending to be serious and it was not wrong for her  to  comment  that
    the sentences were lenient.

28. The particular passage relied upon by Ms Blair is in  para  38  of  the
    judge's determination which is as follows:

         "38.     Having set out the Appellant's criminal history I now turn
             to the submission of the Appellant's representative.  Have set
             out above the  principles  for  Conducive  Deportation  in  OH
             (Serbia).   Mr.  Neale  submits  that  on  the  basis  of  the
             sentences the Appellant was received to these are not  serious
             offences and would not "revolt" society.  I totally  disagree.
             Firstly Affray, Theft, Possessing  an  Offensive  Weapon,  and
             Possession with intent to Supply are all "Either Way" offences
             and therefore they are clearly serious matters.   I  find  the
             fact that the Appellant was given such lenient sentences  does
             not make the offences he committed less serious.   I  consider
             he was fortunate that he received  such  light  sentences  and
             that the fact he could have received longer is not helpful  to
             him in this appeal.  It is a poor reflection of the sentencing
             court rather than the good behaviour of the Appellant."

29. Having done so, the judge set out the sentencing remark from the  Crown
    Court Judge at para 39 as follows:

         "39.     I am assisted by the  sentencing  remarks  of  Judge  Hill
             included in the Respondent's bundle.  The  Appellant  appeared
             before Judge Hill at Southwark Crown Court on 27 October  2014
             and I quote from the transcript:

                  'The question in your case is whether, taking into account
                  the offences that you have now committed, and taking  into
                  account your antecedent history, I am  able  to  take  the
                  view that the offences either singly or taken together are
                  not so serious that  a  custodial  sentence  is  required.
                  Having read all  about  you  and  having  heard  the  very
                  careful submissions from counsel, I am unable to take that
                  view, and it is my conclusion that the offence of handling
                  stolen goods in the circumstances I have  outlined  is  so
                  serious that neither a fine nor a community  sentence  can
                  be justified for it.  And it seems to me that  that  there
                  must be a sentence of imprisonment.'

             And he continued:

                  'I have considered very carefully whether  I  am  able  to
                  accept the  recommendation  of  the  author  of  the  Pre-
                  Sentence Report that the sentence of  imprisonment  should
                  be suspended.  I regret that I am unable to take that view
                  bearing in mind again your antecedent history and the fact
                  that you are in breach of an order made at this  court  in
                  July 2013 ... However, you  stood  or  sat  in  this  very
                  building in  July  2013.   You  were  made  subject  to  a
                  suspended sentence order and by virtue of further offences
                  you are in breach.' "

30. At paras 40-43 the judge then, applied OH (Serbia) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 964, which she cited and set out relevant passages from (at para 34
    of her determination), and reached her  finding  that  the  appellant's
    offending was sufficiently serious as to make his removal conducive  to
    the public good:

         "40.     I find therefore that the Appellant  came  to  the  UK  in
             December 1999 and began offending  in  May  2000  and  he  has
             persistently offended since then.  These are serious  offences
             he has committed and having received lenient sentences in  the
             Magistrates Court instead of learning from this and trying  to
             change his offending behaviour he has  carried  on  committing
             offences until he found himself before a Crown Court where the
             Judge, entirely correctly, found that  the  was  a  persistent
             offender who had breached a suspended sentence and  should  go
             into custody.   He  has  not  taken  the  help  offered  under
             Community Rehabilitation Orders as he has been given  two  and
             carried on offending.  I find these are serious  offences  and
             that they are  offences  any  right  thinking  member  of  the
             general public would be revolted by.  Affray is a very serious
             offence and violence in public places can have a  huge  impact
             for the unfortunate people who are in the vicinity  when  such
             an offence takes place.  Knife crime and carrying weapons is a
             huge problem in the UK today and have led to many  unnecessary
             injuries and deaths.  Drug  offences  have  a  huge,  negative
             impact on society and can ruin the lives of  many  individuals
             and their families.

         41.  I accept that some people who  are  vulnerable  and  on  drugs
             commit offences but certainly not  all.   This  Appellant  was
             given sentences by the court to help him, two CRO's, a CD  and
             a suspend sentence and he has not taken help  or  learnt  from
             any of them hence his  final  appearance  in  Southwark  Crown
             Court, I do not find that these offenses  result  purely  from
             the Appellant's situation here.  Offending is a choice and  he
             has chosen to continue to offend for the entire  time  he  has
             been here.  I am not reassured that he will not offend  again.
             He has said that he has nowhere to live if his leave  were  to
             be granted and I find this to be an Appellant who, in times of
             need, finds it acceptable to commit crimes to obtain money for
             himself which he then spends on drugs.  This is  an  Appellant
             who has not been in work but he has found the money to develop
             a cannabis habit which he has clearly funded that through  his
             criminal activities.

         42.  I find that he certainly falls into categories (b) and (c)  of
             OH (Serbia).  However, I do accept that he is not the type  of
             criminal referred to in the Bournemouth Commitment.

         43.  I have no hesitation in  finding  that  the  removal  of  this
             Appellant is Conducive to the Public Good."

31. Having read the sentencing remarks of Judge Hill in the Crown Court, he
    nowhere refers to the appellant's offence being one of possession  with
    intent to supply.  At two points in his sentencing remark he refers  to
    the appellant having been found "in possession of a small  quantity  of
    herbal cannabis".  The lack of clarity before  Judge  Suffield-Thompson
    may have been engendered by  the  fact  that  the  pre-sentence  report
    (which Judge Hill had) was not available at the appeal hearing and  the
    trial record  sheet  which  was  suppose  to  be  at  Annex  J  to  the
    respondent's  bundle  was  missing.   The  record  or  other  evidence,
    therefore, of precisely what offence the appellant was convicted of was
    not available.  It is, of course,  self-evident  that  the  offence  of
    simple possession of cannabis is  less  serious  than  the  offence  of
    possession with intent to supply.  The latter more obviously engages  a
    relevant public interest as a serious  offence  and  one  which,  as  I
    understand to have been  common  ground  before  me,  potentially  fell
    within the "Bournemouth Commitment" made by the  (then)  government  in
    September 2007 at the Bournemouth Labour  Party  Conference  to  deport
    foreign criminals who were, inter  alia,  involved  in  the  supply  of
    drugs.

32. It would appear that it was on the basis that the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of the more  serious  offence  that  Judge  Suffield-Thompson
    expressed the view as to the seriousness of the appellant's most recent
    offending and the leniency of the sentence passed, namely one month  in
    prison.  That leniency would, of course, be lessened or  disappear  if,
    in fact, the appellant had been convicted of simple possession.  It is,
    perhaps,  worth  noting  that  in  his  oral  evidence   under   cross-
    examination, the appellant stated that he did  not  know  he  had  been
    convicted of "supply".

33. In any event, it is unclear why, and on  what  basis,  Judge  Suffield-
    Thompson was in a position to look behind the record of the appellant's
    offending, which was not restricted to the most recent convictions, and
    assert that the sentencing was "lenient".  The only evidence  that  the
    judge had beyond his record was  Judge  Hill's  sentencing  remarks  in
    relation to the most recent convictions.   She  was  required  to  take
    those remarks as the basis for  the  sentence  which  he  passed.   The
    sentencing judge was undoubtedly in the best  position  to  assess  the
    appellant's criminality when passing sentence.   Although  he  regarded
    the appellant's offending both in relation to the drugs charge and  the
    handling offence  to  be  sufficiently  serious  to  pass  the  custody
    threshold, his sentence of one month and three months  respectively  to
    run concurrently had to be taken  at  face  value  as  the  appropriate
    sentence.  That also followed for  each  of  the  appellant's  previous
    convictions for which there was no other evidence other than  the  fact
    of conviction and the sentence passed.

34. Ms Blair also relied upon the judge's failure to take into account  the
    age of some of the offences and that the weapon offence in 2009 had had
    a "mental health component".  Whilst the age of the offending had  some
    relevance, there was nothing before the judge  that  was  drawn  to  my
    attention to provide any elaboration upon the appellant's conviction in
    2009 for possessing an offensive weapon in a public place other than he
    received a twelve months' community order.

35. Nevertheless, in my judgment, the two factors I have  identified  above
    undermine the sustainability of the judge's finding in relation to  the
    public  interest  issue  based  upon  nature  and  seriousness  of  the
    appellant's offending.  In that respect, the Judge erred in  law.   The
    appellant's offending was not of the most serious kind.  Had  a  proper
    approach been taken to the nature and seriousness  of  the  appellant's
    offending, this is not a case in  which  I  am  able  to  say  that  no
    reasonable judge could have reached any  other  conclusion  as  to  the
    public interest (albeit here discussed under the rubric of conducive to
    the public good) in applying Art 8.  The judge's flawed  approach  was,
    in my judgment, material to her decision and, at least  in  respect  of
    Art 8, cannot stand.  That then is the first point.

36. Secondly, in reaching her findings, particularly in respect of Art 3 of
    the ECHR, the judge failed properly to take  into  account  the  expert
    evidence by Dr Alison Battersby, a Consultant Psychiatrist whose report
    is at pages 6-27 of the appellant's bundle.  That report was  important
    for a number of reasons.  First, it set out the appellant's psychiatric
    condition.  Secondly, it set out the medication he received.   Thirdly,
    it recognised that he was dependant on benzodiazepine and was receiving
    a dose far in excess of that required for his epilepsy.  Fourthly,  the
    report  (at  p.18  of  the  bundle)  identified  that  withdrawing  the
    appellant from his benzodiazepine dependency would likely  be  "a  very
    long and difficult task" given his grand mal epilepsy and that he might
    develop more seizures which were potentially  life  threatening  during
    the withdrawal.  Finally, the effect of the medication which manifested
    itself before Dr Battersby when she interviewed the appellant was  that
    he was "heavily intoxicated" and that

         "... given his degree  of  intoxication  at  my  interview,  if  he
         presents in a similar manner to the Tribunal he is unlikely  to  be
         able to provide cogent evidence or to follow the Tribunal processes
         as high dose benzodiazepine impair cognition.  He is likely to have
         impaired concentration and potentially amnesia.  If he presents not
         heavily intoxicated, I cannot predict his  mental  state  from  his
         interview whilst intoxicated.  If he is significantly  intoxicated,
         in my opinion, he is unlikely to be re-traumatised".

37. Ms Blair submitted that Judge Suffield-Thompson had failed to take this
    evidence into account when assessing the appellant's credibility.   She
    submitted that the judge had been wrong in para 84 of her determination
    to state that she would not "any significant ... weight" to this report
    because it was "primarily based on information given by  the  appellant
    which  is  partially  or  wholly  untrue  and  certainly   deliberately
    misleading."  Ms Blair submitted that the judge had failed to take this
    into account when reaching her finding in para 32  at:  "the  appellant
    was evasive, at times dishonest and that he changed his evidence for no
    discernable or acceptable reason."

38.  In  my  judgment,  Ms  Blair's  submissions  are   well-founded.    Dr
    Battersby's assessment of the appellant's condition, in particular  his
    benzodiazepine dependence, was based upon her medical judgment and  the
    records  of  his  prescribed  medication.   Her   assessment   of   his
    "intoxicated"  presentation  and  the  effect  of  that  was   also   a
    professional judgment made by her as an expert.  It was not based  upon
    the flawed account given by the appellant at interview.  In the absence
    of good reason, the judge should have taken into account Dr Battersby's
    opinion (see, for example R (Minani) v IAT [2004] EWHC 582 (Admin)  per
    Moses J at [26]).

39. At para 58, the judge assessed  the  appellant's  presentation  at  the
    hearing (albeit in  the  context  of  whether  he  displayed  signs  of
    suffering from psychiatric conditions) and  stated  that:  "He  behaved
    totally appropriately and he exhibited no  outward  sign  of  suffering
    from any discernable psychiatric issues ..."

40. That, however, could not rescue the judge's reasoning  in  paras  80-84
    where, in assessing the  appellant's  credibility,  she  highlighted  a
    number of  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  evidence  given,  for
    example, in his interview with  Dr  Battersby.   Given  Dr  Battersby's
    professional opinion as to the appellant's state at that interview,  it
    was highly relevant to have regard to that opinion in assessing whether
    any of the inconsistencies were in fact properly to  be  relied  on  as
    damaging the appellant's credibility.  The judge erred in  law,  in  my
    judgment,  in  declining  to  do  so  when  assessing  the  appellant's
    credibility.

41. Thirdly, both Dr Battersby's report and that of the country  expert  Ms
    Pargeter were relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the  impact  upon  the
    appellant, in particular as a result of his mental health, if  returned
    to Algeria.  The appellant, of course, did not rest  his  claim  either
    under Art 3 or Art 8 of the ECHR  on  a  disparity  of  treatment.   Ms
    Pargeter herself  accepted  in  her  report  that  treatment  would  be
    available to the appellant in Algeria  though  accessing  it  would  be
    "challenging" (see para 4.ii of her report at page 62 of  the  bundle).
    At para 4.vi, Ms Pargeter summarised the position as follows:

         "To the best of my knowledge, therefore,  (the  medicine  currently
         being taken  by  the  appellant)  are  all  available  in  Algeria.
         However, it should be clear from the above that Algeria is blighted
         by repeated shortages of medicine and therefore, even if  they  are
         available on prescription through the state, there may be breaks in
         supply.  To the best  of  my  knowledge  these  medicines  are  all
         available in the  private  sector.   However,  such  drugs  can  be
         expensive."

42. In the light of this and the background evidence  referred  to  by  the
    judge in para 45, it was clearly open to the judge to find in  para  46
    that the appellant would have available the required treatment.

43. The position, however, relied upon by the appellant  before  the  judge
    was that he would  display  signs  of  mental  illness,  stigmatisation
    culturally and socially in Algeria of mental health meant there  was  a
    risk that he  would  obtain  no  support  from  any  family  and  that,
    therefore, he was at risk of becoming homeless and living rough with  a
    consequent affect that would not access treatment and would  suffer  in
    circumstance falling within the "high threshold" set out in D v  UK  to
    include life-threatening circumstances.

44. There is no doubt that the  appellant's  claim  on  this  basis  was  a
    particularly challenging one to establish before the judge.  The  judge
    dealt with it at paras 52-59 beginning with some points  raised  by  Ms
    Pargeter in her report:

         "52.     I have read Ms Pargeter's report (Appellant's bundle pages
             45-65).  She is an  analyst  and  consultant  specialising  in
             political and security issues in North Africa and  the  Middle
             East.   She  has  been  involved  in  a  research  project  at
             Cambridge University which included Algeria as  a  case  study
             country.  I accept that she is a person qualified to submit  a
             report before the Tribunal  and  have  carefully  studied  her
             report.

         53.  It is a very lengthy report and I do not intend to quote  long
             passages from it in this  decision.   I  will  refer  to  some
             central points that appeared in her report.  As I  have  found
             that he is not entitled to remain due to the  Algerian  mental
             health system being less adequate than that here.   I  do  not
             rely on those parts of her report, which are lengthy,  as  the
             Appellant's representative has  conceded  he  cannot  win  his
             appeal on that point.  In her report (pages 60-62)  she  dealt
             with the cultural attitudes towards mental health in Algeria.

                . (Page 60.  Parag 3.i) "Mental illness  continue  to  carry
                  social stigma in Algeria, as it does elsewhere in the Arab
                  world"

                . (Page 61 3.iii) "Traditionally  mental  illness  has  been
                  considered as part of the spiritual realm"

                . (Page 61 3.iv) "Because  of  the  stigma  associated  with
                  mental illness hospitals are often regarded as a place  of
                  last resort."

                . (Page 3.vi) "It is clear that  despite  efforts  to  raise
                  awareness about mental health by  the  government,  mental
                  health remains a taboo subject."

         54.   The  Respondent  in  the  Refusal   Letter   provides   other
             information about mental health in Algeria:

                . (Refusal letter page 7) "The WHO Mental Health Atlas  2011
                  provided useful charts highlighting mental health services
                  in Algeria including workforce and training information:

                  'Magharebia reported on the 18 June  2008  what  with  the
                  growing  number  of  homeless  people  in  major  Algerian
                  cities, they were setting up public facilities in the main
                  capital of five regions.   The  facilities  would  receive
                  emergency homeless cases with no domicile.   Psychological
                  specialists and physicians would be recruited  to  provide
                  the appropriate mental health  care  and  other  attention
                  they might need.  Psychologic experts contact the families
                  of the homeless, if any,  to  reconnect  them  with  their
                  families.  There would also be a hotline established where
                  people could report any homeless cases or individuals with
                  social or psychological problems  to  enable  institutions
                  equipped with financial and  mental  health  resources  to
                  lodge and treat them.'

         55.  A report of 6 May 2010 by the Office of the UN High Commission
             for Human Rights entitled "Committee on Economic,  Social  and
             Cultural Rights considers the report of Algeria" stated in its
             'response by delegation'.

             'With regards to public health, providing  mental  health  and
             drug addiction treatment were an important dimension of taking
             care of the population, including provisions for mental health
             in  prisons.   The  State  employed  a  multi-sector  approach
             because drug abuse went beyond healthcare and was a social and
             cultural issue as well.'

         56.  I accept that there may be some level of ignorance and  stigma
             attached to mental health in Algeria but the same can be  said
             of many countries including, sadly, the UK this does not  mean
             that the Article 3 threshold is met.  It  is  clear  from  the
             Respondent's evidence that the government since at least  2008
             has been working to increase the  number  of  clinics,  mental
             health professionals and help available to those  with  mental
             health issues and Ms. Pargeter in her report accepts that  the
             government is working to increase mental health awareness.  In
             KH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1354  states  at  para
             16:

             'The suffering which flows from naturally  occurring  illness,
             physical or mental, may be covered by Article 3, where it  is,
             or risks being, exacerbated by treatment, whether flowing from
             conditions of detention,  expulsion  or  other  measures,  for
             which the authorities can be held responsible.'

             And it is  clear  from  the  Respondent's  evidence  that  the
             Algerian government  is  working  to  enlighten  people  about
             mental illness which will be of benefit to this Appellant.

         57.  This Appellant has told the Tribunal in his oral evidence that
             if he obtained leave in the UK then he would want to study and
             go back to work.  He is clearly, I  find,  well  enough,  even
             with his health conditions, to study and work and therefore he
             could go and study work in Algeria.  He is not  receiving  any
             mental health therapy or psychiatric intervention here in  the
             UK other than prescribed medication and therefore it would not
             be obvious to anyone, other than his doctor in Algeria who  is
             prescribing the medicine, that  this  is  a  man  with  mental
             health issues.

         58.  At the hearing he was able to express himself well, he behaved
             totally appropriately and he  exhibited  no  outward  sign  of
             suffering from any  discernible  psychiatric  issues  so  even
             though he has been diagnosed with mental  health  issues  they
             would not be easily apparent to  others.   The  medication  he
             takes does not mean that he is unable to work as  some  people
             taking his current medication do work here in the UK.   I  see
             no reason why this  particular  Appellant  would  attract  any
             negative attention to himself in Algeria.

         59.  I do not find that this Appellant would face  treatments  that
             would breach Article 3 if he were to be returned  to  Algeria.
             I also do not find, as was discussed in D v UK (1997) 24  EHRR
             423 that there would be any loss in the Appellant's dignity on
             return.  He has already said he  has  no  family  in  Algeria,
             other than an aunt and uncle and he has  no  idea  where  they
             live.  He has no friends left there so  there  is  nobody  who
             would need to know he was taking medication and as  he  stated
             he wanted to work and study in the UK but he could work  there
             and there would be no need for him to  disclose  to  his  work
             colleagues any private information about his health.  I do not
             find that there would be a question of loss of dignity in this
             Appellant's particular case.  I find nothing  persuasive  that
             would suggest he would end living  in  conditions  that  would
             infringe Article 8 as I do not accept that  his  circumstances
             on return would cause him to  be  mistreated,  stigmatised  or
             cast out form society there.  I do not find that returning the
             Appellant to Algeria would  be  a  breach  of  his  Article  3
             rights."

45. Whilst the judge  does,  I  accept,  refer  to  matters  raised  by  Ms
    Pargeter, I accept  Ms  Blair's  submission  that  the  judge  has  not
    adequately  grappled  with  Ms  Pargeter's  evidence   concerning   the
    potential that the appellant's family may abandon him  if  he  displays
    signs of mental illness.  For example, at para 4.vii Ms  Pargeter  says
    this:

         "As to the  issue  of  social  and  cultural  attitudes  to  mental
         illness, as explained above, Algerian society tends  to  stigmatise
         those suffering from mental health  conditions.   As  one  Algerian
         psychologist described, those afflicted by mental  health  problems
         experience a 'double suffering', a psychological one first followed
         by a resulting social exclusion.  Thus [the appellant]  could  well
         encounter prejudice on account of his mental health problems.  Were
         his family to refuse to accept his mental health  problems  and  be
         unwilling to take him in  and  support  him,  he  could  well  find
         himself living on the streets, a fate shared by  many  with  severe
         mental health problems in Algeria."

46. It is worth noting that in para 59 the judge found that  the  appellant
    has "no family in Algeria, other than an aunt and uncle and he  has  no
    idea where they  live."  It  is  difficult  to  see  what  support  the
    appellant would have at all on the  basis  of  that  finding.   It  is,
    perhaps, to be contrasted with the judge's  finding  in  para  78  when
    considering Art 8 she states: "I believe it is highly  likely  he  does
    have some relatives to whom he could turn to  for  support."  Whichever
    way  the  point  is  approached,  the  Art  3  and  8  claims  required
    consideration (and appropriate findings)  on  what  family  he  had  in
    Algeria and what would be the  effect  on  him  socially  etc  with  or
    without family as a result of his mental illness. Added to this was the
    expert evidence of Dr Battersby that the appellant was  dependant  upon
    benzodiazepine and that process of withdrawal from this was a long  one
    and, given his epilepsy, presented potential  life-threatening  dangers
    to him.

47. I do not accept that the judge was entitled at para 58 simply to state,
    on the basis of her own assessment of the  appellant  at  the  hearing,
    that if returned to Algeria he would not show any discernible signs  of
    mental  illness.   The  finding  could  only  be  made   after   proper
    consideration was given to the  expert  reports  and  medical  evidence
    concerning the appellant's mental health problems and  the  dangers  to
    him on return to Algeria.

48. In concluding, therefore,  at  para  59  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established a breach of Art  3  applying  D  v  UK,  the  judge  failed
    properly  to  consider  the  expert  psychiatric   evidence   and   the
    implications of Miss Pargeter's expert opinion  about  the  appellant's
    circumstance on return to Algeria.

49. Whilst the appellant's claim under Art 3  and  establishing  the  'high
    threshold' identified in cases such as D v UK and N v UK  was  again  a
    challenging one, I am unable to conclude that if all the  evidence  had
    properly been considered such a claim  would  inevitably  have  failed.
    The errors I  identified  were,  therefore,  material  to  the  judge's
    decision in respect of Art 3.

Decision

50. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 and Art 3  involved  the  making  of
    material errors of law.  The judge's decision cannot stand and must  be
    remade.

51. In the light of the errors I have identified, the appropriate  disposal
    of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Suffield-Thompson.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                               Date:
