
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00387/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 August 2017                      |On 04 September 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               NG (SRI LANKA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Seehra, Counsel instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Graham sitting at Birmingham on 21 March  2017)  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  his
    protection and human rights claim.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
    anonymity direction in favour of the appellant, and I consider that  it
    is appropriate that the anonymity direction  is  maintained  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.



Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, who transited the  UK  on  12
    March 2006 on a multi-visit visa which had been issued  in  Bridgetown,
    Barbados for the  6-month  period  running  from  8  March  2006  to  8
    September 2006.  The appellant returned to the UK on 4  September  2006
    on the same visa.  The appellant did not leave the UK before the expiry
    of his visa, and overstayed.  On 3 September 2015 he applied for  leave
    to remain on family and private  life  grounds.   The  application  was
    rejected on 13 October 2015.  On 14 December  2015  the  appellant  re-
    submitted the same application.  This was refused on the merits  on  10
    March 2016.  On 8 July 2016 the appellant claimed asylum.

 3. In his screening interview, he said that he was of Sinhalese ethnicity,
    and his occupation in his home country had been that of a plumber.   He
    originated from the town of Gampola.  He had first come to the UK as  a
    visitor on a visit visa in 2005.  The appellant was  asked  to  explain
    all the reasons why he could not return to his home country.   He  said
    that he received a "life-threat" in  Sri  Lanka  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in 2001.  Because of his political opinion, he had given  a
    statement to the media against the Government in 2001.   He  was  asked
    whether he had been accused in any country of an offence for  which  he
    had been, or could have been, convicted.  He answered:  "No".   He  was
    asked whether he had ever been  involved  with,  or  accused  of  being
    involved  with,  any  political  organisation  or  armed   or   violent
    organisation, group or Party.  He answered: "No".  He was asked whether
    he had ever been involved  in,  or  suspected  of  being  involved  in,
    terrorism, and again he answered: "No".

 4. Following the screening interview, which took place on 8 July 2016, the
    appellant's legal representatives  served  a  statement  of  additional
    grounds, on 14 July 2016.  They said that the  appellant  had  been  in
    employment in a Danish construction firm,  and  in  this  capacity  had
    worked abroad.  His employer had assisted a NGO operating in Sri Lanka.
     The appellant was concerned  about  the  disappearance  of  his  Tamil
    associates, which he  had  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  media,
    especially to the late Editor of The Sunday Mail.  He  was  advised  to
    complain to the Human Rights Commission (HRC) which he did.   He  began
    to face  problems  from  the  authorities  and  from  fellow  Sinhalese
    villagers, and so he had decided to leave Sri Lanka.  His statement  to
    the HRC was later submitted  to  the  LLRC  by  the  relatives  of  the
    disappeared Tamils.   The  appellant  was  now  being  pursued  by  the
    authorities.

 5. The appellant subsequently attended a substantive asylum interview.  In
    the refusal letter of 6 January 2017,  the  respondent  summarised  his
    account as follows. Between 2001 and 2006 he had  supplied  information
    to a friend who worked for numerous newspapers,  revealing  information
    about the practises  of  two  politicians  and  their  family  members.
    Between 2005 and 2006, while working for a Danish company overseas,  he
    had become involved with an NGO in Sri Lanka which  undertook  work  in
    the district of Trincomalee.  Whilst he was in Trincomalee, a friend of
    his was abducted by the Army after he had been seen with  this  friend.
    After he left Sri Lanka, the Terrorist Investigation  Department  (TID)
    came to his house with a warrant for his arrest.

 6. The respondent rejected the appellant's protection claim on the grounds
    that there were numerous inconsistencies between, inter alia,  what  he
    had said in his  screening  interview  as  against  what  he  had  said
    elsewhere.  His claimed fear of the Sri  Lankan  authorities  was  also
    said to be inconsistent with the fact that he had  applied  for  a  new
    passport from the Sri Lankan High Commission in October 2015.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Graham.   Ms  Seehra
    of Counsel appeared on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   In  her  skeleton
    argument for the hearing, she summarised the appellant's evidence.   He
    had been associated with a NGO and a Tamil  person  called  "MS".   The
    villagers became hostile  towards  them  in  November  2005  when  they
    considered that they associated with the LTTE.  The NGO  was  destroyed
    on 14 April 2006.  His friend MS was abducted on 27 May 2006, following
    which the appellant filed a complaint with the HRC.  The complaint  was
    passed to the Lessons Learned Reconciliation Commission  (LLRC)  whilst
    he was in the UK.  His journalist friend Lakmal was shot dead  in  July
    2006, and the  appellant  thereafter  received  threatening  calls  and
    visits to his home.  The appellant believed that Lakmal's killers  were
    aware that he was an informant.  After he  fled  to  the  UK,  the  TID
    attended his home and his parents were shown an arrest warrant.

 8. In paragraph 6 of her skeleton, Ms Seehra  listed  the  documents  upon
    which the appellant relied.  They included a letter from the solicitors
    to a Sri Lankan Attorney; a response  from  the  Sri  Lankan  Attorney;
    certified Court documents stamped on 24 February 2017, which included a
    report of an investigation on 23 October 2006 accusing the appellant of
    LTTE associations, anti-Government activities and causing public unrest
    and a warrant of arrest dated 23 October 2006; an  affidavit  addressed
    to the HRC; and a letter from LLRC.

 9. In her subsequent decision, the Judge gave a detailed  account  of  the
    evidence given by the appellant at the hearing at  paragraphs  [36]  to
    [44].  The appellant was cross-examined inter alia about the provenance
    of the Court documents and on the topic of what he was  accused  of  by
    the authorities.  The Judge noted, at paragraph [42], that whereas  the
    appellant stated a number of  times  that  the  only  charge  he  faced
    related to him passing information about politicians to the media,  the
    report purportedly issued by the Officer in charge of the TID (document
    21) accused him of  assisting  the  LTTE  in  terrorist  activities  by
    maintaining contacts with the LTTE, providing them with security  plans
    which were the property of the Government, and acting  to  de-stabilise
    national security.

10. The Judge's findings of credibility and fact were set out in paragraphs
    [45] to [57].  On the topic of the documents from Sri Lanka relied upon
    by the appellant, the Judge said,  at  paragraph  [52],  that  she  had
    considered the reliability of these documents by looking at the  matter
    in the round.  At paragraph [53] she referred to PJ (Sri Lanka)  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1011, and set out verbatim one of the  passages  cited  by  Ms
    Seehra in her skeleton argument.  At  paragraph  [54],  she  held  that
    there were a number of reasons to doubt that the  Sri  Lankan  Attorney
    had genuinely obtained these documents.  Firstly, there  was  confusion
    as to when, why and how he was instructed.  The appellant said that his
    sole reason for instructing the Attorney was to obtain court and police
    documents, and yet the letter of instruction from  the  representatives
    in the UK made no mention of this, and instead referred to issues which
    were not relevant to the appellant.  The  response  from  the  Attorney
    made no reference to the representatives' letter, nor did he attempt to
    answer any of the questions posed in that letter, but instead  referred
    to an email which pre-dated his instruction.

11. In paragraph [55], the Judge said  that  she  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant, and not his UK representatives, had instructed the Attorney.
     There was no evidence before her to indicate that the  representatives
    had made any checks as to whether he was  genuinely  a  lawyer  in  Sri
    Lanka.  The documents at 12 and 13 were not original documents.  In any
    event, she was also satisfied  that  there  was  no  need  to  instruct
    another lawyer in Sri Lanka when the appellant must have been in  touch
    with the lawyer who had drafted the affidavit upon which he relied.  At
    the time the appellant said that he was instructing the  new  Attorney,
    his father's friend was contacting this other lawyer to obtain  a  copy
    of the affidavit.  Not only was this other  lawyer  familiar  with  the
    appellant's case, according to the affidavit, but his firm was based in
    Colombo, and therefore was ideally placed to obtain the documents  from
    the Court and the Police.  The Judge noted that  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's representatives dated 8 February 2017 made no request  that
    the court and police documents should  be  obtained  and  forwarded  to
    them.  The Judge concluded, in paragraph [56], as follows:

       For all of these reasons and given  that  the  documents  themselves
       refer to the appellant being connected  with  the  LTTE,  which  the
       appellant denies, I have not found these documents  to  be  reliable
       and accordingly I attach no weight to them.

12. The Judge continued, in paragraph [57]:

       The appellant's account is littered with material inconsistencies as
       highlighted.  The screening interview contains significant omissions
       which has led me to find that he has embellished his later accounts.
        The appellant only mentions  the  complaint  to  the  LLRC  in  his
       witness statement, the affidavit does not support his claim that  he
       made a complaint.  The appellant's account of the abduction  of  the
       NGO is fundamentally inconsistent regarding not only the date of the
       incident but whether or not the appellant was with the  NGO  at  the
       checkpoint where he was stopped, or whether the appellant  travelled
       to the jetty separately.  Looking at the appellant's account in  the
       round, I find that it is a fundamentally flawed account and I do not
       accept even the core of his claim as credible.  I make comprehensive
       adverse credibility findings in this appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

13. Ms Seehra pleaded the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Ground
    1 was that  the  Judge's  approach  to  the  assessment  of  the  Court
    documents was flawed.  Contrary to what the Judge said in her decision,
    the appellant's case was  not  distinguishable  from  PJ  (Sri  Lanka).
    Ground 2 was that there was a lack of reasoning  and  fairness  by  the
    Judge when assessing the letter from the Attorney.  Ground 3  was  that
    the Judge failed to consider relevant  evidence,  comprising:  (a)  two
    internet articles from Tamil Net confirming that MS was checked by  the
    Police and the Navy, and then forcibly abducted in a  van  (appellant's
    bundle, page 39), and that the office of the NGO  was  attacked  on  14
    April 2006 (appellant's bundle, page 38); and (b)  a  letter  from  the
    LLRC (page 30 of the appellant's bundle). Ground 4 was that  the  Judge
    had erred in giving undue emphasis to the answers which  the  appellant
    had given in is screening interview, contrary to the guidance given  in
    JA (Afghanistan) [2014] EWCA Civ 450.

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission to Appeal

14. On 2 June 2017 Designated Judge  Campbell  gave  detailed  reasons  for
    refusing to grant the appellant permission to appeal on any  of  the  4
    grounds pleaded.  With reference to Ground 1, Campbell  held  that  the
    Judge had given cogent reasons for distinguishing PJ and for concluding
    that the documents were unreliable evidence of risk  on  return.   With
    regard to Ground 2, he held that the Judge's analysis took into account
    several factors and her conclusion that the letter had  no  weight  was
    open to her.  With regard to Ground 3, he held that the absence of  any
    express mention of these items did not undermine  the  Judge's  overall
    findings and conclusions, in the light of her careful  reasoning  which
    took into account the appellant's  poor  immigration  history  and  the
    material inconsistencies in his account.  With regard to Ground  4,  he
    held that the Judge's approach was consistent with the  guidance  given
    in JA.

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

15. On a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, permission was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  on  4
    July 2017 for the following reasons:

       Although the First-tier Tribunal had given reasons why it finds  the
       documents to be distinguished from those discussed by Fulford  J  in
       PJ [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1011,  I  am  prepared  to  grant  permission,
       particularly, but not exclusively, in relation to Ground 3.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

16. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Seehra developed the case which she had pleaded in the  grounds
    of appeal.  In reply, Mr Tufan adhered to the Rule 24 response opposing
    the appeal that had been settled by a colleague.

Discussion

17. The distinguishing feature of PJ (Sri Lanka) is that in  that  case  it
    was not reasonably contestable that the court documents  relied  on  by
    the claimant had been genuinely extracted  from  a  file  held  at  the
    relevant Magistrate's Court in Sri Lanka.  Given this  starting  point,
    it was inherently implausible that the court documents were  forgeries,
    as in order  to  be  forgeries,  the  claimant  would  have  needed  to
    infiltrate forged material into court records  genuinely  held  at  the
    Magistrate's Court in question.  Hence, in the passage cited  by  Judge
    Graham at [53], Fulford J held that the judge had misdirected  herself,
    "when she concluded  that  they  had  been  falsely  prepared,  without
    providing any reasoning as to how the applicant could have  infiltrated
    false material into the court records, particularly since there  is  no
    suggestion that the lawyers had  been  involved  in  any  discreditable
    conduct."

18. PJ (Sri Lanka) is not authority for the proposition that  whenever  the
    Tribunal is presented with a set of court and  police  documents  which
    have been certified as authentic by a Sri Lankan Attorney, the Tribunal
    must treat such documents as being reliable, unless the respondent  can
    establish the contrary.  As was held by Lord Justice David Richards  in
    MR (Sri Lanka) -v- Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 763 at paragraph [8], in the course of his judgment Fulford  J
    stressed that documents should not be viewed in isolation and that  the
    evidence needs to be considered in its entirety.

19. Unlike in PJ in the Court of Appeal, in this appeal the  provenance  of
    the documents, and the reliability of the Attorney who had  purportedly
    extracted them from a court file, were both live issues. As highlighted
    by the Judge, there was a fundamental inconsistency  between  what  the
    appellant said was the reason why the authorities had sought to  arrest
    him, and the  reason  actually  given  in  one  of  the  key  documents
    allegedly extracted from the court file.  There was also an unexplained
    discrepancy, identified by the  Judge  at  paragraphs  [43]  and  [44],
    between the letter from the Attorney dated 1 March  2017  which  stated
    that he was in receipt of their email dated 6  February  2017,  whereas
    the only email that had been shown to the Judge was an  email  dated  8
    February 2017 (and the Appellant said that he had  not  instructed  the
    new Attorney until 8 February 2017, and he had done so by phone  -  see
    below).  The Judge acknowledged that she had received a fax  after  the
    hearing from the representatives, confirming that  it  was  a  standard
    'pro forma' letter, by way of explanation for the fact that  it  raised
    questions which are not relevant to the  appellant's  particular  case.
    But it was nonetheless open to the Judge to hold that  this  still  did
    not explain why such a letter would be sent with  no  request  for  the
    Attorney to obtain official police and court documents, "when  this  is
    the sole purpose in instructing him".

20. In Ground 2, it is argued that it was unfair of the Judge  to  make  an
    adverse credibility finding on the basis of the appellant instructing a
    new Attorney for the specific purpose of obtaining the court and police
    documents, rather than using one of the lawyers who had worked for  him
    previously, such as the lawyer who prepared his affidavit in 2006.   Ms
    Seehra pleads that the appellant was not questioned about this  matter,
    and so he was not afforded the opportunity to provide  an  explanation.
    However, it is clear from paragraph [43] of the Judge's  decision  that
    the appellant was specifically cross-examined by the Presenting Officer
    on this issue.  As the Judge records, the appellant "accepted" that  he
    had other lawyers working for  him  previously.   His  explanation  for
    instructing a new Attorney was that "a friend recommended this  lawyer"
    and he said that he had instructed the new Attorney by telephone  on  8
    February 2017 for the specific  purpose  of  obtaining  the  documents,
    including the arrest warrant and the court documents relating  to  him.
    He said that he had first advised his representative in  the  UK  on  8
    February 2017 that he had instructed the new Attorney earlier that day.

21. It was open to the Judge to find that the appellant  had  not  given  a
    credible explanation for instructing a  new  lawyer  recommended  by  a
    friend to obtain court documents pertaining to his  case,  rather  than
    using one of his previous lawyers who would be  already  familiar  with
    his case.

22. With regard to Ground 3, I refer to the guidance given by the Court  of
    Appeal in Muse & Others v Entry Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10 on
    challenges to the adequacy  of  a  judge's  reasons.   In  South  Bucks
    District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33, cited  with  approval  by
    the Court of Appeal at [33], Lord Brown said:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration (my emphasis).

23. The Judge did not err in law in not making specific findings  on  every
    single document emanating from  Sri  Lanka.   The  documents  which  Ms
    Seehra relies upon are of peripheral relevance only. The  news  article
    of 27 May 2006 reported that MS was abducted on Saturday morning  by  a
    group of unidentified persons in a white-coloured van from  the  Muttur
    Jetty where he was waiting to travel to Trincomalle Town by ferry  with
    his wife.  The incident was said to  have  been  witnessed  by  several
    members of the public who were present at the site.  The  appellant  is
    not identified as being one of the  members  of  the  public  who  were
    present at the site.  The letter from the LLRC is at best equivocal  in
    its  import,  as  the  date  given  for   the   appellant's   statement
    (15/07/2010) does not accord with the date of the affidavit  which  the
    appellant purportedly affirmed in Colombo on 9 June 2006.   The  letter
    is also addressed to the appellant as if  he  is  resident  in  Gampola
    when, in fact, he had not been a resident  of  Gampola  for  over  four
    years.

24. As to Ground 4, in paragraphs [45] to [50] the Judge gave extensive and
    sustainable reasons as to why she placed significant adverse weight  on
    the numerous and fundamental discrepancies between what he said in  his
    screening interview and  what  he  said  subsequently.   Her  reasoning
    included the fact that, as she  observed  at  paragraph  [48],  in  his
    asylum  interview  the  appellant  was  asked  whether  the   screening
    interview record was correct.  The only alteration that  the  appellant
    made to his screening interview record was in relation to  him  passing
    information to a journalist via a third party. The Judge's approach was
    not contrary to the guidance given in JA.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28 August 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge









