

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/00620/2019
                                                               PA/00624/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 July 2019                      |On 22 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     KA
                                     BM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Sachdev, Bury Law Centre
For the respondent:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. We have anonymised the appellants'  names  because  this  decision
          refers to their asylum claims.


       2. The appellants have appealed against a decision of the  First-tier
          Tribunal (FTT) sent on 7 March 2019 dismissing  their  appeals  on
          protection and human rights grounds.


       3. Mr Tan conceded  that  the  appellants'  grounds  of  appeal  each
          contain errors of law such that  the  FTT  decision  must  be  set
          aside and remade by another  FTT  other  than  FTT  Judge  Davies.
          Both parties therefore consented to the appeal being  allowed  and
          the FTT's decision being set aside.  They  also  agreed  that  the
          appeal should be remitted to be remade by the  FTT  de  novo.   We
          decided that it is appropriate to take  this  course  pursuant  to
          rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

       4. This is an appeal that turned entirely on the credibility  of  the
          appellants' claims.  We  entirely  agree  with  the  parties  that
          Judge Davies' findings are infected by  material  errors  of  law,
          identified in the grounds of appeal, and must be remade  entirely.
            We  have  had  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant   Senior
          President's Practice Statement and the nature and  extent  of  the
          factual findings required in remaking the decision,  and  we  have
          decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to  the  FTT  to
          make completely fresh findings of fact.

Decision

       5. The decision of the FTT involved the making of  a  material  error
          of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

       6. The appeal shall be remade by the FTT (a judge  other  than  Judge
          Davies) de novo.





Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
16 July 2019

