
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00557/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2018                   |On 27 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     NZ
                         (Anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Mottershaw  (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal") which it sent to the parties on
23 March 2017;  whereupon  it  dismissed  her  appeal  on  international
protection  grounds  but  allowed  it  under  Article 8  of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).  The claimant has pursued this appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal because she believes herself to be a refugee and is  not,
therefore, content with the tribunal's decision to allow  the  appeal  under
Article 8 only.

2.    On 12 October 2017,  having  heard  from  representatives  for  both
parties, I decided to set aside the tribunal's decision but to preserve  its
findings and conclusions with respect to the Article 8 aspects. I  did  so,
in a nutshell, because I considered the tribunal to have erred in  rejecting
the international protection arguments solely on the  basis  of  sufficiency
of protection in circumstances where that had not been raised  as  an  issue
either prior to or at the oral hearing held by the tribunal.  There  had,  I
therefore decided, been consequent unfairness because had  the  matter  been
raised at the appropriate time arguments might have been put  on  behalf  of
the claimant which may have led to a different outcome.

3.    My having set aside the tribunal's decision I directed that  there  be
a hearing  before  me  in  the  Upper Tribunal  so  that  the  question  of
entitlement or otherwise to international  protection  could  be  considered
afresh.

4.    By way of background, the claimant was born on [  ]  1984  in  Zambia.
She is a national of that  country.   She  gave  the  following  account  of
events in Zambia:  She said that, when she  was  a  very  young  child,  her
father had had little  or  nothing  to  do  with  her.   However,  when  she
attained the age of 12 years she was told that he wished to have her  marry
a 30 year old man.  In order to avoid that happening her mother sent her to
live with a different family who resided some considerable distance away  in
a different part of Zambia. That family has  been  referred  to,  throughout
the proceedings, as her "foster family".  She went there in or  about  1996.
However, in 1998 her foster mother married a man I shall simply refer to  as
EC.  She says that EC raped her multiple  times  over  a  period  of  years.
Such treatment continued through to her adulthood and when she was  aged 22
she reported what had happened to her local  police  station.   However  she
says that she was laughed at and told to "go  home  and  enjoy  everything".
She says that the final rape took place in 2009.  In 2010 she  came  to  the
United Kingdom travelling in possession of a transit visa.  She  says  that
she successfully entered the UK and lived,  for  a  time,  with  her  foster
mother's sister.  She subsequently discovered that she is HIV positive  and
has stated that she must have been infected by EC.

5.    Having remained in  the  UK  without  permission  for  some  time  the
claimant made a claim for asylum on 17 June 2015.  The basis of the claim,
as subsequently pursued, was that if she had to return to Zambia  she  would
be at risk of persecution or serious harm at the hands of her foster  family
and EC because she had informed family members of what EC had done  to  her
and would herself be blamed by them for his actions or  for  speaking  about
them.  She also expressed a fear of her natural father  in  connection  with
her previous unwillingness to enter into a forced marriage  as  a  child  on
the basis that he might once again try  to  have  her  forcibly  married  to
another.  She also said that she feared being targeted as a  lone  woman  in
Zambia and thought she might be exploited, as  such,  for  sexual  purposes.
With respect to asylum the applicable 1951 Convention Reason was said to be
that of membership of a particular social group.

6.    The tribunal's decision to allow the appeal, but  only  in  part,  was
made after a hearing of 3 March 2017.  As I say  I  have  set  aside  that
decision whilst preserving the  Article 8  findings  and  conclusions.   My
having done so there was a further hearing which took place  before  me  and
at which representation was as indicated above.  That was to  enable  me  to
remake the decision with respect to the international protection issues.

7.    At the hearing I had, before me, the various documents which had  been
before the tribunal when it had made its  decision.   That  consisted  of  a
Home Office bundle in the usual  form,  a  Country  of  Origin  Information
Response concerning availability  of  medication  in  Zambia,  a  bundle  of
documents which had been filed on behalf of the claimant and which  included
her witness statement of 13 December 2016, a psychiatric report  and  some
background country  material,  some  case  law,  an  expert  country  report
prepared by one Professor Beyani and a skeleton argument.  In  addition  to
that I had a letter of 25 January 2018 concerning the claimant's medication
and I also had the various documents which had  come  into  existence  as  a
result of the subsequent challenge to the tribunal's decision.

8.    At the outset of the hearing Mr McVeety said that he would  not  seek
to argue that the claimant had available to herself,  in  Zambia,  a  viable
internal flight alternative.  He  indicated  that  he  was  not  seeking  to
dispute the truth of the account the claimant had given.  He  said  that  he
would argue matters solely on the basis that she would  have,  available  to
her, a sufficiency of protection from the  authorities  in  her  home  area.
But even as to that, he expressed the view that he was  in  some  difficulty
because of what was said about a lack of protection for  victims  of  sexual
violence in Professor Beyani's report of 24 February 2017 coupled with the
evidence, which he was not disputing, that the claimant  had  unsuccessfully
sought the protection of the authorities in the past.  But he did  point  to
an indication in the expert report that the Zambian authorities were  trying
to address the difficulties surrounding sufficiency of protection  for  such
victims.

9.    Ms Mottershaw argued  that  Professor Beyani's  report  demonstrated
that, whilst  the  government  may  have  good  intentions,  protection  for
victims of sexual violence is not in place.  Given  that  the  claimant  had
sought to disclose the previous history of such violence there  would  be  a
risk of her being persecuted by EC's family.  It was  significant  that  the
police had laughed at her when she had sought protection in the past.

10.   I should add that the claimant did not give evidence before me.   That
was  because,  I  think,  Ms Mottershaw  considered  it  unnecessary  given
Mr McVeety's indication that he would not seek to dispute the truth of  the
actual  factual  account  she  had   previously   given.    I   also   note,
incidentally, that that factual account had been accepted  by  the  tribunal
despite its dismissing her appeal.  I should also add  that  I  ascertained,
at the hearing, that the part of Zambia where her foster family  resides  is
some 12 hours drive away from the  part  of  Zambia  where  the  claimant's
natural family reside.  It was accepted by all parties that  the  claimant's
home area was to be regarded as the place  where  she  had  lived  with  her
foster family.

11.   I have concluded, for the reasons which I will now explain,  that  the
claimant is a refugee and  that  her  appeal  does,  therefore,  succeed  on
asylum grounds.

12.   There was, in truth, little which was in issue before me.  So, I  have
proceeded on the basis that the  claimant  did  tell  the  truth  about  her
previous history and, in particular, about the treatment  she  has  received
at the hands of EC.  I do not know whether EC is alive  or  whether,  if  he
is, he resides in the same part of Zambia.  But Mr McVeety did not seek  to
argue that there would be no longer any risk emanating from him and I  would
conclude, in any event, that there is a real risk that  he  remains  in  the
claimant's home area (the area she will return to)  in  Zambia.   Given  his
extensive ill-treatment of her in the past I would conclude that there is  a
real risk he would repeat such behaviour.  That would  obviously  amount  to
persecution.

13.   Professor Beyani also suggests, in the report of  24 February 2017,
that victims of sexual violence in Zambia who disclose the relevant  history
they may be blamed by family members of the perpetrator for instigating  the
abuse and that  such  disclosure  transgresses  traditional  views  of  good
behaviour.  So Professor Beyani suggests that, even absent any direct  risk
from EC, there would be a risk of harm at the hands of other members of  her
foster family.

14.   What Professor Beyani has to say about this was not  the  subject  of
any challenge before me.  So, on the basis of the material which  is  before
me and in the context of this particular appeal, I am able to and do  accept
that there would be a real risk of persecution  emanating  from  the  foster
family including but not limited to direct relatives of EC.

15.    All  of  the  above  is  sufficient  to  demonstrate  that  absent  a
sufficiency of protection (as indeed was not  in  issue  before  me  in  any
event) the claimant would be at risk of persecution if she  were  to  return
to her home area in Zambia.  Since internal flight was not argued before  me
that means that I must conclude that she is  a  refugee  so  long  as  I  am
satisfied that she  is  able  to  bring  herself  within  one  of  the  five
categories set out in the 1951 Refugee  Convention  (she  claims  to  be  a
member of a  particular  social  group)  and  that  there  would  not  be  a
sufficiency of protection for her in her home area of Zambia.

16.   I shall take the second point first.  Mr McVeety,  whilst  as  I  say
acknowledging that he considered himself to be in some difficulty, did  take
me to a  part  of  the  report  of  Professor Beyani  which  indicated  the
government had been making efforts to improve the situation with respect  to
the way in which the authorities deal with complaints  concerning  the  sort
of behaviour the claimant had been the victim of. Indeed,  at  paragraph 83
of the report, it is  noted  that  a  national  anti-corruption  policy  was
adopted in 2009 in order to improve police performance  in  the  context  of
sexual violence.  At paragraph 84  reference  is  made  to  the  government
having taken specific measures to deal with the problem of sexual  violence.
 There is also reference at paragraph 86  to  a  national  action  plan  on
gender based violence.  But the overall  tenor  of  the  report  is  to  the
effect that these measures have not, as yet at  least,  yielded  significant
concrete results.  For example, reference is made at  paragraph 82  to  the
poor training of the police and the lack of adequate resources which  it  is
said  explains  "the  lack  of  effective  implementation  of  the  measures
deployed  by  the  Zambian  authorities  to  combat  sexual  violence".   At
paragraph 87  it  is  said  that  whilst  measures  focus   upon   victims
perpetrators are not dealt with.  So it  is  suggested  that  this  claimant
remains at risk, as I understand the report, at the  hands  of  EC  and  her
wider foster family.  There is, of  course,  the  history  of  the  claimant
having sought protection in the past but not having received  it.   I  fully
accept  that  one  such  incident  does  not,  of  itself,  demonstrate   an
unwillingness or an inability to, in general terms, provide protection.   It
is always possible that an  individual  might  be  unlucky  in  encountering
rogue officers.  But the claimant's previous experience  is  not  irrelevant
in considering what level of protection she is likely to receive in  future.
 Further, the accuracy of what is contained in the report about the  ongoing
shortcomings in the context of protection was not challenged before me.

17.   In the circumstances I have concluded, on the material before  me  and
in the particular circumstances of this case, that this  claimant  will  not
have available to her a sufficiency of protection upon return to Zambia.   I
would stress, though, that I am not purporting to make any general  findings
as to the availability or otherwise of  protection  for  victims  of  sexual
violence in Zambia.  I am focusing solely  upon  this  particular  claimant.
But my having reached this conclusion does mean that the claimant  has  only
one further hurdle to surmount, in the context  of  asylum,  which  is  that
relating to her claim to be a member of a particular social group.

18.   Very little was said about that  particular  issue  before  me.   That
might be because Mr McVeety did not actively see to persuade  me  that  the
claimant, in her circumstances, is not  a  member  of  a  particular  social
group.  I do  note,  though,  that  the  matter  was  addressed  before  the
tribunal by Ms Mottershaw in her skeleton argument of 2 March 2017.   She
offered, in that skeleton argument, a number of  different  formulations  as
to the social group to which it  was  argued  the  claimant  belonged.   The
suggestions put forward were "single women";  "women  who  had  transgressed
social  and  cultural  mores";  or  "single  woman  who  have   transgressed
expectations by being a victim of sexual violence and reporting this".

19.   I can think of other different formulations.  I do not, however,  feel
the need to be specific here.  As I say Mr McVeety did not  seek  to  argue
before me that the claimant was not a member of a particular  social  group.
In those circumstances I would accept that she  is.   In  the  circumstances
that is all I have to do.

20.   I have concluded, therefore, that the claimant has made out her  claim
to be a refugee.  That being so it is inappropriate and unnecessary  for  me
to go on to consider whether she is entitled  to  a  grant  of  humanitarian
protection.  I would, however, also conclude that for  the  reasons  I  have
accepted her as a refugee she is also a person who would be at real risk  of
receiving treatment which would breach Article 3 of the European Convention
on Human Rights if she were to be returned to Zambia.  She is, therefore,  a
person who is entitled to international protection.

21.   As to anonymity,  I  am  aware  that  anonymity  was  granted  by  the
tribunal.  Nothing was said about anonymity before me but  it  seems  to  me
obvious, given the particular circumstances of this case, that the  claimant
should continue to have  protection  from  publicity.   Accordingly  I  have
granted her anonymity myself.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, which was sent to the  parties  on
23 March 2017 has already been set aside.

In remaking the decision I allow on  asylum  grounds  and  on  human  rights
grounds  (Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights)  the
claimant's  appeal  against   the   Secretary   of   State's   decision   of
30 June 2015.


Signed:     Date: 23 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


Anonymity

I grant  the  claimant  anonymity  pursuant  to  rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, such grant to continue  unless  and
until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise.   No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  claimant  or  any
member of the claimant's family.  This direction applies to all  parties  to
the proceedings.   Failure  to  comply  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed:     Date: 23 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is payable there can be no fee award.


Signed:     Date: 23 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
