
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/00641/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29 August 2017                     |      On 18 September 2017            |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                          mr Vivekanathan Jeyaruban
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Popal, Counsel, instructed by KQ
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka aged 31.  In a  decision  sent
    on 16 December 2016 First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge N Osborne dismissed
    his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on  20  July  to
    make a deportation order against him under s.32(5) of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007 on the basis that he was a foreign criminal.  On  4  September
    2013 he had been convicted of violent  disorder  and  sentenced  to  42
    months' imprisonment.  He had also been convicted in October 2005 of an
    offence of wounding.  He also committed more than one other offence  of
    a minor nature.  On the same day a decision was made by the  respondent
    to refuse his protection and asylum claim and certify it under S.72  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act as a result  of  which  the
    appellant was presumed to have been convicted by final  judgment  of  a
    particularly serious crime, and to constitute a danger to the community
    of the UK.  Having upheld the S.72 certificate the judge then turned to
    consider the appellant's human rights grounds under Articles 3 and 8.

2.   The appellant's appeal on Article 3 grounds encompassed a challenge  to
    the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  lacked
    credibility.

3.   For the purposes of assessing  the  appellant's  Article  3  claim  the
    judge noted his claim that he had  been  arrested,  detained  and  ill-
    treated by the Sri Lankan Army in 2001/2002 and his more  recent  claim
    that he had become active in protests in London against the Sri  Lankan
    government since 2010 and that a warrant had been issued for his arrest
    in Sri Lanka in 2013.  The judge was  prepared  to  accept  that  as  a
    teenager the appellant had carried out low-level activities  on  behalf
    of the LTTE and also appeared to accept his claim  that  when  a  14/15
    year old boy he had been arrested, detained and ill-treated for several
    weeks in 2001/2002 before being released upon payment of a bribe by his
    family.  However:

    (i)  he was not satisfied that the appellant's  conduct/behaviour  even
         on his own account was anything other than low-level  and  did  not
         consider it would  concern the Sri Lankan authorities some  fifteen
         years later and some seven years after the civil war had ended; and




    (ii) he was not satisfied that  the  appellant  had  suffered  injuries
         resulting in scars as a result of his ill-treatment  in  2002.   At
         paragraph 31 the judge stated:


         31.  Even if I was satisfied (which I am not) that the  Appellant's
             injuries were caused by the Sri Lankan Army  as  long  ago  as
             late 2001, I find that I am far from satisfied for the reasons
             set out below that the Appellant now after such  a  long  time
             has  anything  to  fear  from  the  Sri  Lankan   authorities.
             However, due to the age of the scars and due to the nature  of
             the private life exercised by this Appellant since he has been
             in the UK in terms of his involvement in violent behaviour,  I
             am not satisfied that the scars which now appear upon his body
             were not suffered after he arrived in the UK  in  any  one  or
             more of the violent incidents in which the Appellant has  been
             involved.

4.   As regards his sur place activities, the judge first of all  considered
    the appellant's claimed activities in  support  of  the  British  Tamil
    Forum (BTF).  He concluded that the appellant  had  adduced  no  or  no
    adequate evidence to establish that he attended any  demonstrations  in
    support of the BTF or that he did any work on behalf of the  BTF.   The
    judge next considered his claim that he was also involved in  volunteer
    activities for the Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE).   In
    this regard he considered a copy (undated) letter from a Mr Sockalingam
    Yogalingam who was described as the  Deputy  Minister  for  Sports  and
    Community Health.  It stated that the appellant had joined  TGTE  as  a
    volunteer in organising several public events in the UK in  support  of
    creating a free Tamil state in Sri Lanka.  Alongside  this  letter  the
    judge  considered  copy  photographs  produced  showing  the  appellant
    attending inter alia a rally in August  2016  near  Downing  Street,  a
    rally in October 2015 to protest against the  killing  of  students  at
    Jaffna University and attending a TGTE meeting on 2 October  2016.   At
    paragraphs 43 and 44 the judge said:

    "43. All these photographs that the Appellant has adduced  in  evidence
         in an attempt to show his commitment to the cause of the  TGTE  are
         dated between the date of the first tribunal  hearing  on  26  July
         2016 and the date of this hearing.  Mr Arkless properly put to  the
         Appellant that his involvement in relation to this cause or  indeed
         any other Tamil activities in the UK has been and will be proved to
         be short-lived.  Mr Arkless put to the Appellant that he  has  been
         in the UK since early 2002 and it is only now shortly  before  this
         final hearing that the  Tribunal  is  shown  any  evidence  of  any
         involvement by the Appellant in Tamil activities.  I find that this
         point raised by Mr Arkless was well  made.   I find  that  if  the
         Appellant, as he claims, is genuinely committed  to  and  has  been
         genuinely supporting Tamil causes since his arrival in this country
         in January 2002 that this Tribunal would have been shown  far  more
         evidence in the form of photographs and would have heard  far  more
         oral  evidence  from  individuals  who  could  have  confirmed  the
         Appellant's involvement.  As it is, no witnesses have been  brought
         to the Tribunal to  confirm  the  Appellant's  activities  in  this
         regard whether as claimed by the Appellant or at all.


    44.  For the avoidance of doubt I  find  that  the  copy  letter  which
         purports to have emanated  from  the  Transnational  Government  of
         Tamil Eelam is a most unimpressive document which  is  undated,  is
         relatively vague in its description  of  the  Appellant's  specific
         activities and the specific  extent  to  which  the  Appellant  has
         helped that organisation.  I give the letter little if  any  weight
         for those reasons and because its author failed  to  attend  to  be
         cross-examined and/or  to  confirm  its  contents.   I  would  have
         thought that if the Appellant  were  genuinely  involved  in  Tamil
         activities that members of the Tamil organisations  with  which  he
         claims to be involved would have been only too ready to attend  the
         Tribunal to support his appeal knowing that if he  is  returned  to
         Sri Lanka he would be of interest to the  state  authorities.   The
         distinct lack of support from within the Tamil  community  for  the
         Appellant's claimed commitment to the  Tamil  separatist  cause  is
         illuminating.  It  undermines  the  Appellant's  reliability  as  a
         witness, his personal credibility, and the credibility of his claim
         to be genuinely involved with any Tamil separatist cause whether as
         claimed by him or at all. "

5.   The judge went  on  to  reject  the  appellant's  evidence  seeking  to
    establish that the Sri Lankan authorities had issued an arrest  warrant
    against him.  The judge also considered and  rejected  the  appellant's
    claim that he qualified as an EEA extended family member  and  that  he
    was entitled to succeed on the basis of  his  Article  8  circumstances
    based primarily on the long-term cohabitational relationship with Ms  S
    Ganay, a French citizen.

6.   The appellant's grounds of  appeal  raised  the  following  challenges.
    First it was submitted that the judge materially erred  in  respect  of
    his assessment of the medical evidence.   Second  that  the  judge  had
    failed to adequately weigh in the balance when assessing risk  that  he
    had found that the appellant had been detained and ill-treated in  2001
    on suspicion of LTTE involvement.  Thirdly, it was submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to engage adequately  with  the  appellant's  risk  on
    return due to his perceived involvement with  the  TGTE  (which  was  a
    proscribed organisation).  Finally it was submitted that the judge  had
    failed to engage with paragraphs 4 and 15  of  Appendix  C  of  GJ  and
    others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] 00319  UKUT  and
    the fact that the appellant will be questioned about his  pro-LTTE  sur
    place activity and cannot be expected to lie about that.

7.   The appellant's grounds were considered by a First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    in May 2017 and  permission  to  appeal  was  refused.   However  in  a
    decision made on 7  July  2017,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  granted
    permission on "limited grounds" which she specified as being

         "grounds set out at [6] and [7]  of  the  renewed  application  for
         permission which both related exclusively to  the  appellant's  sur
         place activities: the essence of [6] was alleged failure to  engage
         with  "the  appellant's  risk  on  return  due  to  his   perceived
         involvement with the TGTE" and the essence of [7]  was  failure  to
         engage with paragraphs 4 and 15 of Appendix C of  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)"
         (see above).

8.   At the hearing Ms  Popal  applied  for  permission  to  argue  all  the
    grounds set out in the applications for permission.  She explained that
    she had only been instructed late in the day and to  her  understanding
    it  was  open  to  the  Upper  Tribunal   to   consider   all   grounds
    notwithstanding the grant made by UTJ Smith  on  limited  grounds.   In
    addition she submitted that it was in the interests of justice  that  I
    permit her to argue all  the  grounds  because  there  were  compelling
    reasons for the UT reconsidering the issue of the judge's treatment  of
    the medical evidence.

9.   Having considered the parties' submissions I ruled against  Ms  Popal's
    request to allow her to argue all the written  grounds.   Ms  Popal  is
    correct to state that I am not  prevented  by  the  TCEA  2007  or  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  from  considering  the
    written  grounds  in  full,  notwithstanding   UTJ   Smith's   specific
    restriction.  However, I do not consider the appellant has demonstrated
    a sufficient basis for me to take this step.

10.  First of all, the limited basis on which UTJ Smith  granted  permission
    was unequivocal.

11.  Yet the appellant's representatives took no  steps  to  challenge  this
    limitation either by way of an appellant's reply or any other step. The
    appellant's representatives have had since early July to register  such
    a challenge but did nothing.  No explanation has been provided from the
    appellant's solicitors as to why they failed  to  take  any  action  to
    raise with the UT the scope of the grant of permission.

12.  Secondly, I am unable to accept Ms Popal's contention  that  there  are
    compelling circumstances for going outside the restricted remit of  the
    grant  of  permission  arising  from  what  she  termed   the   clearly
    questionable treatment by the FtT Judge of the medical  evidence.   The
    grounds seek to rely on the findings of Dr Al-Wakeel in his  report  of
    September 2016 that the appellant's scars are "typical" of  the  events
    described by him of being intentionally burnt.  However, it was also  a
    finding of Dr Al-Wakeel that it was not possible to give a precise  age
    to the scars, which were fully mature.  It is well established  in  the
    medical literature that there is no scientific  basis  for  determining
    the age of scars after a period of six months to two years:  as  stated
    in KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC) at
    paragraph 5 of the head note  (whose  contents  is  unaffected  by  the
    subsequent Court of Appeal decision):

         "5.  Whilst the  medical  literature  continues  to  consider  that
             scarring cannot be dated beyond six months from  when  it  was
             inflicted, there is some  medical  basis  for  considering  in
             relation to certain  types  of  cases  that  its  age  can  be
             determined up to two years".

13.  Given the doctor's proper acceptance that he could not date  the  scars
    that clearly qualified the scope of his finding  that  the  scars  were
    "typical" of those inflicted in the  way  the  appellant  had  claimed.
    That finding was  predicated  on  the  appellant's  scars  having  been
    inflicted in 2001/2002, despite it being impossible to  say  they  were
    that old.  The judge's assessment at paragraph 31 was that

         "due to the age of the scars and due to the nature of  the  private
         life exercised by this Appellant since he has been  in  the  UK  in
         terms of his involvement in violent behaviour, I am  not  satisfied
         that the scars which now appear on his body were not suffered after
         her arrived in the UK in any one or more of the  violent  incidents
         in which the Appellant has been involved".

14.  Ms Popal submitted that this assessment  should  be  considered  flawed
    because the scarring included cigarette burns which were most  unlikely
    to be connected with any violent behaviour in the UK.  Whether  or  not
    that is correct, the underlying problem that the  scars  could  not  be
    dated remains and it is clear from paragraph 31 that the judge saw this
    problem as adverse to the appellant quite separately from  his  violent
    behaviour.

15.  I turn therefore to consider the appellant's challenge to  the  judge's
    assessment of the appellant's sur place activities.

16.  As regards the appellant's account of  involvement  with  the  TGTE,  I
    consider it was entirely open to the judge to reject his account.   The
    grounds  take  issue  with  the  judge's  reliance  on  the   lack   of
    confirmation but Article  4(5)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  only
    excuses  non-confirmation  of  written   statements   under   specified
    conditions - conditions which the appellant plainly did not fulfil.  It
    was open to the judge to attach very significant weight to the  failure
    of anyone from the TGTE to attend to give evidence  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant to confirm his claimed activities.  The  judge  analysed  the
    photographic  evidence  with  care.   The  judge  also  considered  the
    reliability of the copy letter which purported to  have  emanated  from
    the Tamil government-in-exile.  At paragraph 44 the  judge  gave  sound
    reasons for deciding to attach little or no weight to it.

17.  It must be borne in mind that he appellant's claim to have  achieved  a
    significant profile as a TGTE supporter was based in part on his  claim
    to have become passionate about its cause.  The  judge  was  singularly
    unimpressed by this aspect of the appellant's claim, pointing out  that
    despite having been in the UK since  2002  it  was  "only  now  shortly
    before this final hearing that the Tribunal is shown  any  evidence  of
    any involvement by the Appellant in Tamil activities".  Given the terms
    of Article 5(1) of the QD it was entirely open to the judge  to  assess
    that his claimed sur  place  activities  were  not  a  continuation  of
    activities in Sri Lanka and that this feature  reinforced  the  reasons
    for assessing that he was not the actively involved TGTE  supporter  he
    claimed to be.

18.  The grounds seek to argue that the  judge  failed  when  assessing  the
    appellant's sur place activities to take account of how  the  appellant
    would be perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as distinct  from  how
    genuine were  his  sur  place  activities.   However,  on  the  judge's
    findings  the  appellant  had  failed  to  establish  that  he  had   a
    significant sur place profile capable of generating adverse perception.



19.  The above leads me to conclude that ground  6  fails  to  establish  an
    error of law.

20.  Turning then to ground 7, I fail to see  that  the  judge's  assessment
    contravened any part of the guidance  given  in  GJ.   On  the  judge's
    findings the appellant had failed to  establish  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities would have any adverse interest in him on return.   To  the
    extent that the argument is advanced that the appellant  could  not  be
    expected to lie on return about his sur  place  activities  that  would
    entail on the judge's findings that he would have to admit that he  was
    in fact not significantly involved with the TGTE.  Bearing in mind that
    a further feature of the findings made by the UT in GJ was that the Sri
    Lankan authorities hold sophisticated intelligence,  it  is  even  less
    likely that they would respond to  any  mention  by  the  appellant  of
    seeking to claim he had a significant TGTE involvement by treating  him
    as someone who required further questioning and investigation.

21.  Ms Popal's submissions raised  a  further  point  which  was  that  the
    judge's rejection of the appellant's evidence about his TJTE activities
    was contrary to authority.  In this regard she sought to  rely  on  the
    Court of Appeal judgment in UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 85, in which
    the Court of Appeal had allowed the appeal of UB on the basis that  the
    respondent had failed to put before the FtT and UT judges  the  letters
    from the British High Commission Sri Lanka regarding the  TGTE.   I  am
    not prepared to consider this further point.  Despite the  decision  in
    UB dating from 22 February 2017 no point regarding  these  letters  was
    raised in the appellant's grounds of appeal nor was any exception taken
    prior to the hearing before me to UTJ Smith's grant  of  permission  on
    limited grounds.  In any event I do not consider  that  had  the  judge
    been referred to UB it would have made any difference to the reasons he
    gave for finding this appellant's sur place activities not such  as  to
    place him at risk.

22.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT Judge did not  materially
    err in law and accordingly his decision must stand.

23.  No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 15 September 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey

