
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00735/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2018                    |On 16 October 2018                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Y S
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  I continue that order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court
directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  or  any   form   of
publication thereof shall identify the original claimant,  whether  directly
or indirectly. This order applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant'  s  appeal  against  his
    decision on 12  January  2016  to  refuse  the  claimant  international
    protection under the Refugee Convention,  humanitarian  protection,  or
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  human  rights  grounds.   The
    claimant is a Ukrainian citizen: he is a computer systems analyst  with
    a degree in Information Technology from the Kyiv  Slavonic  University.
    From 2007-2014, the claimant worked in the Ukrainian central bank,  the
    National Bank, as a systems analyst, setting up  WiFi  and  maintaining
    the servers and the internal and external computer systems of the bank.



 2. The claimant's wife, also a citizen of Ukraine, is a dependant  in  his
    appeal.  The couple met in the autumn of 2010 and married in June 2014,
    just after the Euromaidan Revolution in February/March 2014.  She has a
    Masters' degree in Ecology from the National University  of  Zaporozhye
    and worked in Ukraine as a freelance writer and  copywriter.  The  wife
    was not a state employee: she worked privately for clients.

 3. Ukraine was formerly part of the  Soviet  Union,  becoming  a  separate
    country  by  declaration  of  independence  in  1991.   The  Euromaidan
    Revolution was sparked by the decision of then President Yanukovych  to
    suspend the signing of an Association Agreement between Ukraine and the
    European Union, in favour of  closer  ties  to  Russia.   Following  an
    agreement to settle the conflict, President Yanukovych was forced  into
    exile, and the Ukrainian Parliament removed him  from  office.   On  21
    March 2014, Ukraine signed an Association Agreement with  Europe,  with
    the Russian witness declining to countersign the Agreement.

 4.  In  February-March  2014,  Russia  invaded  and  annexed  Crimea   and
    Sevastopol  in  eastern  Ukraine  and  actively  supported   separatist
    movements in the Donbas (the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts).  Protests in
    the Donbas escalated into an armed  pro-Russian  separatist  insurgency
    there. The claimant's home area of Zaporozhye is 150 miles to the  west
    of the Donbas, but still in eastern Ukraine.

 5. The basis of the claimant's international protection claim is  that  he
    fears rogue elements within the Ukrainian Security Services (the  SBU),
    acting in Russian interests, his case  being  that  they  have  already
    detained, tortured, and tried to assassinate him, following his refusal
    to take part in a sabotage plot to damage the computer systems  of  his
    employer, the National Bank.  There is  said  to  be  a  pending  false
    criminal case against the claimant and that he  is  on  a  Ukraine-wide
    wanted list.

 6. In his refusal letter in January 2016, the Secretary of State  accepted
    that the claim as put engaged Article 1A of the Refugee Convention  and
    that  if  credible,  the  claimant's  account  would  entitle  him   to
    international protection. The Secretary  of  State  now  also  accepts,
    following the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  VB  &  Anor  (draft
    evaders and prison conditions: Ukraine) (CG) [2017] UKUT 79 (IAC), that
    if detained or imprisoned on return to Ukraine, the  claimant  risks  a
    breach of his unqualified Article 3 ECHR protected rights by reason  of
    the prison conditions in Ukraine.

 7. This appeal therefore  turns  on  the  credibility  of  the  claimant's
    account and that of his wife.  I heard oral evidence  from  them  both.
    Their evidence, and that of the  claimant's  father,  together  with  a
    summary of the contents of the 23 translated documents, are  summarised
    in Appendix A.  At Appendix B, I have summarised the  relevant  country
    evidence in the bundle, including the country  expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Rano Turaeva-Hoehne of the Max Planck Institute in Germany.

Secretary of State's case

 8. The Secretary of State considers that the claimant's account lacks both
    plausibility and credibility.  The asylum interview was a lengthy  one,
    taking over five hours to complete but the factual matrix was  assessed
    briefly at [19]-[21] in the refusal letter:

         "19. The material facts of your claim have been examined and either
         rejected, accepted, or they remain unsubstantiated.  If any aspects
         of your claim are left in  doubt  these  have  been  considered  in
         conjunction with section 8 of the 2004 Treatment of  claimant  Act,
         339L and 339N of the Immigration Rules.

         20.  Any documents that you have  submitted  have  been  considered
         where appropriate within the consideration of the material fact  of
         your claim to which they relate.  They have also been considered in
         line with the case-law  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  IAT  2002  UKIAT  00439
         STARRED.  This means that it is for you to show that any  documents
         you rely on to support your case can be relied on."

 9. The claimant in his asylum interview relied on 23 documents written  in
    Ukrainian and/or Russian,  of  which  he  did  not  then  have  English
    translations, which he considered supported his account  of  events  in
    Ukraine.  None of those documents is medical evidence  of  his  claimed
    depression, or of the physical sequelae  of  the  torture  he  says  he
    experienced in detention in Ukraine.

10. The refusal letter contains no analysis of the 23 documents.  That  was
    reasonable:  they  were  not  translated,  and  it  is  the  claimant's
    responsibility to produce his evidence in translation.

11. Following the August 2016 rejection of his appeal,  in  December  2016,
    the claimant  supplied  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with translations of the 23 documents.  Those have never  been
    considered by the Secretary of State.  The claimant's position is  that
    the translated documents could and should have been considered  by  the
    Secretary of State pursuant to her own policy, given the length of time
    this appeal has been outstanding.

Procedural history

12. The appeal was heard for the first time by Designated  Judge  Woodcraft
    and First-tier Judge Monaghan at Hatton Cross on 26 August  2016.   The
    panel rejected the credibility of the claimant's account and  dismissed
    the appeal. The claimant challenged that decision on the basis that the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to  consider  the  documentary  evidence
    before it in the round.

13. On 12 February 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and remitted the appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing afresh, on the basis that consideration  of  the
    23 unchallenged Court and other official documents could  have  made  a
    material difference to the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  The  appeal  was
    reheard in the First-tier Tribunal on 12 September  2017.   This  time,
    the claimant's account was accepted as fully credible, and  the  appeal
    was allowed on Refugee Convention grounds.

14. The Secretary of State appealed, alleging inadequate reasoning  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and failure to resolve evidential  conflicts.    On
    15 February 2018, I set aside the decision and ordered that the  appeal
    be retained in the Upper Tribunal for remaking  of  the  decision.  The
    appeal was listed for substantive rehearing on 9 August 2018, with  the
    appeal notices being sent out on 10 July 2018.

15. On 9 August 2018, at the beginning of the hearing, Mr Melvin sought  an
    adjournment, arguing that this was a complex case, with two huge  files
    of documents, and that he was disadvantaged  because  the  Home  Office
    file had reached him only  the  day  before  the  hearing.   Mr  Melvin
    explained that there was a considerable amount of country  evidence  in
    the bundle on which he had been unable as yet to  prepare  his  written
    submissions.  There were also serious credibility issues on at least 10
    points,  for  which  Mr  Melvin  needed  to  prepare  detailed   cross-
    examination. He considered that the appeal would require a full day for
    rehearing.

16. Mr Bandegani resisted the adjournment, arguing that  the  Secretary  of
    State had advanced no proper explanation for such a late application to
    adjourn and that it was irrelevant that Mr Melvin had  been  unable  to
    prepare, as the Secretary of State was  the  party,  not  a  particular
    presenting officer.   The  appeal  should  not  be  adjourned  for  the
    Secretary of State's  administrative  convenience.   The  Secretary  of
    State had been in possession of almost all the relevant evidence (apart
    from one or two new documents) for at least two years.  The appeal  was
    not inherently complex, despite the volume of documents.

17. I granted  the  adjournment  request  and  directed  the  provision  of
    skeleton arguments for the hearing.  The  bundle  prepared  for  the  9
    August 2018 was to stand as the claimant's evidence for  the  adjourned
    substantive hearing.  I directed that if the Secretary of State  wished
    to rely on any additional documents, she was to serve and file them not
    later than 21 days before the adjourned hearing.  In the event, no such
    documents were filed.

18. The appeal came back before  me  on  2  October  2016  for  substantive
    rehearing,  with  the  benefit  of   skeleton   arguments   from   both
    representatives.







Upper Tribunal hearing

19. Despite the additional 3 months granted to the Secretary of State  when
    I adjourned this hearing in July 2018,  at  the  October  2018  hearing
    there had been no formal consideration by the Secretary of State of the
    23 translated documents provided by the claimant in December 2016,  and
    in particular whether, taken with the other evidence he relied upon and
    his own account and that of his wife, those documents would affect  the
    credibility of his account overall. Mr  Melvin  for  the  Secretary  of
    State told the Tribunal at the hearing  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    'could not be expected to drop everything' and  consider  new  material
    while an appeal was pending.   He was entitled to rely on the  decision
    already taken.

Oral evidence

20. I heard oral evidence  from  the  claimant  and  his  wife.   The  wife
    remained outside the hearing room during the husband's evidence.   Both
    of them adopted their original witness statements and were tendered for
    cross-examination. Mr Melvin cross-examined both witnesses very  fully,
    but without making any significant  impact  on  their  accounts,  which
    remained consistent with each other, with the translated documents, and
    with the claimant's father's witness statements.  Having heard from the
    claimant and his wife, I am satisfied that both are witnesses of truth,
    save in relation to the address where they lived in Lvov.

21. The account they give must be seen  in  the  context  of  the  internal
    conflicts in Ukraine in  2014/2015  and  the  Russian  incursions  into
    Crimea and the Donbas regions of Ukraine in that year.  The claimant is
    a loyal Ukrainian, supportive of the government which took power  after
    the Maidan revolution. Following his studies at the University of  Kyiv
    which ended in 2007, the claimant received two job offers, one from the
    SBU and one  from  the  Ukrainian  central  bank,  National  Bank:   he
    accepted the offer  from  the  National  Bank.   By  the  time  of  the
    Euromaidan Revolution in the spring of  2014,  the  claimant  had  been
    working for 7 years  for  the  National  Bank  as  a  systems  analyst,
    maintaining its servers and computer systems.  He  worked  on  a  shift
    system, either from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., or from 1 p.m. to 10 p.m.

22. The claimant was not a political animal, but after  the  annexation  of
    Crimea by Russia in February/March  2014  and  Russian  sponsorship  of
    separatist movements in the Donbas oblasts of Donetsk and Luhansk, less
    than 150 miles from Zaporozhye, where the  claimant  lived,  he  became
    concerned and wanted to help support the army  to  resist  the  Russian
    incursion.  He looked for ways to assist the pro-Maidan  forces,  first
    by assisting fundraising for the military resistance to pro-Russian and
    separatist forces, and later by undertaking internet research  for  the
    Ukrainian Security Services (the SBU), using his computing skills as  a
    system analyst and networking engineer.

23. In 2014, the pro-Russian Ukrainian President was refusing to  fund  the
    army, which was short of both weapons and clothing.  Young  people  who
    were pro-Maidan used the internet to raise funds to support  the  army,
    using online fundraising pages and sites.  The claimant set up some  of
    these pages and sites: he never handled the money, but helped with  the
    technical IT element of fundraising, which was his area  of  expertise.
    It took him about an hour to an hour and a half in the evenings.

24. The claimant discovered that some of the online fundraising pages  were
    scams,  set  up  to  raise  money  then  disappearing  swiftly  without
    accounting for it.  Overall, however, useful work was being done and he
    was proud of his contribution to the pro-Maidan resistance effort.  The
    claimant's wife was aware of the claimant's online activities  to  help
    raise funds for the Ukrainian army, but  did  not  involve  herself  in
    them.  She was incurious about the claimant's online  activity,  saying
    that in their new family, they respected each other's privacy.

25. At the end of October 2014, the SBU contacted the  claimant  again.   A
    Major, who would become his first SBU handler, started by asking  about
    someone whom the claimant knew only  by  name,  and  then  invited  the
    claimant for a meeting.  The claimant was  asked  to  work  as  an  SBU
    volunteer source.  The claimant was told that Russian  online  activity
    was so extensive in Ukraine that the SBU needed  volunteer  helpers  to
    show them where to look for pro-separatists.   He was made aware,  when
    his SBU work began, that he would someday be asked to take part  in  an
    operation.  He did not give that much thought but  continued  with  his
    volunteer activities on behalf of the SBU,  replacing  his  fundraising
    for the military.

26. The claimant's task was to search online for pro-separatist  pages  and
    websites, and also the fraudulent  fundraising  pages  he  had  already
    spotted.  The claimant reported online twice weekly to his SBU handler,
    by emailing him a spreadsheet of  what  he  had  discovered,  including
    names and contact information for the members of pro-separatist  groups
    and their online pages and groups.  The SBU work took  about  the  same
    time as his previous activity had done, and his wife noticed nothing.

27. On 5 January 2015, two and half months after his SBU  work  began,  the
    claimant's first SBU handler was promoted.  His new handler took a much
    more proactive approach, asking a lot of questions about  the  National
    Bank equipment and servers, and the claimant's  access.   The  claimant
    said he had access to the server room and the whole  system.   The  new
    handler listened carefully.  At the end of January 2015, he  asked  the
    claimant to come to the SBU office  and  the  claimant  signed  a  non-
    disclosure agreement, prohibiting him from discussing what he was  told
    with anyone, including his wife and his employer. The new  SBU  handler
    told the claimant it was now time for him to undertake an operation for
    the SBU, to test  the  National  Bank's  emergency  processes  and  its
    capacity to protect itself from a cyber attack.

28. On 3 February 2015, the claimant met an SBU technical  specialist,  who
    told him what would be required of him. On 6 February 2015, just a  few
    days ahead, the claimant was to turn off the air conditioning  for  the
    National Bank servers at end of his shift (10 p.m.) and delete all  the
    emergency contact numbers which  would  automatically  inform  National
    Bank employees that the servers were overheating.  With no intervention
    by National  Bank  employees,  and  no  air  conditioning,  the  server
    processors would overheat and burn out.

29. The next morning, at 8 a.m., when the claimant reported for  his  early
    shift,  a telephone call would be made saying there was a bomb  in  the
    National Bank.  Everyone would be evacuated for 3 hours,  during  which
    time the  claimant  was  to  restore  the  servers  and  reinstall  the
    telephone numbers.  The plan was to test how long it would take to  get
    the National Bank's systems up and running again, without the  managers
    being aware what had occurred.

30. The claimant protested that there was no spare equipment and voiced his
    concern about the damage the operation would cause.  The  claimant  and
    the technical specialist parted on reasonably good terms on 3 February:
    the claimant had not committed himself to the operation but he also had
    not refused.

31. On 5 February 2015, the day before the operation, the claimant met  the
    technical  specialist  again  and  said  he  would  not  undertake  the
    operation.  He thought it looked more like  outright  sabotage  of  the
    Ukrainian banking system than a test of cyber-security.   The  claimant
    said that  this  went  beyond  the  IT  assistance  he  had  agreed  to
    undertake.  The effect of this operation would be to make it impossible
    for commercial banks or private individuals to draw or transfer  money.
    The effect would be catastrophic, causing mass panic.

32. The technical specialist threatened the claimant to make  him  do  what
    was asked of him, saying that he had no choice, he  could  not  refuse.
    If he did refuse, said the technical specialist,  his  career  and  his
    personal life would both be made difficult for him. The SBU would  find
    someone else to carry out the operation.  The claimant  maintained  his
    refusal to take part, and left.

33. The claimant reflected on his way home,  and  concluded  that  the  new
    handler and his superiors might well be pro-Russian.  He  decided  that
    he must break his  confidentiality  agreement  and  warn  the  Head  of
    Security at the National Bank about the server sabotage plot.  However,
    when he reached home, about an hour later, there were  two  SBU  agents
    waiting.  They handcuffed both the claimant and his wife, and attempted
    to take her as a hostage to ensure that the claimant  would  carry  out
    the operation.

34. Fortunately, there was a panic button in another room and while packing
    some things for the two days  she  would  be  held  hostage,  the  wife
    triggered it.  Police arrived within minutes and asked the SBU officers
    for a warrant for their intrusion into the claimant's  home.   The  SBU
    men had no warrant, and left.  The claimant had to tell his wife  about
    the National Bank sabotage plot, though he still did not tell her about
    the internet work he had done for  the  first  SBU  handler.   She  was
    furious and disappointed that he had kept the secret  of  the  sabotage
    plot from her.

35. The claimant and his wife went to the police station and  attempted  to
    record the incident but the police told them they had no authority over
    the SBU, and refused.  This is all corroborated in  the  23  translated
    documents. The claimant was told  to  approach  the  prosecutor  if  he
    wished to complain about the SBU.  It was too  late  by  then,  so  the
    couple went to stay with a friend as they  thought  it  was  unsafe  to
    return to their apartment.

36. On 6 February 2015, the day  of  the  planned  sabotage,  the  claimant
    telephoned and spoke to the Head of Security at the National  Bank;  he
    told him of the sabotage plot, saying that he feared for his  life  and
    would not be coming to work, but that the SBU might find  someone  else
    to carry it out.  At 2 p.m. that day, SBU agents went to  his  parents'
    flat, looking for the claimant.  They also raided  the  couple's  flat,
    taking the claimant's laptop and computer away with them.

37. They couple fled to Lvov, some 700 miles away, and rented accommodation
    there, living on savings.  Both the claimant and his  wife  claimed  to
    have no memory of the address, or any details of the property in  which
    they lived for the next few weeks, a privately rented apartment.   This
    part of their account lacks credibility: I find that they  probably  do
    remember but do not wish to say, for reasons of  their  own.   However,
    given the overall credibility of the rest of the account, I do not find
    that apparent loss of memory is fatal to their protection claim.

38. The couple began trying to access domestic protection. On  14  February
    2015, the claimant wrote to the District Prosecutor, using his parents'
    address for correspondence, but in mid-March, he  received  a  response
    saying  that  the  SBU  had  done  nothing  wrong,  and  that  all  the
    information he had given about the SBU would be sent to the SBU office.
     On 1 March 2015, the claimant's parents were taken to the SBU  office,
    where they were told that the claimant was now  on  a  national  wanted
    list and that a criminal case had been opened against him. The claimant
    next wrote to the head of the SBU office, explaining his volunteer work
    on the internet and asking for help resolving the problem.

39. The couple were arrested in Lvov on 31 March  2015,  because  they  had
    been drawing out money and shopping in supermarkets; they were  tracked
    down by their electronic transactions and accosted at the door  of  the
    apartment.  The SBU took the couple's laptop  and  a  couple  of  flash
    disks.  SBU agents took the couple back  to  Zaporozhye,  keeping  them
    separate on the journey.  The wife was questioned  and  released.   The
    claimant had told the SBU she knew nothing, and that he  had  not  told
    anyone about the sabotage plot, except the head of security at National
    Bank (they already knew about that call).  The claimant  was  detained,
    under court oversight, from 1 April 2015 to 30 July  2015  when,  after
    cooperating with the SBU and signing a false confession, he  was  given
    bail on a recognisance in excess of �8000.

40. The wife and the claimant's father  had  continued  to  try  to  access
    domestic  protection:  the  wife  wrote  to  the  Regional  Prosecutor,
    explaining what had occurred,  but  all  that  happened  was  that  the
    investigating officer called her and told her to  stop,  or  she  would
    also be detained. The family appointed a private  lawyer  to  represent
    the claimant, but he was not allowed to visit him  in  prison  and  was
    intimidated into ending his retainer.  A court appointed  lawyer  acted
    instead.

41. The claimant was held in an isolation unit.  He was asked to sign a pre-
    written statement, leaving the name of his second SBU handler  and  the
    technical  specialist  out  of  account,  but  naming  two  politicians
    instead.  He refused.  One of the politicians, Mr Gordeev, was arrested
    and the claimant  was  questioned  about  that  man  in  his  presence.
    Following three weeks of torture with chlorine fumes in  his  isolation
    cell, the claimant agreed to accuse Mr Gordeev.  He was  taken  to  the
    SBU office to be questioned in front of Mr Gordeev, then the  SBU  beat
    up Mr Gordeev in front of the claimant.  The  claimant  does  not  know
    what became of Mr Gordeev.

42. The claimant was released on bail on 30 July 2015, and began trying  to
    reach the Ukrainian President, since his letters to the prosecutors and
    the head of the SBU had not achieved anything.  On 15 August  2015,  he
    had a private meeting with an assistant to the President  who,  he  was
    told, had oversight of SBU matters.  He showed the  assistant  all  the
    documents he had, and was promised investigation and protection.

43. The claimant began trying to sell his car, to help repay those who  had
    loaned his wife the money for his bail.  On 28 August 2015, he was  out
    in his car, with a friend of his father who was considering buying  it.
    The claimant was sitting in  the  back  but  his  father's  friend  was
    driving.  A car pulled up,  men  in  balaclava  face  masks  and  plain
    clothes got out and shot the driver, who was badly injured.  The police
    came and took a statement from the claimant, but let him go.

44. The claimant's account is that he overheard the  police  controller  on
    the radio, checking whether someone with the claimant's name was  alive
    after the shooting, and realised that the attack  had  been  meant  for
    him.  A press report  of  the  shooting  is  among  the  23  translated
    documents, but does not mention a back seat passenger in the car.

45. The couple fled immediately, first  to  Moscow  where  they  rented  an
    apartment, and then, as soon as the claimant's father could pay for the
    tickets, they booked a flight from Moscow to Hong Kong,  transiting  in
    London, where they claimed asylum  on  arrival.   They  did  not  claim
    asylum in  Russia  where  the  claimant's  pro-Maidan  activities  were
    unlikely to be well regarded, and  human  rights  were  worse  than  in
    Ukraine.

46. After the couple left, in September 2015, the  wife  received  a  Court
    summons to forfeit the bail surety, addressed to her at their  home  in
    Ukraine.  The surety has been forfeited: later court documents  confirm
    that.

47. Local police and SBU agents continue to question the  parents  of  both
    the claimant and his wife, trying to find  out  where  they  are.   The
    claimant's father keeps an eye on the couple's apartment in their  home
    town.  A neighbour told him  that  the  police  had  been  to  all  the
    apartments in the house, asking when they had last seen  the  claimant,
    where he was, and so forth.  The policemen returned  in  December  2015
    and February 2016, asking the same questions and  saying  it  would  be
    better for the claimant to hand himself in.

48. In the autumn  of  2015,  the  claimant's  former  private  lawyer  was
    interviewed by the SBU to see if he knew where the claimant was, or  if
    he was in contact with the couple.

49. The claimant's parents received similar visits and were told again that
    the claimant was on a Ukraine-wide wanted list.   The claimant's father
    told the SBU agents that the couple had left the country, but they  did
    not believe him. SBU agents said he could not have left, that he  would
    be found and this time he would not get bail.

50. On 4 December 2015, the SBU came with a search warrant and searched the
    parents' home.  They broke kitchen utensils, and  were  rude,  arrogant
    and  'barbaric',  turning  over  furniture   unnecessarily,   so   that
    everything fell out. The claimant's father told  them  again  that  the
    claimant had left the country.

51. On 7 December 2015, the claimant's  father  complained  to  the  Deputy
    General Prosecutor of Ukraine about the illegal behaviour of  the  SBU,
    asking for a legal assessment of the SBU's actions and the validity  of
    the  criminal  proceedings  against  his  son.   He   asked   for   the
    investigation to be transferred to the Special Investigations Agency of
    the Head Office of the GPOU (the SIA).  In  January  2016,  the  Deputy
    General Prosecutor's response was that there  were  no  grounds  for  a
    referral to the SIA, but the other matters would be  investigated.   In
    March 2016, the General Prosecutor's office said that the SBU's actions
    and the Court proceedings were lawful and that the claimant remained on
    a wanted list.  The claimant's  father  was  disappointed,  seeing  the
    response as a cover up.

52. The police have continued to visit the  claimant's  parents  every  2-3
    months, as well as their  neighbours  and  the  claimant's  neighbours,
    asking when the claimant had last been seen.   On  25  June  2017,  the
    claimant's  father  was  watering  the  plants  as   usual   when   two
    plainclothes  officers  attacked  him,  pushing  him  back   into   the
    apartment, handcuffing him and checking his documents, before releasing
    him when they realised he  was  not  the  claimant.   Later,  after  an
    interview at the police  station,  the  father  was  released  with  an
    apology for the 'misunderstanding'.

53. The claimant's father has tried to get  both  the  private  lawyer  the
    family employed, and the court-appointed lawyer, who were involved when
    the claimant was detained, to represent him now.   Both  have  refused,
    fearing that they would be arrested and the SBU would fabricate a  case
    of separatism and terrorism against them.  The  court-appointed  lawyer
    said that since the claimant had absconded and become a wanted man,  he
    had no further  access  to  the  case.   Under  Article  49(2)  of  the
    Ukrainian Criminal Code,  where  an  accused  evaded  investigation  or
    trial, the statute of limitations provided no exemption  from  criminal
    liability until 15 years after the date of the offence (February 2030).

Country evidence

54. Dr Rano Turaeve-Hoehne is an associate post-doctoral researcher on post-
    Soviet countries, including Ukraine, at the Max  Planck  Institute  for
    Social Anthropology in Halle/Saale, Germany.   In her main  report,  Dr
    Turaeva-Hoehne set out  the  Ukrainian  background  to  the  claimant's
    account.   The weight to be given to expert evidence is  a  matter  for
    the Tribunal.

55. I am satisfied that Dr Turaeva-Hoehne's evidence,  which  is  carefully
    sourced and composed mainly of direct  quotations  from  other  country
    experts, should be given weight in assessing  the  credibility  of  the
    claimant's core account.  It is Dr Turaeva-Hoehne's evidence  that  the
    SBU contains many high-ranking members who trained with the KGB in  the
    Soviet Union days, some of whom were Russian  Communist  party  members
    and are 'still involved in organised crime to enrich their  private  or
    political needs'.

56. Dr Turaeva-Hoehne quotes Alan Malcher as saying this:

         ""Apart from several senior SBU officers saying it is going  to  be
         extremely difficult to overcome the disloyalty within their  ranks,
         expressions of concern over the large quantity of data  thought  to
         be in the hands of the FSB, and having an intelligence agency  that
         one officer described as: "Riddled with  officers  whose  loyalties
         are unknown, at a time when Ukraine's sovereignty is in danger from
         a Russian-proxy war which is increasing in intensity. ...""

57. Dr Turaeva-Hoehne's report quotes the Euromaydan Press as saying that a
    weak point of the SBU was its close connection to the FSB  (the  modern
    Russian security service) as many of its members used to work  for  the
    KGB and that it was 'hard to imagine that a person who once  worked  in
    this  repressive  structure  could  remain  unaffected  and  would  not
    maintain old connections...during the three months of  the  revolution,
    three groups of persons occupying high  positions  in  the  FSB  worked
    within the structure of the SBU'.

58. Dr Turaeva-Hoehne considered that the second SBU handler, if he was pro-
    Russian, would be likely to perceive the claimant's  internet  research
    as a threat, as it helped  identify  separatist  activities  on  social
    media.  The second SBU handler, if pro-Russian, could  well  have  been
    tasked to remove the claimant and  stop  the  flow  to  pro-Maidan  SBU
    officials of his valuable information on separatists and  their  online
    activities.

59. Dr Turaeva-Hoehne described what the claimant was  asked  to  do  as  a
    'classic prisoner's dilemma': if he accepted, the National  Bank  would
    be sabotaged and the claimant imprisoned.  If  he  failed,  appropriate
    criminal charges could be constructed against him, to  neutralise  him.
    The  government  controlled  the  media  and  could  ensure  that   the
    corruption and failure in the state legal system which  the  claimant's
    case displayed did not receive much, if any, publicity.

60. Dr Turaeva-Hoehne concluded that the claimant  had  been  a  victim  of
    'political games  played  between  pro-Russian  officials  and  corrupt
    Ukrainian state security' and was highly likely to be on  the  national
    SBU wanted list, which was widely shared within the  overall  Ukrainian
    security system.  He risked arrest and detention  at  the  airport,  or
    anywhere within Ukraine, because of the propiska system:  the  SBU  had
    unlimited access to data on  individuals  and  their  movements  within
    Ukraine.

61. In an updated report  in  August  2018,  Dr  Turaeva-Hoehne  said  that
    OHCHR's 2018 report confirmed that the Donbas armed conflict continued,
    corruption was still  a  problem,  and  there  was  'an  atmosphere  of
    physical insecurity and socio-economic degradation' in eastern Ukraine.
     Conditions in prisons remained  poor,  perhaps  worse  than  in  2016.
    Freedom House's 2018 report said that there was interference  with  the
    independence of the judiciary, with some judges becoming the subject of
    criminal investigations themselves.

62. Other country evidence in the bundle before me includes an article from
    The Times on 2 April 2018, indicating that in November 2014, as part of
    a wider Kremlin attempt to destabilise Ukraine and prepare  for  Russia
    to move west into the Zaporizhzhia region, where the claimant lived,  a
    plan by Alexei Muratov included contacting sympathisers  in  the  local
    police and the SBU.  The plot was revealed by a  network  of  Ukrainian
    hackers.  This is  supportive  of  the  claimant's  assertion  that  he
    thought that his second SBU handler wanted him to  assist  in  damaging
    the Ukrainian  National  Bank,  creating  a  crisis  in  the  Ukraine's
    financial services; it also supports his account of a pro-Maidan hacker
    and fundraising community.

63. The US State Department report  for  2017,  published  in  April  2018,
    confirmed a climate of impunity for SBU officials who committed abuses,
    in particular regarding allegations of torture.   The  UN  Subcommittee
    had no difficulty in crediting  numerous  and  serious  allegations  of
    torture and mistreatment of individuals under the control of  the  SBU,
    or during periods of  unofficial  detention.   There  was  a  continued
    pattern of arbitrary detention by the authorities, concerns about  fair
    trial  issues,  including  demands  for   high   bail   sureties,   and
    intimidation and attacks against lawyers and unlawful searches.

64.  The  National  Bank  had  a  political  profile:  in  2015  the   Kyiv
    Administrative Court  of  Appeal  had  overturned  a  decision  by  the
    National  Bank  that  Crimean  IDPs  were  non-residents  of   Ukraine,
    restricting access to banking and financial services for those  fleeing
    the Russian occupation.

Submissions

65. Mr Melvin in his skeleton argument set out the history  of  the  appeal
    and the claimant's core  account.   He  argued  that  the  account  was
    littered with inconsistencies, implausibility and  credibility  issues,
    such that the Secretary of State did not accept the core account.   The
    only aspects accepted were the claimant's name and  nationality.   Even
    taken at its highest, the Secretary of State did not  accept  that  the
    claimant had demonstrated a need for  international  protection,  since
    there was sufficient protection from the Ukrainian authorities  against
    rogue state agents and officials.

66. At [8], Mr Melvin set out, then  characterised  as  not  credible,  the
    secrecy agreement which the SBU imposed on the claimant, as against the
    attempted prosecution now, bringing matters into the public domain.  He
    attacked the core account as highly or seriously implausible.  There is
    no reference  in the Secretary of  State's  skeleton  argument  to  any
    decided case, immigration rule or statutory authority.

67. The skeleton argument is a vigorously expressed disagreement  with  the
    claimant's evidence as expressed in his witness statement and those  of
    his wife and father, as well  as  with  the  evidence  of  the  country
    expert, Dr Turaeva-Hoehne.

68. The Secretary of State rejected the evidence of the country expert,  Dr
    Turaeva-Hoehne, in particular her  conclusion  that  the  claimant  had
    become caught up in political games played between pro-Maidan and  pro-
    Russian forces within the SBU.  The Secretary of  State  also  disputed
    the expert's assessment of the claimant's social media  skills,  and  a
    number of other matters in the  expert  report.   There  is  no  expert
    evidence for the Secretary of State before me.

69. In relation to the 23 translated documents, the skeleton argument  says
    that Mr Melvin would make or provide detailed  submissions  thereon  at
    the hearing and that the Upper Tribunal should consider them as part of
    the evidence as a whole, on Tanveer Ahmed principles.  No  attempt  was
    made in the skeleton argument to assess the claimant's account overall,
    with reference to those documents.

70. The Secretary of State rejected as implausible the  wife's  account  of
    her lack of awareness of the claimant's activities and her pressing the
    panic alarm and noted that while there was a witness statement from the
    claimant's father (the credibility of which was rejected) there was  no
    witness statement  from  the  wife's  parents.  The  skeleton  argument
    concludes by disagreeing with the core account.  The Secretary of State
    did not accept that there ever had been a sabotage plot to cripple  the
    National Bank servers, or that the claimant had undertaken social media
    research to pinpoint pro-Russian supporters.  The  Secretary  of  State
    would reject the totality of the claimant's core account.

71.  In  his  oral  submissions,  Mr  Melvin  continued  to   dispute   the
    plausibility and credibility of all the evidence given by the  claimant
    and his wife.  The claimant had no reason not to tell his wife what  he
    was doing. There was no evidence of the termination of  the  claimant's
    contract of employment with National Bank.

72. Mr Melvin argued that  there  was  very  little  corroboration  of  the
    sabotage plot, which never had any prospect of success, because it  was
    implausible that the  National  Bank  would  not  have  closed  circuit
    television cameras in the server rooms, a  fire  alarm,  and  far  more
    guards than the claimant said it did.  There was no evidence to support
    this supposition on the Secretary of State's behalf.

73. Mr Melvin submitted that it was not  reasonably  likely  that  the  SBU
    would use someone with this claimant's qualifications  and  experience,
    either for the internet research or  the  server  sabotage  plot.   The
    claimant's fear was of rogue pro-Russian SBU agents, not the  Ukrainian
    authorities and there was sufficiency of protection from the  Ukrainian
    authorities available to the claimant and his wife.

74. Mr Melvin asked me to find that the SBU would not have deferred to  the
    local police, nor would  the  police  have  refused  to  record  the  5
    February 2015 incident.  There was a lack of  police  evidence  overall
    and the news report of the shooting did not mention a second man in the
    car.

75. Mr Melvin argued that the 23 documents did not  indicate  a  continuing
    interest by the Ukrainian authorities in this claimant, nor that  there
    was still any criminal case against him. Mr Melvin did not content that
    the documents were totally unreliable, but asked the Tribunal to  treat
    them with caution.

76. Overall, Mr  Melvin  asked  the  Tribunal  to  find  the  core  account
    implausible in the extreme, like a plot from a Hollywood film.

77. For the claimant, Mr Bandegani provided a chronology,  which  has  been
    very helpful in writing this decision.  He also provided a glossary  of
    people and  places  relevant  to  this  claim.   As  this  decision  is
    anonymised, those  names  and  places  largely  do  not  appear  in  my
    decision.   Mr  Bandegani  argued  that  the  claimant's  account   was
    credible,  to  the  lower  standard   appropriate   for   international
    protection claims, if viewed fairly and in context.  There  followed  a
    good deal about the standard and burden of proof, the  role  of  expert
    evidence,  and the treatment of country information  which  it  is  not
    necessary to set out in this decision.

78. The skeleton argument set out the expert opinion and addendum,  so  far
    as relevant, and the contents of the 23 documents.  Mr Bandegani  asked
    the Tribunal to  find,  as  a  minimum,  that  the  claimant  had  been
    threatened by the SBU, that there were false charges against him,  that
    he had signed a false confession, that an attempt had been made to kill
    him, that the SBU tortured him in detention  and  that  the  claimant's
    name appeared on  a  wanted  list.   If  all  of  these  elements  were
    accepted, the claimant was at risk of persecution on return to Ukraine,
    as  set  out  in  VB  (Ukraine).    The   Ukrainian   authorities   had
    demonstrated repeatedly that they were unwilling or unable  to  provide
    him with protection: every attempt he made had either been thwarted  or
    led to further persecution.

79. The claimant's attempt at internal relocation to Lvov, some  700  miles
    from home, had not protected him.  He had been re-arrested by the  SBU,
    returned to his home area, and detained and tortured.  The claimant and
    his wife were refugees.

80. In his oral submissions, Mr Bandegani observed that Mr Melvin's  cross-
    examination had been wholly focused on plausibility, which was an error
    of law (see MM (DRC, plausibility) Democratic Republic of Congo  [2005]
    UKIAT 00019).

81. The Secretary of State had never had a case in this appeal, and despite
    Mr Melvin's  valiant  efforts  to  challenge  the  credibility  of  the
    claimant's account, his challenge amounted to no  more  than  assertion
    and speculation. The Secretary  of  State's  arguments  were  based  on
    supposition as to the putative practices of the National Bank  and  the
    Tribunal should give such supposition no weight. The Secretary of State
    had produced no expert evidence of his own, nor had  he  complied  with
    his own policy guidance and considered the 23 documents, which  he  had
    now had for almost 2  years.    The  country  evidence  (including  the
    Secretary of State's  own  country  of  origin  report)  supported  the
    claimant's account.

82. If the claimant were to be  returned  to  Ukraine,  and  there  was  an
    outstanding serious criminal charge against him, he would  be  detained
    again while it was resolved and VB & Anor  (draft  evaders  and  prison
    conditions : Ukraine) (CG) [2017] UKUT 79 (IAC) held that he was likely
    to suffer torture and/or a breach of  his  Article  3  ECHR  rights  in
    detention.

83. The Tribunal should prefer, and give the benefit of any doubt,  to  the
    claimant's account. The oral testimony of the claimant and his wife had
    been  entirely  consistent  with  their  written  account,   with   the
    documents, and with each other's evidence.   The  expert  evidence  was
    properly sourced and should be given weight: the expert was a member of
    an elite institution, the Max Planck Institute and very well  qualified
    to give an expert opinion in this appeal.  Her evidence  supported  the
    claimant's account.

84. There was no reason not to find the claimant's account and that of  his
    wife credible and the appeal should be allowed.

Discussion

85. The claimant's account is extremely detailed and backed by  documentary
    and expert evidence.  It must be seen in the context  of  the  internal
    turmoil in 2014/2015 in Ukraine, and the tension between the pro-Maidan
    and pro-Russian movements within the  country.   The  country  evidence
    which has been produced, including the expert evidence of  Dr  Turaeva-
    Hoehne, is highly consistent with the claimant's very detailed  account
    of his treatment after the appointment of his second SBU handler.   The
    23 translated documents support his account and that of  his  wife  and
    his father.

86. I have had regard to the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in  VB  &
    Anor (draft evaders and prison conditions: Ukraine) (CG) [2017] UKUT 79
    (IAC) that:

         "...2.   There is a real risk of anyone being returned  to  Ukraine
         as a convicted criminal sentenced to a term of imprisonment in that
         country being detained on arrival,  although  anyone  convicted  in
         absentia would probably be entitled  thereafter  to  a  retrial  in
         accordance with Article 412  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code  of
         Ukraine.

         3.   There is a real risk that  the  conditions  of  detention  and
         imprisonment in Ukraine would  subject  a  person  returned  to  be
         detained or imprisoned to a breach of Article 3 ECHR."

87. The charges laid against this claimant are extremely  serious  and  the
    attempts made by him and his family to seek  domestic  protection  have
    been unsuccessful, or perhaps worse, if the shooting of the  driver  of
    his car was, as the claimant believes, intended for him.   He has tried
    internal relocation, but without success.

88. I am satisfied, in the light of  the  evidence  before  me  and  having
    regard to the  lower  standard  of  proof  applicable  to  the  Refugee
    Convention, humanitarian protection and  Article  3  ECHR  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that the account of the  claimant  and  his  wife  is
    true, and that the interest of the SBU and the Ukrainian authorities in
    him has not faded.  I find that there is a real risk that  if  returned
    now to Ukraine, he would be detained again and would not receive  bail.
    The  respondent  accepts  that  if  detained,  the  claimant  would  be
    subjected to conditions which breach Article 3 ECHR.

89. I have found the claimant's  account  to  be  credible,  including  his
    account of past persecution: I accept that he was subjected to chlorine
    gas torture in his cell.  He says he continues to  have  breathing  and
    gastric problems arising from that, but there is no medical evidence of
    his present health.  At [42] in VB and  another,   the  Upper  Tribunal
    found as follows:

         "42. It is clear from paragraph 23 of the [European  Committee  for
         the Prevention of  Torture  and  Inhuman  or  Degrading  Treatment]
         report that [in 2014] there were still concerns about the effective
         investigation into allegations of torture  and  ill-treatment  from
         public officials, with the phenomena of torture being said to  have
         been "an issue of grave concern for the CPT since  the  Committee's
         first visit to Ukraine 15 years ago". In relation to those held  in
         Kiev by internal affairs officials in ITT facilities the  Committee
         found that since the entry into force of the new CCP the  instances
         of severe physical abuse had reduced although there were still many
         detained persons who complained of physical ill treatment  such  as
         punches, kicks and being hit with  hard  objects,  and  threats  of
         beatings. The improvement in relation to such matters  was  not  as
         good in other regions outside Kiev and there were also  allegations
         of treatment which was severe enough to amount to torture  such  as
         being  suspended,  the  use  of  electric  shocks,   burning   with
         cigarettes and asphyxiation. CPT conclude that  the  phenomenon  of
         ill-treatment is a long way from  being  overcome  and  has  become
         closely  connected  with  corrupt  practices.  There   were   great
         improvements in relation to this issue at Kiev and Simferopol SIZOs
         where no complaints of ill-treatment by staff were made,  but  this
         was not the  case  at  Odessa  and  Dnipropetrovsk  SIZOs.  In  the
         correctional  colonies  and  in  the  closed  prisons  improvements
         relating to staff ill-treatment were found, but  in  both  cases  a
         group of inmates was being used to ill-treat others at  the  behest
         of the prison authorities."

90. I have regard also to paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules:

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

91. On the evidence before me, I am not  satisfied  that  in  this  appeal,
    there are good reasons to consider  that  this  claimant,  if  detained
    again, will not suffer similar ill-treatment amounting  to  persecution
    or serious harm. I do  consider  that  it  is  likely  that  there  are
    outstanding criminal charges against him  and  that  he  remains  on  a
    wanted list, having absconded while on bail.  I therefore  consider  it
    reasonably likely that on return  to  Ukraine  the  claimant  would  be
    detained for further investigation, triggering the Article 3 ECHR  risk
    identified in VB and others.

92. The claimant's appeal is therefore allowed.

DECISION

93. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.


   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by allowing the
   claimant's appeal.


Date:         9 October 2018                 Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson

                                 Appendix A

                     Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

Claimant's evidence

 1. The claimant adopted his witness statement of 5 September 2017.  He was
    born in 1986 in Zaporozhye in south-eastern Ukraine, 142 miles west  of
    Donetsk and almost 700 miles away from Lviv in the west. He went to  an
    aviation college and graduated, after four years of study, as a  Junior
    Specialist in Computing Networking in 2005.  He considers  this  to  be
    the equivalent of an undergraduate diploma in the United Kingdom.   The
    claimant supported himself by working as an electronic  engineer  in  a
    factory, building aviation engines,  but  was  quickly  transferred  to
    their IT department where he was responsible for computer networking.

 2.  He  next  worked  at  an  internet  provider,  Radiocom,  as  engineer
    programmer, while pursuing his studies  at  Kiev  Slavonic  University,
    about 350 miles from his home  town.   He  graduated  in  2007  with  a
    Masters degree in Information Technology.  He received two job  offers,
    one as a system administrator for the SBU, and one  from  the  National
    Bank of Ukraine.  The claimant had not completed his  military  service
    and considered that this would disadvantage him in the SBU, so he chose
    the National Bank post.  His role at the National Bank was as a systems
    analyst, maintaining the National Bank's servers and computer systems.

 3. The claimant was interested, but not active, in Ukrainian politics.  In
    spring 2014, he became very concerned by what was happening in Ukraine.
     Russia had annexed Crimea and  sponsored  the  'independence'  of  two
    oblasts in the Donbas region in eastern Ukraine, Donetsk  and  Luhansk.
    In other areas of Russia, those  loyal  to  the  Ukrainian  state  were
    seeking to support the military effort: the President  of  Ukraine  was
    refusing to fund the military effort.  Following the outbreak of war in
    the Donbas, the army was in  a  bad  way  and  loyal  Ukrainians  began
    raising funds to help  the  military  effort  by  buying  clothing  and
    weapons for the army.

 4. The fundraising took place mainly online with  crowdfunding  pages  and
    websites.  Some of the pages were obvious  scams,  opening,  collecting
    money, and then closing down suddenly and vanishing, but  overall,  the
    effort seemed worthwhile and from June 2014, the claimant spent an hour
    or two every day  online  involving  himself  in  the  military  effort
    online, creating and managing a group on social media and setting up  a
    website, [ ~ ], and a Facebook page for the  volunteers.  The  claimant
    continued to do this work for about 6 months, until the  end  of  2014.
    He never fought, or picked up a gun, and he did not meet the people  he
    was working with, except electronically.

 5. The claimant had married his wife in June 2014.  She  was  a  freelance
    writer.  His father was a security  guard  in  another  bank,  and  his
    mother was a sales assistant.  He has an older half-brother  who  is  a
    warehouse assistant.  His wife's father is a plumber in the theatre and
    security guard.

 6. Towards the end of October 2014, the claimant received a telephone call
    from an SBU Major who wanted some information about another  volunteer.
     The claimant did not know the person, except as a name,  but  the  SBU
    Major then invited the claimant for a meeting to 'help him to find  out
    a few things'.  He was asked about his work at the National  Bank,  the
    team spirit at work, and the attitudes towards the war.  He  was  asked
    to assist the SBU on a voluntary basis for a couple of hours  or  so  a
    day.

 7. The Major explained that the SBU was monitoring social  network  safety
    but that the Russian Secret Service's activities were so high that they
    could not manage with their existing resources.  He asked the  claimant
    to help them by monitoring the internet for new separatist groups, with
    the names of those involved, threats towards volunteers  and  Ukrainian
    patriots.  He was also asked to keep an eye out for pages  where  money
    was collected but not remitted to the Ukrainian army.  The  Major  said
    that at some time, the claimant would take part in an SBU operation.

 8. The claimant stopped spending very much time on the fundraising website
    and page, turning his attention instead to  the  SBU  work.   He  would
    spend an hour, or an hour and a half, every day, and  email  the  Major
    twice a week with a spreadsheet of the information he had tracked down.
    The SBU gave him a special email address to use for  this,  but  he  no
    longer has access to it.

 9. On 5 January 2015, the claimant was invited to the  SBU  office  again.
    The Major said that he was being moved on, and that the claimant's work
    for the SBU would now be managed by a different person  (the  handler).
    The new handler met the claimant that day.  He wanted to know  a  great
    deal about the claimant's work at  the  National  Bank;  the  equipment
    used, his access to rooms within the bank, and in particular, to server
    rooms.  The claimant said that he had access to all the National Bank's
    networks.  The new handler listened carefully.

10. The claimant  continued  with  his  raw  information  searches  on  the
    internet until the end of January 2015, when he was asked to return  to
    the SBU office.  He described the building, the guards, their  uniforms
    and arms.   He  signed  in,  and  signed  a  non-disclosure  agreement,
    agreeing not to discuss anything he spoke about, even  with  his  wife.
    He was warned that if he breached the agreement, he would be punished.

11. The claimant was told that he would now take part in an SBU  operation.
    He was to assist in 'checking and inspecting the security protection of
    the National Bank and its capability to protect itself from  separatist
    attack or to withstand a cyber-attack'.  An  SBU  technical  specialist
    would give him the technical details later. On 3 February 2015, he  met
    the technical specialist in a park.  He was told  the  plan:   when  he
    finished his shift at 10 p.m. on Friday 6 February 2015,  the  claimant
    was to turn off the air conditioning in the server room, and change the
    information server settings, deleting the telephone numbers of National
    Bank employees who would  normally  receive  warning  messages  if  the
    server temperature began to rise.

12. The rising temperature would 'collapse' all the equipment in the server
    room.  On Monday 9 February 2015, on his early shift, the claimant  was
    to be first in and to make sure all the equipment had  been  destroyed.
    If the information server was still working, he was  to  reinstall  the
    employee telephone numbers and delete all  system  logs,  to  hide  his
    actions on the Friday.  The technical specialist said that at  0800  on
    Monday 9 February 2015, there would be a telephone  call  saying  there
    was a bomb in the National Bank building.  Everyone would be evacuated,
    and this would take about 3 hours.  The SBU would use  this  period  to
    prevent the managers knowing what had happened to the  server,  and  to
    put the systems back on.  The intention of the operation  would  be  to
    find out how long it would take to get the system back up  and  running
    after an attack.

13. The claimant was reluctant.  He  told  the  technical  specialist  that
    there was no reserve equipment and that to  restore  the  whole  system
    would take quite a long period of time.  The  server  system  was  very
    costly, and cost millions.  He could not see  the  sense  or  logic  in
    breaking the system.  The technical specialist said that the  operation
    had been planned at a high level and was not negotiable: the claimant's
    job and  that  of  the  technical  specialist  was  to  carry  out  the
    instructions.  They were soldiers and should fulfil the  mission.   The
    claimant neither accepted nor refused  the  task  and  they  parted  on
    reasonably good terms.

14. The claimant met the technical specialist again two days  later,  on  5
    February 2015, just a day before the operation was due  to  occur.   He
    said he was not going to carry out the operation: it did not look  like
    a standard checking operation, but rather, a sabotage  to  destroy  the
    National Bank systems.  The technical  specialist  became  threatening.
    He said maybe the claimant did not understand that he could not  refuse
    to take part; if he refused, he would have problems both in his  career
    and in his personal life, and they would find someone to do it.

15. The claimant said  that  his  agreement  with  the  SBU  was  only  for
    analytical help, not destroying the  server  systems  of  the  National
    Bank. He tried to  explain:  such  action  would  stop  all  electronic
    banking in the region, both commercial and personal, and cause  a  mass
    panic.  He refused to take part and left.

16. After the meeting, the claimant reflected on the way home.  He  thought
    that his new handler, and the handler's SBU superiors might  be  linked
    pro-Russian rogue security operatives in the Ukrainian  government  and
    that they wanted to sabotage the National Bank.  He decided to warn the
    National Bank's head of security in case SBU did find someone  else  to
    carry out the job.

17. It took the claimant about an hour to get back to  his  home:  two  men
    were waiting for him there, and attacked him as  he  opened  the  door,
    handcuffing him and pushing him into his  flat.   They  handcuffed  his
    wife, too, and told her to be quiet.  They pointed guns at them.   They
    called his handler, who came to the flat and told the claimant that  he
    had no choice.  While he undertook the work, his  wife  would  be  held
    hostage:  the handler left, and the other two men told  the  claimant's
    wife to collect belongings for the next two days.  When  in  the  other
    room, she activated a panic button in the flat.  The claimant  and  his
    wife subscribed to a panic button service with a private department  of
    the police force, paying a monthly amount so that  they  could  receive
    prompt assistance if attacked by thieves in their home.

18. The panic button brought a swift  response.   Less  than  five  minutes
    later, the security officers arrived  and  asked  the  SBU  men  for  a
    document giving them authority to intrude  into  the  claimant's  flat.
    The SBU men showed their SBU identity cards.  The claimant and his wife
    were screaming that the SBU men wanted to take them as  hostages.   The
    security men said that all of them (including the SBU men) should go to
    the police station and file a report.  The SBU took the  handcuffs  off
    the claimant and his wife, but refused to attend  the  police  station.
    As they left, they told the  couple  that  it  would  be  'the  end  of
    [them]'.

19. The claimant and his wife went to the police  station,  but  when  they
    mentioned that the attackers were SBU men, the police refused  to  help
    or to file any report.  They said it was a matter for  the  prosecutor.
    By then, it was 8 p.m. and the prosecutor's  office  was  closed.   The
    police said they could not protect  the  claimant  and  his  wife;  the
    claimant's wife was hysterical, so he decided they would stay away from
    their flat and go to stay with a friend.  He called his wife's  father,
    who took them to the friend's house for the night.

20. The next day, Friday 6 February 2015, was to have been the day  of  the
    sabotage.  The claimant called the National Bank head of  security  and
    told him that SBU officers had asked him to help sabotage  the  banking
    system. He said he was afraid for his life, and that of his  wife,  and
    would not be coming to work.  He had no doubt by  this  time  that  the
    intention of the SBU handler and technical specialist was criminal,  to
    sabotage the National Bank.  He was scared, frightened for his life: he
    tried to compose a letter to the prosecutor, but  could  not  find  the
    right words.

21. At 2 p.m. on that Friday, the claimant's  parents  told  him  that  SBU
    members had been to the parents' flat looking for the claimant, and had
    raided the claimant's  flat,  taking  his  laptop  and  computer.   The
    claimant decided to relocate to Lvov in  Western  Ukraine,  almost  700
    miles away, where he hoped that they would be  safe.   The  couple  had
    been to Lvov several times but had no friends or  acquaintances  there.
    They could not return to their flat or put their  parents  at  risk  by
    staying with them; they needed to start afresh.

22. The couple arrived in Lvov on Monday 9  February  2015,  travelling  by
    private hire car and rented a flat through a private agency.

23. On 14 February 2015, the  claimant  wrote  a  letter  to  the  District
    Prosecutor, giving his parents' address for  correspondence.   In  mid-
    March 2015, the prosecutor responded, saying  that  the  SBU  had  done
    nothing wrong and that all information about the SBU would be  sent  to
    the SBU office.

24. On 1 March 2015, the claimant's parents were taken to the  SBU  office,
    where they were told that the claimant was  on  a  wanted  list  and  a
    criminal case had been opened against  him.   They  told  the  claimant
    about this, and he decided to  try  contacting  the  head  of  the  SBU
    office, explaining his  unofficial  SBU  work  (finding  and  analysing
    information online) and what he had been asked  to  do  with  the  bank
    servers.  He asked the head of the SBU to resolve the problem.

25. While in Lvov, the couple lived on their  savings,  not  working  while
    they  were  there.  They  withdrew  money  and  spent  money   in   the
    supermarket.  On 31 March 2015, the  claimant  was  accosted  by  plain
    clothes officers at the doorway to the flat they were  renting,  having
    been tracked down by his electronic money transactions.  Officers  from
    the Lvov SBU arrested and handcuffed the claimant, took him up  to  the
    flat, and arrested his wife too.  They took the couple's laptop  and  a
    couple of flash disks.  They were taken separately to  the  SBU  office
    and kept separately overnight.  The next  day,  they  were  transferred
    back to their home town, in the same van.  The claimant's wife  was  no
    longer handcuffed, but he was.

26. On 1 April 2015, the claimant was taken to the SBU office in  his  home
    town and questioned.  He was asked if he  had  told  anyone  about  the
    sabotage plot, and whether his wife was aware he had been working  with
    the SBU.  He told them she was not.  They released  her  and  sent  her
    home.  They knew about the call he had made to the security officer  at
    National Bank.

27. The next day the claimant was taken to Court and  charged  with  crimes
    involving plotting  to  destroy  the  National  Bank  server.   He  was
    remanded in custody for 60 days, while the investigations were  carried
    out.  He was questioned, then put in a damp  unpleasant  cell,  without
    access  to  legal  representation,  although  he  paid  for  a  private
    solicitor.  The claimant's  wife  wrote  to  the  regional  prosecutor,
    explaining  what  happened:  the  officer  who  was  interrogating  the
    claimant contacted her and said that if she did not stop contacting the
    prosecutor, the claimant's wife would also be detained.

28. On 28 May 2015, the claimant was brought before the  Judge  again,  and
    returned to custody for a  further  60  days,  in  isolation.   He  was
    interrogated again and asked to cooperate by leaving  the  SBU  handler
    and technical specialist out of his account and  instead  giving  false
    evidence against two named people, to say that they had  asked  him  to
    destroy the server.  The named people were involved  in  politics;  the
    statement was already written and ready to sign, but the claimant would
    not sign it. One of the political men was  arrested,  even  though  the
    claimant had not named him, and the claimant was questioned about  that
    man in the man's presence.

29. The claimant was held in an isolation unit. He could neither  lie  down
    nor sit down during the day.  If he tried to  sit  on  the  floor,  the
    guards beat him.  On 17 June 2015,  they  began  to  torture  him  with
    chlorine fumes in the sink, handcuffing the claimant to the  cell  bar.
    The room would fill with fumes and the claimant would feel  suffocated,
    his eyes sore, and his throat burning.  After about an hour,  he  would
    faint.  This happened once a week for three weeks; the  claimant  could
    not eat for an entire week because his throat was so sore, and he still
    has a dry throat and burning  sensation  there,  as  well  as  allergic
    reactions on his face which previously he did not have.

30. Finally, on 6 July 2015, the claimant signed the false  statement.   He
    was taken on 20 July 2015 to the SBU office to be questioned  in  front
    of the political accused. The claimant could not look him in  the  eye,
    but he gave the false evidence.  They beat up the accused in  front  of
    the claimant.  In a brief conversation between the two men, the accused
    man asked what the claimant had been promised, to say these things; the
    accused man said that if they had promised to set  the  claimant  free,
    they would kill him.  The claimant does not know what happened  to  the
    man.

31. On 28 July 2015, the claimant had a bail hearing and was granted  bail,
    conditional on payment of money and an undertaking  not  to  leave  the
    country.  On 30 July 2015, his wife raised the money, and he was freed.
     They went home, but did not feel safe.  The claimant tried to  contact
    the office of the Ukrainian  President,  because  his  letters  to  the
    prosecutors and the head of SBU  had  not  achieved  anything.   On  15
    August 2015, he had a private meeting with  the  President's  assistant
    who was charged with SBU matters.  He  showed  the  assistant  all  the
    documents he had; the assistant promised protection and that  he  would
    investigate.

32. The claimant heard no more, but on 28 August 2015, his car was shot  at
    in the centre of town. The claimant was not in the  driver's  seat:  he
    had been selling the car to raise money for his bail, and the  intended
    purchaser, a friend of the claimant's father, was driving.  The  friend
    was badly injured; the claimant escaped uninjured.  The assailants  all
    had plain clothes and balaclava face masks.   The police came and  took
    a statement then let the claimant go.  He overheard their controller on
    the radio, asking whether the claimant was hurt, and  using  his  name.
    the controller asked twice if the policeman was sure that the  claimant
    was not hurt.  The claimant realised the bullets  had  been  meant  for
    him.  He left the police officer his mobile telephone number and called
    his wife, asking her to collect his belongings.

33. The couple fled.  They got a  lift  from  a  friend  to  a  place  near
    Donetsk, and paid an acquaintance of his father's friend  US  $1000  to
    get them into Russian-occupied territory.  Once in Donetsk, they bought
    coach  tickets  to  Rostov-na-Donu,  and  crossed  into  Russia,  using
    Ukrainian internal passports which were valid for  entry  into  Russia.
    They were stopped at the border and asked  why  they  were  travelling,
    then allowed to proceed.

34. At about the  same  time,  another  friend  paid  $500  to  immigration
    officials for the return of the  couple's  external  travel  passports,
    which had  been  with  the  Ukrainian  authorities  for  the  issue  of
    duplicate  passports,  a  common  practice  in  Ukraine.   The   friend
    organised tickets from Moscow  to  Hong  Kong,  transiting  the  United
    Kingdom. The claimant's parents paid for the  tickets,  another  $1000.
    The couple did not claim asylum in Russia: human rights are worse there
    and his history of helping raise funds for the Ukrainian army  was  not
    likely to endear him to the Russian authorities.  He  feared  detention
    without investigation or trial and did not know what  would  happen  to
    him.

35. The couple claimed asylum  as  soon  as  they  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The claimant says he fears  return  to  Ukraine  because  SBU
    agents had already tried to kill him, and  because  of  the  fabricated
    case against him.  His wife had received a summons after  he  left  the
    country (although she had also left).  The claimant could not prove his
    innocence or protect himself. He had been attacked after being promised
    protection from the President's  assistant.   The  police  and  several
    different prosecution offices had not assisted him.

36. The claimant was asked no supplementary questions and was tendered  for
    cross-examination.  Mr Melvin's cross-examination  is  recorded  in  my
    notes and consisted principally of asking  the  claimant  questions  to
    which he replied as set out above.  It is not necessary to set out  the
    cross-examination in full.  Mr Melvin put it to the  claimant  that  he
    should have told his employer much sooner what he was  being  asked  to
    do: the claimant's response was that he had  signed  a  confidentiality
    agreement, and that he was trying to persuade the SBU  not  to  proceed
    with the plan.  Once he realised that they would try  to  find  someone
    else to undertake the sabotage, and  at  some  personal  risk,  he  did
    inform his employer what was planned.

37. The claimant said that he had not told his wife of  his  internet  work
    for the SBU, nor the  National  Bank  server  sabotage  plot,  for  two
    reasons, first that he had signed a confidentiality clause, the  breach
    of which was a criminal offence, and second, that he wanted to  protect
    her.  He had been obliged to tell her something of  the  National  Bank
    server sabotage plot after the kidnap incident on 5 February 2015,  but
    had not told her the full story of his  unofficial  work  for  the  SBU
    until they were in Moscow.  His precautions to  protect  his  wife  had
    been successful: when they were arrested on 31  March  2015,  his  wife
    genuinely knew nothing and was quickly released.

38. The claimant said that generally speaking, the bank and  the  SBU  were
    still on the same side, but locally, there could  be  people  who  were
    corrupted.  In the Donbas regions, the SBU were  supporting  separatist
    pro-Russian movements.  At his workplace, there were  some  individuals
    who were obviously on the side of Russia, but the claimant's  view  was
    that if there was any pro-Russian movement, there would  be  a  lot  of
    victims.  Nothing had changed.

39. Asked why the SBU would want to damage the National Bank, the  claimant
    said that there were two possibilities: either there  were  pro-Russian
    rogue agents within the SBU who wanted to damage the Ukrainian  banking
    system, or there were corrupted people higher up in the SBU.

40. Mr Melvin asked why the SBU would use someone like  the  claimant,  who
    had no apparent expertise.  I found that line of questioning  difficult
    to follow, given the claimant's experience and qualifications.

41. The claimant explained how the damage would have  worked.  If  the  air
    conditioning was switched off, the processors would overheat  and  burn
    out.  There were about 15  working  networking  servers  at  the  bank.
    There was insufficient spare equipment.  The National Bank  had  closed
    circuit television cameras only at the  entrance,  not  in  the  server
    room.

42. The claimant's working hours were shifts, either from 1 pm to 10 pm  or
    from 8 am to 5 pm.  There would have been nothing extraordinary in  his
    being there at 10 pm on the 6 February 2015 to undertake the  sabotage,
    and returning early to reinstall the telephone numbers  and  so  forth.
    There were to his knowledge only two security guards, one at  the  till
    where the money was stored, and one at  the  entrance;  if  there  were
    others, he had not seen them in all the  time  he  had  worked  at  the
    National Bank.

43. The claimant confirmed that his father's friend, to whom he was  trying
    to sell his car, was sitting in the front  seat  when  the  shots  were
    fired.  The claimant was in the back seat and was very lucky not to  be
    hit.  The police took his statement from him while he  was  sitting  in
    the car, just as a witness, and let him go after about  half  an  hour.
    He did not think that the police realised he  was  on  bail  when  they
    interviewed him, or he might have been detained again.

44. The press report indicated that the driver survived, but  the  claimant
    and his wife left immediately, so he could not be sure what the outcome
    had been.  He had not been in  contact  with  the  man  to  ask  for  a
    statement confirming that he was shot, nor had he asked for any  police
    report of the incident, but he had  produced  a  media  report  of  the
    event.

45. The claimant was sure the criminal case was still  outstanding  against
    him in Ukraine.  His father had asked their lawyer, who  said  that  if
    the claimant was outside Ukraine, the case could be kept  open  for  as
    long as 15 years.

46. The claimant was asked about his cooperation  with  the  investigation,
    following the second detention during which he was  tortured.   He  had
    identified as co-conspirators two political persons who were not really
    involved in the sabotage.  The claimant said one was  still  in  prison
    for killing a member of the SBU.  The other remained a  Deputy  in  the
    Ukrainian Parliament.

47. There was no re-examination.

Wife's evidence

48. The claimant's wife adopted her statement of 27  June  2016.   She  was
    born in 1991 and grew up in the same town as the claimant.  She  has  a
    Master's degree in Ecology from the National University of  Zaporozhye.
     She is a freelance writer and copywriter, working privately,  not  for
    any particular organisation.

49. The couple met in the autumn of 2010 and married on 14 June 2014.  They
    did not live together before marriage, although she visited him at  his
    flat from time to time.  The wife knew nothing about the claimant's SBU
    activities  until  the  kidnap  incident  on  5  February  2015.    Her
    description of  what  happened  matches  that  of  the  claimant.   She
    described being 'deeply disappointed' and unable  to  sleep,  screaming
    and shouting at her husband, when she learned that the  flat  had  been
    raided in their absence. It was not easy to move to Lviv, far away from
    friends and family and their usual lives: they were sure that it  would
    not be for long.

50. The wife described her interview on  1  April  2015,  after  they  were
    transferred back to their home town.  She was asked  whether  she  knew
    about the bank sabotage; she said she knew that some people  had  asked
    her husband to damage a network system in the National  Bank  where  he
    worked; she did not know the  people  involved.    She  knew  that  her
    husband had written to the SBU from Lviv.  She signed a  non-disclosure
    agreement and was released, then went to her parents' home, as she  was
    afraid to be in the couple's own flat.

51. The wife then described being informed of the Court judgment, trying to
    get a lawyer for her husband, and  the  advice  given  to  her  private
    lawyer that he should not handle the case.  After that, he just  agreed
    to 'provide consultation regarding the official complaint...to back  my
    husband was beyond his power or possibility'.  The lawyer  declined  to
    take the case.

52. The wife tried many times to see  her  husband,  or  to  get  from  the
    prosecution service the reason why her husband had been  arrested,  and
    the crime with which he was charged.  The only result was that the  SBU
    investigator  threatened  that  if  she  pursued  a  complaint  to  the
    prosecution service, there would be no outcome but she would be charged
    as a co-conspirator in the same offence.   The wife was able to see the
    claimant briefly at Court on 28 May 2015: he  'seemed  very  awful  and
    lost some weight'.  It was a closed hearing, and she was not  permitted
    to attend. The court-appointed lawyer was no help to the  claimant  and
    would  not  even  allow  her  to  visit,  without  the   investigator's
    permission.  She became distressed, very nervous, and hysterical.   Her
    parents persuaded her to see a private psychiatrist and  she  had  five
    therapy sessions and some herbal medication.  It did not help her much.

53. Despite the threats, the wife persisted  in  trying  to  challenge  the
    claimant's incarceration.  She appealed to the  Prosecutor  General  of
    Ukraine, asking whether the arrest, and the procedure  of  leaving  him
    without legal representation, were legal.  She attached  the  responses
    from the local prosecution service and the SBU.  She told them that her
    husband was innocent and  complained  that  the  investigator  was  not
    allowing her to see him.

54. The claimant was finally released on bail, after his wife collected the
    sum of UAH 300,000 (about �8000), on 30 July 2015.  He  was  completely
    changed; closed in, nervous, and very weak.  He  slept  badly  and  had
    lost weight.  He had problems with his stomach and an allergic reaction
    with spores on his face.  She tried to persuade him to go to  hospital,
    but he would not do so without  protection.   The  wife  described  the
    claimant's attempt to seek protection from the Office of the  Ukrainian
    President.

55. Following the attack on the claimant's car, they knew they had  to  go,
    to leave before the SBU were informed of the situation and could react.
     If they knew he was still alive, they  might  detain  him  again:  she
    thought the traffic police who responded probably did not  have  orders
    to detain the claimant.  The wife's statement concludes:

         "40. So we arrived in Donetsk, and from there we passed the  border
         towards Russia by bus and reached Rostov na Donu and from there  to
         Moscow.  In Moscow we rented a flat.  After  that,  we  decided  to
         claim asylum in one of the European countries,  as  in  Russia,  we
         cannot rely on any help and justice relating to  our  case.   Also,
         because of our situation involving Russia and Ukraine, the personal
         case of my husband indirectly relates to Russia, which  is  at  war
         with Ukraine, and Russia is not a  democratic  country.   Hence  we
         could not come back to Ukraine, as we were threatened to  die.   It
         was one attempt to kill my husband already.  There is a  very  high
         probability that they will do it  again.   If  my  husband  is  not
         killed, certainly as soon as he comes back to the country, he  will
         be  imprisoned  without  any  rights  to  have  a  lawyer  or   any
         protection, as all authorities  in  our  country  relating  to  our
         trouble we many times requested them to help us.  We contacted  all
         the institutions  relating  to  justice  and  law,  however  nobody
         helped. ..."

56. The wife confirmed that  local  SBU  agents  questioned  both  sets  of
    parents after they left the country, trying  to  find  out  where  they
    were, where they went, and whether they had left the country.

57. In September 2015, a letter was sent to their home address,  forfeiting
    the recognisance.  The wife thought the Ukrainian authorities  probably
    knew the claimant had left the country by then.

58. The wife was tendered for cross-examination. Mr  Melvin  explored  when
    they had met, and how well the wife knew the layout of their  flat,  so
    that she was able to use the panic  button.   The  wife  had  not  been
    involved with any of her husband's volunteering  work:  they  each  had
    their privacy and it was a matter for him.  She knew he was working  to
    help raise money for the army,  and  to  provide  people  with  correct
    information about what was happening in Ukraine and in the  Donbas  and
    Crimea regions.  The wife was very upset at first when  she  found  out
    about his work for the SBU, because she had not  been  aware  what  was
    happening, but now she understood that it had been for her own safety.

59. The  remaining  questions  asked  by  Mr  Melvin  elicited  information
    matching the wife's witness statement and do not need  to  be  set  out
    here.

60. There was no re-examination.

Father's witness statements

61. The claimant's father made a witness statement on 5 May 2016.  He  said
    he was born in 1957 and a citizen of Ukraine, as was his wife. They had
    two sons, who  lived  separately  from  them.   The  younger  was  this
    claimant.

62. The claimant had not told his parents  of  his  problems,  probably  to
    avoid worrying them.  The first they knew of it was that on 6  February
    2015 (the day after the SBU incursion into  the  claimant's  flat)  SBU
    officers came to the parents' home.  They said that  the  claimant  and
    his wife were suspected of a serious crime, and they wanted  to  search
    the house, to see whether they were hiding there.  The father asked  to
    see a search warrant, but the SBU did not have one.

63. The father asked what crime his son and daughter-in-law  were  supposed
    to have committed.  The SBU responded by threatening him and he said he
    would call the police.  'Things were heating up': the father agreed  to
    let the SBU search the house.  They did  not  find  the  young  people.
    When leaving, the SBU said it would be best if  the  claimant  and  his
    wife handed themselves in to the SBU.

64. After they left, the father  tried  to  call  either  his  son  or  his
    daughter-in-law.  Their telephones were 'out of reach'.  He called  the
    wife's father, who knew nothing about the  problems,  nor  where  their
    children were.   One of  the  claimant's  neighbours  rang  his  father
    later, to say that the SBU had searched the  claimant's  apartment  and
    she had been asked to be a witness.

65. At about 20:30 the claimant called.  The father and  mother  were  very
    worried: the claimant's mother had taken sedatives to  calm  her.   The
    claimant said not to worry, they were not guilty, and  he  would  prove
    it, but for now they would have to disappear to  avoid  being  arrested
    illegally.  The father did not ask where they  were  staying,  and  the
    claimant did not say.  The father told the claimant of the  SBU  search
    at the parents' home.  He agreed to keep Skype on  all  the  time:  the
    claimant would contact them when he could.

66. On 1 March 2015, the  claimant's  parents  were  summoned  to  SBU  for
    questioning.  They were told that  a  criminal  case  had  been  opened
    against the claimant under Articles 15, 113, 361  of  Ukraine  Criminal
    Code:  attempt to commit a crime, sabotage,  unauthorised  intervention
    in the operation of computers, automated systems, computer networks  or
    telecommunications networks.  They were asked where  the  claimant  was
    and informed that he was on a Ukraine-wide wanted list. Towards the end
    of March, they received a letter from the Prosecutor's Office addressed
    to the claimant.  They did not open it, waiting for him to get in touch
    and tell them to do so.

67. On the night of 1 April 2015, the claimant's  father-in-law  telephoned
    the claimant's father.  The claimant's wife was in her  parents'  home.
    Her father asked the claimant's father to come  urgently,  saying  that
    the claimant was in pre-trial detention.  The  claimant's  father  went
    immediately to their home.  He found the claimant's  wife  shaking  all
    over and very shocked.  Her account came out gradually; she  still  did
    not know the exact reason why they had  been  persecuted,  because  the
    claimant had not told her.  she did know that at  the  end  of  January
    2015, some people had ordered him  to  disable  the  equipment  at  the
    National Bank where he worked.  She believed he had been offered a  lot
    of money to do so, but had refused.  The people had then tried to force
    him  to  comply,  even  breaking  into  their  flat.   Her  account  as
    remembered by the claimant's father matches the account  she  gives  in
    her evidence.

68. They were up all night, discussing the situation.  On 2 April 2015,  as
    they calmed down a little,  the  families  began  to  consider  how  to
    proceed.  They decided it was important to get a good lawyer, and  some
    friends gave them a name.  The families  decided  that  the  claimant's
    wife would deal with getting him released, and  the  parents  would  do
    nothing without consulting her.   The  next  day,  3  April  2015,  the
    claimant's wife went to see the lawyer, who agreed to  act,  reassuring
    her and promising to help.  He discovered that on  2  April  2015,  the
    Court had already decided that the claimant's detention would  continue
    to 30 May 2015.  A few days  later,  the  lawyer  was  intimidated  and
    refused to continue to act.  The families were unable to  find  another
    lawyer.

69. On 28 May 2015, there was a further hearing at the Court.   Nobody  was
    allowed to enter the courtroom.  The claimant's wife was able to  speak
    very briefly with him before the hearing.  The pre-trial detention  was
    extended for another 60 days.   The  claimant's  wife  complained,  but
    without success.

70. At the end of July there was a third hearing. The claimant had begun to
    cooperate with  the  investigation.  With  the  agreement  of  the  SBU
    investigator, bail was granted,  subject  to  payment  of  UAH  300,000
    (about �8000).  The claimant's parents were not in a position to  raise
    that amount, but his wife borrowed it from some friends  and  paid  the
    bail money so that he could be released.

71. On 30 July 2015, the claimant's parents, his wife, and her parents  all
    met him outside the detention facility.  He had a tired, haggard  look.
    They took him back to the claimant's apartment where he  told  them  he
    had been cleared of suspicion.  They  believed  him,  and  thought  the
    worst was behind the family, but it turned out later that the  claimant
    was just trying to reassure his family: he was still in danger.

72. The claimant and his wife had no choice but to leave Ukraine  and  seek
    asylum in the United Kingdom.  The claimant's parents did not know they
    had left until 30 August 2015, when the claimant contacted his  parents
    on Skype: the couple were already in Moscow  by  then.   He  asked  his
    parents to pay for their flights to Europe, and  gave  his  father  the
    necessary details.

73. The claimant's parents keep in touch with their son on  Skype,  and  at
    his request, are keeping an eye on the claimant's flat.  They go  there
    twice a week, to water the plants and pick up post,  and  so  on.   The
    district police continue to visit the claimant's parents about  once  a
    month, asking them and their neighbours where the claimant and his wife
    had gone. In September 2015, the  post  at  the  apartment  included  a
    summons for the claimant's  wife  to  attend  a  Court  hearing  on  25
    September 2014.

74. In mid-November 2015, when  the  claimant's  father  was  checking  the
    apartment, a neighbour came out and said that in  early  November,  the
    district police had been to all the apartments  in  the  house,  asking
    when they had last seen the claimant,  where  they  might  be,  and  so
    forth, and left a card with his contact details if there were to be any
    news.  He returned to ask the neighbours the same questions in December
    2015 and February 2016.

75. At the end of November 2015, the claimant's parents were summoned to be
    questioned by the SBU.  The same investigator asked the questions.   He
    wanted to know where the claimant and his wife had gone, and when  they
    had last seen or talked to them.   The claimant's father said they  had
    left Ukraine, but the investigator did not believe them.  He  told  the
    claimant's parents that the claimant was on  a  wanted  list  all  over
    Ukraine and would not have been  able  to  leave  Ukrainian  territory;
    finding him was just a matter of time, and this time, he would  not  be
    granted bail.

76. The investigator said that it would be better for the  claimant  if  he
    handed himself in, and that if the claimant did  not  understand  this,
    his parents should help the authorities to locate him.  He asked  about
    the claimant's work for the National Bank, but the parents had  nothing
    to say on that; they still did not know the details.  The  investigator
    said it was a pity  the  parents  would  not  cooperate.   He  switched
    between persuasion and threats, saying that the parents would  be  held
    accountable and a criminal case would also be opened against  them,  if
    they continued to refuse to cooperate.

77. On 4 December  2015,  the  SBU  came  with  a  search  warrant  to  the
    claimant's parents' home.  His mother telephoned his  father  at  work:
    his father who left work and went home immediately  to  deal  with  the
    situation.  The parents were kept outside the house  while  the  search
    was conducted.  The SBU officers were rude, arrogant and barbaric,  not
    taking off their dirty shoes, overturning furniture aimlessly, so  that
    its contents fell on the floor, and breaking  kitchen  utensils.   They
    said they were looking for the claimant, and for  documents  and  other
    things  associated  with  his  case:  the  claimant's  father  did  not
    understand why, in that case, they needed  to  overturn  furniture  and
    break kitchen utensils, or rummage through  the  parents'  possessions.
    He told them again that the claimant and  his  wife  were  outside  the
    country.

78. On 7 December 2015, the father made a formal complaint  to  the  Deputy
    Prosecutor General of Ukraine about the illegal behaviour of  the  SBU.
    He hoped that this high-ranking  officer,  tasked  with  reforming  the
    Prosecutor's  Office,  would  understand  the  situation  and  view  it
    objectively. He set out everything that had happened and  asked  for  a
    legal assessment of the SBU's actions and the validity of the  criminal
    proceedings against his son.  He asked for the case to  be  transferred
    for investigation by the Special  Investigations  Agency  of  the  Head
    Office of the GPOU (the SIA).

79. In  January  2016,  the  claimant's  father  received  a  disappointing
    response: there were no grounds to refer the case to the SIA, but other
    matters would be transferred to a different department  for  oversight.
    The statement concludes:

         "I realised that if they did not see the violations of the law, and
         the other departments would hide everything.  That's how the system
         of covering up crimes of those  in  power  works  against  ordinary
         citizens of this country.

         The response of the General Prosecutor's Office, which  I  received
         in March 2016, contained information that all the  actions  of  the
         [SBU] and the Court fully comply with the law,  that  the  criminal
         case was opened legally, the son is hiding form  the  investigation
         authorities and therefore is on wanted list. ..."

80. The father enclosed supporting documents which I review below.

The translated documents

81. The translated Ukrainian documents were sent to the Secretary of  State
    by the claimant's solicitors on 10 December 2016,  but  have  not  been
    examined by the Secretary of State and form no part of his January 2016
    credibility decision.  They  are,  however,  fully  supportive  of  the
    claimant's account and there is  no  indication  on  the  face  of  the
    documents that they are not reliable to  the  Tanveer  Ahmed  standard.
    Indeed, it was only at the latest Upper Tribunal hearing that there was
    any suggestion that these documents should not be given weight  by  the
    Tribunal. I summarise them in date order.

82. On 13 June 2014, just before the claimant's marriage, the National Bank
    certified that the claimant had  been  working  at  their  Zaporizhzhia
    administrative branch from 28 August 2007.  His  post  was  'electronic
    engineer of the 1st category of the sector of network  technologies  of
    the department of the  telecommunication  systems  of  the  information
    centre'.  Details were given of his average salary  for  the  last  six
    months, totalling UAH 51543.82 (about �1400 for the entire period).

83.  On  28  August   2015,   at   12:29   hours   a   news   report   from
    www.Prestupnosti.net (translated as saynotocrime.net) records  that  in
    the claimant's home town, a man with a gun shot at a car at about 08:50
    hours, with two volleys of automatic gunfire  and  then  escaped.   The
    driver's identity was not yet known.  He was badly injured and  was  in
    intensive care.  The event had been registered in the Unified Crime and
    Offence  Registration  Log,  with  the   provisional   designation   of
    'intentional homicide' under Article 11591) of Ukraine Criminal Code.

84. On 18 September 2015, the District Court summoned the  claimant's  wife
    to appear at a hearing on 25 September 2015, as surety for her husband,
    who had absconded while on bail.  The hearing was to determine  whether
    the surety money should be forfeited.  The claimant's wife was required
    to bring her passport with her.  The  notice  of  hearing  contained  a
    warning of the consequences of failure to attend, but as this is just a
    list of provisions of the Ukrainian Criminal Code, it is not clear what
    those were. On 25 September 2015, in  a  lengthy  decision,  the  Court
    forfeited the bail surety to the state.

85. On 16 March 2016, a letter signed by the local Deputy Prosecutor of the
    General Prosecution Office of Ukraine (GPOU) confirmed  the  attendance
    of employees of the Advanced Maintenance Service (AMS) of the  Ministry
    of Internal Affairs on 5 February 2015, responding to an  alarm  signal
    to their computer monitoring system.  On  arrival,  the  AMS  employees
    checked who was in the flat.  They interrogated the  claimant  and  his
    wife and noted that SBU representatives were also in  the  flat.   They
    reported back to the  AMS  local  emergency  centre,  and  as  the  SBU
    employees did not object, they took the claimant and his  wife  to  the
    local Komunarsky (police station).

86. There was a record in the Unified Crime and  Offence  Registration  log
    for 20:10 hours on 5 February 2015, recording 'that the representatives
    of the [SBU] treated you unlawfully'.  The letter continues:

         "I hereby inform you that the current legislation of  Ukraine  does
         not  give  to  representatives  of  the  State  Guard  Service  any
         authority for detention  of  employees  of  the  [SBU]  and  search
         operations towards them. Taking the above into account, the  [local
         prosecution office] had not established any violations with current
         legislation in relation to actions of the employees of the [SBU].

         Regarding the information you provided  in  relation  to  intrusion
         into work of your PC and other involvement to make you  work  under
         duress at your work place at  the  [National  Bank]  we  understand
         importance of this information  and  possible  involvement  of  the
         employees of the [SBU] to this matter.  Your application  was  sent
         to the [local SBU department]  for  verification  of  evidence  set
         forth herein.  If  the  grounds  prove  true  and  violations  with
         current legislation were established,  then  the  prosecution  will
         impose appropriate response measures."

87. A press report from www.korrespondent.net dated 27 March  2016  reports
    unlawful  imprisonment  of  a  detainee  and  abuse  of  power  by  SBU
    employees, who beat a terror suspect to death in Donetsk  Province;  an
    agreement between the SBU  and  Amnesty  International  to  investigate
    'matter of tortures' together on 27 May 2015; and that a  woman  living
    in Kharkiv had won damages of E20,000 for police torture.   The  United
    Nations had  repeatedly  'blamed'  the  Ukrainian  government  for  SBU
    employees using torture, with impunity.

88. On 22 January 2016, a letter from the GPOU says that the main  task  of
    the SIA, created on 8 December 2014, was to act as a  single  point  of
    investigation for crimes committed during protest actions in Ukraine in
    2014-2015, and in particular, the circumstances of seizure of power and
    the  whole  range  of  criminal  actions  committed  during   President
    Yanukovych's various terms of office.  The SIA is primarily intended to
    investigate the mass killing of peaceful protesters on  18-20  February
    2014.  The letter continues:

         "Tasks of bodies of the [SBU] in supervising the implementation  of
         criminal proceedings do not  fall  within  the  competence  of  the
         [SIA]."

89. There were no grounds to call on the SBU investigator to account to the
    SIA for his conduct of the proceedings. However, the supervision of law
    enforcement by the SBU was within the competence of the  GPOU  and  the
    complaints by the claimant's father,  and  earlier  complaints  by  his
    wife,  would  be  considered  by  the   GPOU's   Office   of   Criminal
    Investigations.  The facts and circumstances raised would be thoroughly
    examined and a decision made by 25 March 2016.  The  claimant's  father
    would be notified of the outcome in  accordance  with  the  established
    procedure.

90. On 26 February 2016 the GPOU's department of  supervision  of  criminal
    proceedings, wrote to the claimant to confirm that on 20 February 2015,
    the SBU's local Department of Criminal Investigations had lodged a pre-
    trial enquiry regarding offences contrary to  Articles  15(3)  113  and
    15(3) 361(2) of the Ukrainian Criminal Code. The GPOU letter  sets  out
    the detention and bail history of the claimant between 1 April 2015 and
    28 July 2015, his breach of bail conditions, and confirmed that  on  23
    September 2015, he had been placed on the national  Ukrainian  'wanted'
    list.  The SBU investigator who had filed the criminal charges was  now
    charged with 'retrieval of the alleged criminal'.

91. The General Prosecution Office had reviewed the  handling  of  the  SBU
    investigation and found no breach of procedure by the investigator  and
    accordingly, the Court decisions thus far could not  be  reopened.  The
    circumstances of the December 2105 complaint were not such as  to  'lay
    the  case  open  to  revision  of  activities  of  the  above-mentioned
    subordinated prosecution offices and employees of the [SBU]'.

92. There is a group of four documents concerning a letter  and  enclosures
    sent by the claimant's father to him in the United Kingdom  on  13  May
    2016.  The first document is the postal receipt by the Ukrainian  State
    Enterprise of Postal Services (UKRPOSHTA), confirming that a letter was
    posted to the claimant in the United Kingdom; the next is a  lost  post
    enquiry form dated 6 June 2016; on 16 June 2016, the Central Bureau  of
    Complaints at UKRPOSHTA confirmed that the delay in delivery was  being
    investigated.

93. A letter from the claimant's father dated 15 July 2016, stated that  on
    13 May 2016, he had sent the claimant a letter including  the  father's
    witness statement, a Court summons against the claimant's wife dated 18
    September 2014, a Court decision dated 25 September 2015, and responses
    from the Prosecutor General's Office to his complaints dated 22 January
    2016 and 26 February 2016.    The father said that the  claimant  still
    had the scanned copies of all the documents: it was the originals which
    were missing and might take months to locate.

94. On 19 April 2018, the father made a  supplementary  statement,  setting
    out what had happened since May 2016.

95. In September 2016, the SBU investigator had sent for  the  father.   He
    was aware that the father had sent a letter to the  United  Kingdom  in
    his son's name and placed a tracing request on the  missing  item.   He
    wanted to know what the claimant was doing in the United Kingdom,  what
    the father sent him, and whether the  claimant  planned  to  return  to
    Ukraine.

96. The police were continuing to visit the claimant's  parents  every  2-3
    months, and also their neighbours, and neighbours near  the  claimant's
    flat.  In each case, they were asking when the people had last seen the
    claimant.

97. On 25 June 2017, the claimant's father visited the claimant's  flat  to
    water the flowers and check everything was  in  order  there.   He  was
    attacked as he left by two plainclothes men who pushed  him  back  into
    the apartment, knocked him to the floor, twisted his  arms  behind  his
    back and handcuffed him.  They asked  for  his  name  and  surname  and
    checked the documents in the claimant's father's pocket, making sure he
    was not the claimant.  Then they removed the handcuffs and took him  to
    the police station to explain where his  son  had  gone.   After  being
    interviewed at the police station, the  father  was  released  with  an
    apology for 'the misunderstanding of the arrest'.

98. On 12 March 2018, the claimant's father tried  again  to  instruct  the
    lawyer who had previously refused to  act.   He  asked  the  lawyer  to
    prepare a witness statement for these  proceedings.   The  lawyer  said
    that he remembered the case, but would not testify. The  father  begged
    him to help: the witness statement would be used  only  in  the  United
    Kingdom and not shown to anyone in Ukraine.  The father  recorded  what
    the lawyer told him: he had tried to visit the claimant in  prison,  as
    his retained lawyer, but the investigator  'rudely  refused'  and  said
    that the claimant already had  a  state-appointed  lawyer.  The  lawyer
    explained that  if he continued to try to  act,  or  to  refer  to  the
    Criminal Code or the Constitution, he would be  arrested  and  the  SBU
    would fabricate a case of separatism and terrorism against him.

99. The lawyer continued:

         "...I did not have another choice, I was forced  to  withdraw  from
         the case.   I explained to [the claimant's wife] the seriousness of
         the situation, that the cause of [the claimant] obviously  involved
         high-profile people, and in such circumstances, the case  will  not
         be taken by any lawyer because of the threats from the SBU. ...

         The lawyer [name redacted] also said that in  his  opinion,  taking
         into account all of the above circumstances and the Articles of the
         Criminal Code that [the claimant] is  accused  of,  we  should  not
         count on an objective and  fair  resolution  of  the  case  in  the
         Ukrainian courts."

100. The lawyer had also been interviewed in autumn 2015, to see if he  knew
    where the claimant and his wife had gone, and if he was in contact with
    them.

101. On 14 March 2018, the claimant's father met the State-appointed  lawyer
    who had represented the claimant at Court.  He said that he  no  longer
    had access to the case, from the date when the claimant absconded while
    on bail and became a wanted man.  The claimant's father asked when  the
    statute of limitations would permit the claimant's case to  be  closed:
    the lawyer said that in accordance with Article 49(2) of  the  Criminal
    Code, if an accused evaded either  investigation  or  trial,  exemption
    from criminal liability was not available for 15 years from the date of
    the offence.




                                 APPENDIX B

                              Country Evidence

Expert evidence: Dr Rano Turaeva-Hoehne

 1. Dr Rano Turaeva-Hoehne is an associate post-doctoral researcher on post-
    Soviet countries, including Ukraine, at the Max  Planck  Institute  for
    Social  Anthropology  in  Halle/Saale,  Germany.   She  sets  out   her
    professional background: she is working on a research promect  studying
    migration within post-Soviet Republics, focusing on  Russia.   She  has
    worked with  local  and  international  non-governmental  organisations
    conducing  and  assisting  various  research  projects,  including   on
    domestic  violence  and  trafficking.   She   monitors   the   academic
    literature but also has informants, family members and  friends  living
    in Russia, Ukraine, and  throughout  the  region.  Dr  Turaeva-Hoehne's
    report is carefully sourced, with all quotations identified  and  links
    to the source material.

 2. After setting out her  methodology,  Dr  Turaeva-Hoehne  explained  the
    political situation in Ukraine.  She characterises President Poroshenko
    as a former oligarch.  She notes that on 24 June 2015, the head of  the
    SBU was dismissed  by  the  Ukrainian  parliament  at  the  request  of
    President Poroshenko as  a  result  of  'his  growing  independence  in
    running the SBU'.  At  [8]-[9],  Dr  Turaeva-Hoehne  notes  that  there
    remain high levels of corruption  in  Ukraine  and  that  'high-ranking
    officials who were party members during  the  Soviet  times  are  still
    involved in organised crime to enrich their private or political needs.
    ...These  high   ranking   officials   who   bought   their   political
    participation power now are referred to as magnates or oligarchs'.

 3. At [12]-[16], the report deals with the  SBU,  the  Ukrainian  security
    service.  Most of its higher echelons were trained by the KGB in Moscow
    during the Soviet era.  The SBU system resembles  that  of  the  modern
    Russian FSB. At [12] she notes that:

         "12. The [SBU] is currently under President  Poroshenko's  control,
         its role having grown considerably since the  start  of  the  armed
         uprising by pro-Russian militants in eastern Ukraine.  The security
         agency  now  has  no  qualms  about  monitoring  civic   activists,
         independent   journalists  and  opposition   politicians,  and   is
         actively involved in resolving business conflicts. ...

         14.  Kuzio (2015, page 472) describes current  security  structures
         in Ukraine which have their roots in  KGB  system  centered  around
         Moscow and most of higher echelons of this systems being trained in
         Moscow in Soviet schools of KGB.  The structures remained the same,
         the author argues, and stated: "The SBU, in similar manner  to  the
         Russian  FSB,  have  Soviet-era  KGB  mind-sets  where  their  main
         function is not to protect state but to defend  those  who  are  in
         power".  This can be seen  within  internal  divisions  of  SBU  in
         Ukraine along pro-Russian and  pro-Ukrainian  lines  of  belonging.
         For instance, Alan Malcher describes this  problem  within  SBU  as
         following in his analytical piece: "Apart from several  senior  SBU
         officers saying it is going to be extremely difficult  to  overcome
         the disloyalty within their ranks, expressions of concern over  the
         large quantity of data thought to be in the hands of the  FSB,  and
         having an  intelligence  agency  that  one  officer  described  as:
         "Riddled with officers whose loyalties are unknown, at a time  when
         Ukraine's sovereignty is in danger from a Russian-proxy  war  which
         is increasing in intensity. ...""

         15.  Euromaydan  Press,  highlighting  the  link  between  SBU  and
         Russian FSB, stated: "Before Euromaidan, the  SBU  in  Ukraine  had
         been perceived as the government's  assistant,  which  covered  its
         crimes and served its interests, including in  business.   However,
         another weak point of the institution was its close  connection  to
         the Russian Security Services, as many employees of the institution
         used to work for KGB.  It is hard to imagine that a person who once
         worked in this repressive structure  could  remain  unaffected  and
         would not maintain old connections.  Moreover, it has been revealed
         that the connections of the SBU to Russian FSB had a  great  effect
         on the events after the Euromaidan revolution.  In 2014, then  head
         of the SBU Valentyn Nalyvaichenko  stated  that  during  the  three
         months of the revolution, three groups of  persons  occupying  high
         positions in the FSB worked within the structure of the SBU.

         The architecture of the security system of Ukraine

         16.  ...Here I would like to  describe  the  de  facto  functioning
         principles of the state security apparatus of  Ukraine.  There  are
         two major security ministries which are important for the  security
         of the state and its sovereignty in  Ukraine,  namely  Ministry  of
         Defense and Ministry of Internal Affairs, which comprises  SBU  and
         the police.  Besides formal structures defined by  law,  there  are
         also informal structures within this system, which  is  crucial  in
         the functioning of this apparatus in  the  way  it  does  function,
         namely undemocratic and  abusive  ways  much  criticised  by  human
         rights activists and others.  Within SBU, informal  staff  is  also
         known as stukachi (informants) and other personnel make it possible
         for the SBU  to  successfully  operate  their  illegal  activities.
         These are officially known  as  volunteers  and  there  is  diverse
         reciprocal  relations   between   security   officers   and   those
         individuals working for the SBU.  This system of informal personnel
         is not new and stems from Soviet KGB style  of  functioning  within
         security services which proved to be effective at all times. ..."

 4. Moving to the claimant's case, Dr Turaeva-Hoehne  found  it  plausible.
    She noted that  the claimant was loyal to the Maidan government and had
    worked as a stukachi, collaborating with the  SBU  to  find  out  about
    separatist activities on social media, which might have  been  regarded
    negatively by pro-Russian officials within the SBU in eastern  Ukraine,
    where the  claimant  lived.   Dr  Turaeva-Hoehne  considered  that  the
    decision to use the claimant  to  sabotage  a  strategic  unit  of  the
    national government such as the National Bank was rational 'to make the
    [claimant] stop doing jobs he did before for SBU and eventually to  get
    rid of him'.  She had looked  up  the  online  profile  of  his  second
    handler, who asked him to do this, finding that  the  handler's  social
    media profile contained strong  indications  that  he  worked  for  the
    security structures and was pro-Russian.

 5. At [20], Dr Turaeva-Hoehne dealt with the panic button element  of  the
    account, and confirmed that  the  police  do  indeed  offer  a  special
    private service of the type described:

         20.  ...Their actions in the situation described by [the  claimant]
         are professional that the  geed  the  security  in  the  house  and
         referred all the parties to go to police office. ... The fact  that
         SBU left the house of [the claimant] that evening did not  indicate
         that they were intimidated considering the following up events  and
         violence performed  by  the  same  officials.   Local  police  (not
         private security agencies) collaborate with the SBU which  is  well
         documented in the sources (both academic and media) I cited in this
         report in the section on criminal state structures.   The  question
         of loyalty is  a  different  question  which  is  unsolved  in  the
         conflict-torn Ukraine where  major  reforms  of  KGB-like  security
         system, where former KGB nomenclatura still remain holding powerful
         positions. ...""

 6. It was to be expected that a pro-Russian SBU official  perceived  as  a
    threat the valuable work the claimant was doing as  an  SBU  volunteer,
    contributing information from social media about separatist activities,
    and was tasked to remove him. As the claimant worked in the  IT  system
    of a strategic unit of the Ukrainian government, it was not unusual  if
    the official concluded that the best way to do that was to ask  him  to
    sabotage his employer's server.

 7. Dr Turaeva-Hoehne considered that the claimant  was  presented  with  a
    classic prisoner's dilemma: if  the  claimant  agreed  to  perform  the
    sabotage, under threats to his life and his family, that would be a win
    for the pro-Russian SBU  officials,  as  the  National  Bank  would  be
    sabotaged and the claimant imprisoned.    If  he  refused,  appropriate
    criminal charges could be crafted, fitting his profile,  to  cover  his
    plans and neutralise him.   The government controlled the media and  it
    was unlikely that a case like the claimant's, revealing corruption  and
    failure in the state legal system, would receive much publicity because
    the government would want to save face:

         "22. ...The fact that the problem  of  disloyalty  within  SBU  and
         security  system  of  Ukraine  is  unresolved,  speaks  about   the
         professionalism of the former KGB officials  who  hold  pro-Russian
         attitude,  who  are  able  to  keep  right  balance  in  the  power
         structures of state criminal security system of Ukraine."

 8. Dr Turaeva-Hoehne was unable to comment on the allegation that the  SBU
    had made the claimant blame the lawyer and activist, Mr Gordeev, or  Mr
    Andre Denisenko, the national deputy of the  Ukrainian  parliament  for
    the region.  It was public knowledge that Mr Gordeev had  shot  an  SBU
    officer who was supporting  contraband,  which  Mr  Gordeev  wanted  to
    prevent.

 9. Overall, Dr Turaeva-Hoehne did not consider that the claimant's account
    was implausible or inconsistent: the powerful position the SBU had gave
    it impunity, and the background evidence  indicated  that  a  statement
    from the SBU would have more weight than that of a bank  employee,  who
    had absconded, making him automatically seem more guilty  than  someone
    who remained to explain.

10. Dr Turaeva-Hoehne concluded that the claimant  had  been  a  victim  of
    'political games  played  between  pro-Russian  officials  and  corrupt
    Ukrainian state security' and was highly likely to be on the SBU wanted
    list, which was widely shared within  the  overall  Ukrainian  security
    system.  He risked arrest and detention at  the  airport,  or  anywhere
    within Ukraine, because of the propiska system: the SBU  had  unlimited
    access to data on persons and their movements within Ukraine.

11. On 7  August  2018,  Dr  Turaeva-Hoehne  provided  an  updated  report,
    describing the present situation in Ukraine.  The  OHCHR  in  its  2018
    report said that corruption continued to be a problem, with  an  active
    armed conflict entering  its  fifth  year,  and  'costs  for  civilians
    amassing by the day...The unpredictable nature of the armed hostilities
    and its consequences maintained an atmosphere  of  physical  insecurity
    and socio-economic degradation among the conflict-affected  communities
    in eastern Ukraine'. The  Donbas  conflict  continued.   Conditions  in
    prisons were the same or perhaps worse.

12. The Freedom House  report  for  2018  also  supported  high  levels  of
    corruption, and OHCHR noted that there had  been  interference  in  the
    independence of the  judiciary  'as  judges  who  released  individuals
    accused of terrorism or separatism-related charges pending trial became
    subjects of criminal investigations themselves'.

13. Dr Turaeva-Hoehne provided a response the Secretary of State's skeleton
    argument as it related to her report.  I have not had regard  to  that:
    responding to a party's argument is no part of an expert witness' role,
    as Dr Turaeva-Hoehne should be well aware.

Other country materials

14. The bundle before First-tier Judge Wilson included 103 pages of country
    evidence for 2017.  I was not asked specifically to look at any of that
    evidence.  The Upper Tribunal  bundle  contains  just  four  additional
    documents: the US  State  Department  Human  Rights  Report  for  2017,
    published on 20 April 2018 (included twice); the Amnesty  International
    report for 2017/2018, and an article from The Times dated April 2 2018,
    entitled Operation Troy: Russia's  blueprint  for  spreading  chaos  in
    Ukraine.

15. The Operation Troy article describes a plan  sent  to  the  Kremlin  by
    Alexei Muratov in November 2014, as part of a wider Kremlin  engagement
    to destabilise Ukraine and prepare the people of Zaporizhzhia region in
    eastern Ukraine, where this claimant lived, for a pro-Russian takeover.
     The proposal was a 'blueprint for manipulating public  opinion  before
    an insurrection in Zaporizhzhia, wresting the region from the orbit  of
    the central government in Kyiv' and  would  make  use  of  an  existing
    espionage network, contacting sympathisers inside the local police  and
    the SBU, in parallel with Moscow's direct military intervention in  the
    Donbas conflict in Eastern Ukraine.

16. The Operation Troy plot was revealed by a network of Ukrainian  hackers
    in November 2016.  Its budget included $10,000 for  maintaining  agents
    in the SBU and  Interior  Ministry;  $100-$300  for  hacking  an  email
    account; $50-$5000 for  bringing  down  a  website,  and  $130,500  for
    'demotivating enemies' on social media and amassing the  personal  data
    of targeted individuals in Kharkiv, Ukraine's second city, as  well  as
    funds for staging  rallies,  organising  pro-Russian  protests  in  the
    region, and backing a local Council election campaign for 30 banned ex-
    communist figures.

17. The US State Department 2017 report in its Executive Summary said this:

         "The  government  generally  failed  to  take  adequate  steps   to
         prosecute or punish most officials who committed abuses,  resulting
         in a climate of  impunity.  Human  rights  groups  and  the  United
         Nations noted significant deficiencies in investigations into human
         rights  abuses  committed  by  government   security   forces,   in
         particular into allegations of  torture,  enforced  disappearances,
         arbitrary detention, and other abuses reportedly perpetrated by the
         Security Service of Ukraine (SBU). ... "

18.  In  Section  1(c)  of  the  report,  it  confirms  that  although  the
    constitution and law prohibit  torture  and  other  cruel  and  unusual
    punishment, there were reports of law enforcement agencies engaging  in
    such abuse, including torture, and of false confessions being  obtained
    in this way: the UN Subcommittee on the Prevention of Torture in 2016:

         "... received numerous and serious allegations  of  acts  that,  if
         proven, would amount  to  torture  and  mistreatment.  ...beatings,
         electrocutions,   mock   executions,   asphyxiations,    acts    of
         intimidation and threats of sexual violence against themselves  and
         their family members. ...the  Subcommittee  has  no  difficulty  in
         concluding that these allegations are likely to be true.   Many  of
         the above-mentioned acts are alleged to  have  occurred  while  the
         persons concerned were under the  control  of  the  SBU  or  during
         periods of unofficial detention."

19. There was a culture of impunity for the  SBU  officers.  There  was  'a
    continued pattern of arbitrary detention by authorities'.   There  were
    also concerns about fair trial issues, with both judges and prosecutors
    reportedly taking bribes in exchange for favourable decisions,  lengthy
    court proceedings, inadequate funding, high bail  surety  demands,  and
    difficulty for courts in enforcing  rulings.   There  were  reports  of
    intimidation and attacks against lawyers  representing  pro-Russian  or
    pro-separatist defendants.

20. There were also reports of  arbitrary  or  unlawful  interference  with
    privacy, family, home or correspondence:

         "By law the SBU may not conduct surveillance or searches without  a
         court-issued  warrant.  In  practice,  however,   law   enforcement
         agencies sometimes conducted searches without a proper warrant.  In
         an emergency, authorities may initiate a search without prior court
         approval, but they must seek court approval immediately  after  the
         investigation begins.  Citizens  have  the  right  to  examine  any
         dossier in the possession of the SBU that concerns them; they  have
         the right  to  recover  losses  resulting  from  an  investigation.
         Because  there  was  no   implementing   legislation,   authorities
         generally did not respect these rights, and many citizens were  not
         aware of their  rights  or  that  authorities  had  violated  their
         privacy.

         There were some reports that the government  had  accessed  private
         communications and monitored private movements without  appropriate
         legal authority. For example, on October 20,  journalist  Oleksandr
         Chernovalov  filed  a  complaint  with  the  police  alleging   the
         government had conducted illegal surveillance on him. The Darnytsia
         district police in Kyiv launched an investigation,  which  remained
         underway."

21. Supervision of the internet was also an issue:

         "Law enforcement bodies monitored the internet,  at  times  without
         appropriate legal authority, and took significant steps during  the
         year to ban major Russian-sourced news and social media sites. ...

         Human rights groups and journalists who were  critical  of  Russian
         involvement in the Donbas  region  and  the  occupation  of  Crimea
         reported their websites were subjected  to  cyberattacks,  such  as
         coordinated denial of service incidents and  unauthorized  attempts
         to obtain  information  from  computers,  as  well  as  coordinated
         campaigns of "trolling" and harassment on social media.

         In its annual Freedom on the  Net  report  published  in  November,
         Freedom House concluded that internet freedom had deteriorated  for
         the second year in a row. It noted in particular that  "authorities
         have  become  less  tolerant  of  online  expression  perceived  as
         critical of Ukraine's position in the conflict, and the  government
         has been especially active this year in  sanctioning  social  media
         users for 'separatist' and 'extremist' activities, with many  users
         detained, fined and even imprisoned for such activities. Meanwhile,
         separatist forces in the east have  stepped  up  efforts  to  block
         content online perceived to be in support of  Ukrainian  government
         or cultural identity."

22. The National Bank had a high profile:

         "In 2015 the Kyiv  Administrative  Court  of  Appeal  overturned  a
         National Bank decision that Crimean IDPs were non-residents,  which
         had restricted access to banking and financial services  for  those
         fleeing  the  Russian  occupation.   Nonetheless,   media   reports
         indicated that banks continued to  restrict  banking  services  for
         Crimean IDPs even after the court decision."

Amnesty International 2017/2018

23. The Amnesty International report on Ukraine for 2017/2018 reported that
    the investigation into the SBU for alleged  secret  prisons  failed  to
    make any progress, and that law enforcement officials continued to  use
    torture and ill-treatment.  There was 'continued impunity for past  and
    ongoing violations of international humanitarian law'.

24. The Secretary of State's Country Policy and Information Note on Crimea,
    Donetsk and Lukhansk, Ukraine, September 2017, summarises the situation
    in 2014 at 5.1.1 and following:

         "5.1.1 In the Country Report on Human Rights Practices in 2016, the
         US Department of State ('the USSD's 2016 report') noted:

             'In February 2014 Russian  forces  entered  Ukraine's  Crimean
             Peninsula and occupied it militarily.  In  March  2014  Russia
             announced  the  peninsula  had  become  part  of  the  Russian
             Federation following a sham referendum that violated Ukraine's
             constitution. On March  27,  2014,  the  UN  General  Assembly
             adopted Resolution 68/262 on  the  "Territorial  Integrity  of
             Ukraine,"   which   called   on   states   and   international
             organizations not to recognize any change in  Crimea's  status
             and affirmed the commitment of the UN to recognize  Crimea  as
             part  of  Ukraine.  In  April   2014   Ukraine's   legislature
             (Verkhovna Rada) adopted a law attributing responsibility  for
             human rights violations in Crimea to the Russian Federation as
             the occupying state... Russian law has  de  facto  applied  in
             Ukraine's Crimea since the Russian  occupation  and  purported
             "annexation" of the peninsula.'

         5.1.2 In a September 2015 report, the UNHCR noted that 'Following a
         referendum, which was not authorized by Ukraine, in the  Autonomous
         Republic of Crimea  in  2014,  the  legislative  framework  of  the
         Russian Federation has been applied across the territory of  Crimea
         in January 2015. "

25. At 2.2.9, the same report records the annexation of Donetsk and Luhansk
    in 2014,  and  the  continuing  military  conflict  there  between  the
    Ukrainian government and pro-Russian  armed  groups.   A  ceasefire  in
    September 2014 was never fully effective.

26. Further excerpts from the US State Department Report for the year 2015,
    published in April 2016, appear in the general Country Information  and
    Guidance report set out the interrelation between the  police  and  the
    SBU living in territory controlled by the Government of Ukraine, as was
    the case for this claimant:

         "9.1.1  The  US  Department  of  State   provided   the   following
         information, which covered the year 2015 and was published in April
         2016:

         'The Ministry of Internal Affairs is  responsible  for  maintaining
         internal security and order. The ministry oversees police and other
         law enforcement personnel. The SBU [Security Service of Ukraine] is
         responsible for all state security, non-military intelligence,  and
         counterintelligence. The Ministry of Internal  Affairs  reports  to
         the Cabinet of Ministers, and  the  SBU  reports  directly  to  the
         president. The  State  Fiscal  Service  exercises  law  enforcement
         powers through the  tax  police  and  reports  to  the  Cabinet  of
         Ministers. The State  Migration  Service  implements  state  policy
         regarding  border   security,   migration,   citizenship,   refugee
         registration and other registering other migrants; the Ministry  of
         Internal Affairs oversees it.

         'Civilian authorities generally had control  over  law  enforcement
         agencies but rarely took action to investigate  and  punish  abuses
         committed by security forces.

         'Impunity for abuses by  law  enforcement  remained  a  significant
         problem. During a September [2015] visit to  the  country,  the  UN
         special  rapporteur  on   extrajudicial,   summary   or   arbitrary
         executions recommended that the government establish  a  system  of
         independent overview of the conduct  of  law  enforcement,  with  a
         particular focus on allegations of mistreatment by the SBU.

         'Human rights groups expressed concern that  authorities  have  not
         properly investigated crimes committed by Ukrainian forces and have
         not punished them. In particular human  rights  groups  noted  that
         alleged crimes committed by the Aidar Battalion remained  unsolved,
         including the killing of  two  persons  in  Shchastya  in  February
         [2015].

         'While authorities sometimes brought charges against members of the
         security services, cases often remained under investigation without
         being  brought  to  trial,  while   authorities   allowed   alleged
         perpetrators to continue. ..."




