
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00864/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2019                  |On 7 January 2020                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               B B (Sri Lanka)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Don T C W Kumudusena, an OISC registered legal
                    adviser with Liyon Legal Limited
For the respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) the Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of B B who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.
Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born in  India,  who  appealed
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to refuse to grant him  international
    protection on asylum or humanitarian protection grounds,  or  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. On 14 May 2018, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
    ordered that the decision  in  this  appeal  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on a date to be fixed.   The  appeal  came  before  me  on  23
    November 2018 at the Bradford hearing centre but was adjourned,  partly
    because of interpreter difficulties but also  because  the  appellant's
    representatives  successfully  applied  under  rule  15(2A)  to  adduce
    additional  evidence,  albeit  served  electronically  very  late   the
    preceding day.  I considered that it was in the  interests  of  justice
    for the new documents to be admitted. The hearing was adjourned for the
    respondent to consider the  new  documents  and  indicate  whether  she
    wished to cross-examine the applicant.

 3. The respondent has not indicated any  intention  to  cross-examine  the
    appellant.  I approach this appeal on the basis  that  the  applicant's
    updated evidence is to stand unchallenged.  I considered  that  further
    submissions would assist me in determining  this  appeal  and  directed
    that they be provided, reserving to the  Upper  Tribunal  the  question
    whether a further hearing was required or whether the appeal  could  be
    decided on the submissions and documents.

 4. On 15 November 2019, the appeal came back before me at Field House  for
    a case management review.  It was agreed at the  hearing  that  as  the
    respondent had not amplified her position, the appropriate  course  was
    for me to remake the decision on the papers.

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

 5. In my decision of 15 May 2018, setting aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, I was directed to the appellant's witness  statement  and  to
    the risk categories in GJ and ors (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka
    [2013] UKUT 00359 (IAC).  The appellant in his witness statement (which
    now stands unchallenged) said that he was born in India in Tamil  Nadu,
    but moved to Sri Lanka in the 1990s  with  his  parents.  In  2001,  he
    returned to India to study for his 'A' levels, returning to  Sri  Lanka
    in April 2004.

 6. From 2007, the appellant worked as a cashier in a district of  Colombo,
    Sri Lanka, which supplied building materials to  customers  across  Sri
    Lanka.  Two of the business' main customers, whom he got to know,  were
    from Vavuniya in the northern province of Sri Lanka.  They  would  come
    in once a month and buy building materials, and over  time  he  learned
    that they were not running a shop  in  Vavuniya  but  were  buying  the
    materials for the LTTE, including electrical items and generators.

 7. The appellant  told  no  one  about  this.   He  was  afraid  that  the
    authorities would consider him to have links to the LTTE.  In  December
    2007, he agreed to allow these two clients, who were preparing to  flee
    abroad, to stay in his home in  Colombo  until  they  travelled.   They
    stayed for two weeks, until one day they went out  to  meet  the  agent
    arranging their travel, but did not return.

 8. Four or five days later, the police came to the appellant's  house  and
    asked whether he knew the two men.  He denied knowing  them  at  first.
    He was taken to Wellawatta police station, where his denials  were  not
    accepted and the appellant admitted that the two men had  been  staying
    with him.  After 4 days in detention, his sister's husband located  the
    appellant and bribed the police to release him.

 9. Six months later, in June 2008, the CID came back  to  the  appellant's
    house and blindfolded him, taking him to an unknown location in a  van.
    He was questioned again about the two men and accused of supporting the
    LTTE.  He was told that the two men had been arrested and that they had
    alleged that he was an LTTE  supporter.   The  appellant  said  he  was
    tortured and beaten: he was beaten with a wire, burned  with  cigarette
    butts, suspended  upside  down  and  beaten.   He  was  not  given  any
    medication nor was he given food or water regularly.  He has  marks  on
    his body from that torture.

10. Once again, his brother in law was able to  locate  the  appellant  and
    bribe the CID to release him.  He  was  bailed  on  condition  that  he
    remained in Sri  Lanka.   He  spent  two  days  in  hospital  receiving
    treatment for his injuries.

11. The appellant consulted his parents, who advised him to go to live with
    his uncle in Kandy to avoid further problems.  The  civil  war  in  Sri
    Lanka had not yet ended and Kandy was far enough away for safety.   The
    appellant spent two months in Kandy, then returned to Colombo  to  stay
    with a friend from approximately August 2008 until January  2011.   The
    appellant's mother said that the police did come to the  house  looking
    to arrest him, but it seems that they did not  look  elsewhere  in  Sri
    Lanka or even in Colombo.

12. The appellant produced a preliminary CID investigation report dated  10
    May 2018 (with a translation) which indicated that  an  arrest  warrant
    would be sought on 11 May 2018, under sections 3(A)  and  5(B)  of  the
    Prevention  of  Terrorism  Act  No  48  of  1979  (as  amended).    The
    investigation report noted that the principal suspect was  arrested  in
    May 2010 but that the appellant's whereabouts could not be  established
    and they were unable also to arrest him.

13.  The  charge  against  the  appellant  was  to  be  'maintaining  close
    relationships with the LTTE's international network and  assisting  the
    LTTE members by providing them accommodation and helping  them  to  get
    building materials for their  operation'.   The  investigator  recorded
    that the appellant knew the two men were LTTE  members  and  purchasing
    building materials for the LTTE, but failed to inform  the  authorities
    about the LTTE members, instead helping them in  their  activities  and
    offering them  accommodation.  A  copy  of  the  arrest  warrant  (with
    translation) was provided.

14. In May 2010, the appellant's brother in law was arrested and  released,
    following payment of a bribe.  After the brother in law was released in
    May 2010, he arranged a Tier 4 student visa for the  appellant  through
    an agent.  The appellant travelled from Sri Lanka  openly  on  his  own
    passport, passing through Colombo airport and arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 20 January 2011 to take up his student visa.

15. The appellant left Sri Lanka in January 2011, but  the  United  Kingdom
    college  which  the  appellant's  brother  in  law   had   chosen   was
    subsequently closed down.  His Tier 4 visa expired on 30 September 2013
    and was not renewed.  He has had no leave since then.

16. The appellant relies on a court order from Colombo  Magistrates'  Court
    dated 1 February 2011 authorising his arrest at the airport  on  return
    to Sri Lanka,  because  the  CID  had  received  information  that  the
    appellant had escaped Sri Lanka.   From that point on, he was a  person
    on the 'stop list'.

17. The appellant remained unlawfully in the United  Kingdom  from  October
    2013 until 16 November 2017, when he was encountered working illegally.
     He took no steps to regularise his position, because he was afraid  of
    the police here.

Refusal letter

18.  On 15 January 2018, the respondent refused international protection or
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.  Although  the  appellant  was
    born in India in 1985, the respondent accepted that he was a Sri Lankan
    citizen.

19. There was then no Rule 35 report dealing with his  claimed  torture  or
    scarring arising from it.   The appellant's account was rejected in its
    entirety, with reference to paragraphs 339L and 339N of the Immigration
    Rules HC395 (as amended), and section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004.  The respondent applied the  country
    guidance in GJ (Sri Lanka): she considered that the appellant  had  not
    asserted any involvement with the LTTE  in  Sri  Lanka  or  the  United
    Kingdom, and that he could not bring himself within any  of  the  other
    categories identified by the Upper Tribunal  in  GJ.  His  humanitarian
    protection claim failed for the same reasons.

20. The appellant's human rights claim was also refused:  although  he  had
    lived in the United  Kingdom  for  8  years,  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  He had not demonstrated  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to his integration into  Sri  Lanka
    on return; his parents, sister and brother in  law  were  still  living
    there and the  appellant  spoke  Tamil,  Hindi  and  English.   He  was
    familiar with the culture and traditions of Sri Lanka and would be able
    to find lawful employment on return.  No exceptional circumstances  had
    been established.

21. On 6 February 2018, the respondent acknowledged receipt of  a  Rule  35
    report from a medical practitioner at Harmondsworth  Detention  Centre,
    which indicated that the appellant had  cigarette  burn  scars  on  his
    chest, and laceration scars on his back.  The appellant had  depression
    and nightmares, and was experiencing  poor  sleep,  all  of  which  had
    worsened in detention.  The appellant was now saying that  in  addition
    to the abuse previously disclosed, he had suffered  sexual  abuse,  but
    was too traumatised to discuss it.

22. The respondent considered that the appellant could not be  relied  upon
    to comply with any immigration requirements and  that  as  a  long-term
    overstayer,  whose  asylum  claim  had  not  been  made  until  he  was
    discovered working unlawfully, it was lawful to continue his  detention
    pending his appeal.   The respondent did not revisit her refusal letter
    on the basis of the Rule 35 report.

The 2018 evidence

23. The appellant's new evidence produced in 2018 comprised:

      1) a medico-legal report dated 19  November  2018  from  Dr  Baha  Al-
         Wakeel,  FRCP  FFAEM,  prepared  with  reference  to  the  Istanbul
         Protocol,  which  found  injuries  typical  of   torture   on   the
         appellant's body:  cigarette burn marks (aged scars) on  the  front
         of his chest and a healed  lesion  on  his  back,  typical  of  his
         account of being suspended upside down and beaten  with  pipes  and
         wires;

      2) a faxed letter from A A F Farhana,  attorney  at  law  in  Colombo,
         explaining how  the  arrest  warrant  documents  relied  upon  were
         obtained.  Mr Farhana said that the appellant's brother in law  had
         asked him to provide the letter. He confirmed that at  the  request
         of the brother in law, he had obtained documents in connection with
         the appellant from the Registrar at Colombo Magistrates' Court:  he
         said that the documents 'show an 'Arrest Warrant'  for  the  above-
         named to be arrested', and

      3)  a  letter  from  the  appellant's  brother  in  Sri  Lanka,   with
         translation, indicating that there is indeed continuing interest in
         this appellant.

Appellant's written submissions

24. The appellant in his written submissions relied on the medical evidence
    that the appellant's injuries were 'typical of' the  account  he  gave,
    with reference to the Istanbul Protocol, and relied on the respondent's
    CPIN and Fact-Finding Mission of March 2017, which confirmed that those
    considered to be associated with the LTTE were still being arrested and
    detained in the north of the country.  Rights Now was  unaware  of  any
    arrests in Colombo.  Former LTTE cadres were treated worse than  normal
    criminal detainees.  Extrajudicial killing had stopped but beatings  of
    the type described by the appellant were regarded as normal.

25. The appellant  relied  on  the  evidence  of  Mr  Anton  Punethanayagam
    recorded in GJ (Sri Lanka) at [26]-[27] and  assessed  as  'useful  and
    reliable' at [275] thereof.  The appellant had given a detailed account
    and explained the discrepancies relied upon  by  the  respondent.   His
    appeal should be allowed.

Respondent's submissions

26. The respondent did not provide written submissions as directed  by  the
    Tribunal, nor did Mr Jarvis cross-examine the appellant  or  make  oral
    submissions.  That is the evidential basis on which the  Tribunal  must
    remake the decision in this appeal.



The GJ guidance

27. In GJ (Sri Lanka)  the  Upper  Tribunal  gave  the  following  relevant
    guidance on the post-conflict situation in Sri Lanka and the  risks  it
    presents to particular groups:

         "... (2) The focus of  the  Sri  Lankan  government's  concern  has
         changed since the civil war ended in May  2009.  The  LTTE  in  Sri
         Lanka itself is a spent force and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
         incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
         activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and
         to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment
         6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983,  which  prohibits  the
         'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka. Its focus is  on
         preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any similar Tamil
         separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within
         Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
         there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
         international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
         person at real risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
         government now controls the whole  of  Sri  Lanka  and  Tamils  are
         required to return to a named address  after  passing  through  the
         airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
         whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained  from  the
         airport. Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities  are
         or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after  arrival
         in their home area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID
         or police within a few days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
         otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
             or are perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka. ...

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities  know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.  In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,   an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

         (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of
         an individual's activities and responsibilities  during  the  civil
         war, the exclusion clauses are engaged (Article 1F of  the  Refugee
         Convention and  Article  12(2)  of  the  Qualification  Directive).
         Regard should be had to the categories for exclusion set out in the
         "Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing the International  Protection
         Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka", published by UNHCR  on  21
         December 2012."

SB (Sri Lanka) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]  EWCA
Civ 160

28. In SB (Sri Lanka), handed down in February 2019,  Lord  Justice  Green,
    with whom Lord Justice Moylan and Lord Justice Baker  agreed,  reminded
    himself at [49]  that  the  risk  to  an  individual  arises  from  the
    perception of his involvement, not his actual involvement. If there was
    a real risk that an appellant was  perceived  as  a  threat,  that  was
    sufficient to engage international protection.

RS (Sri Lanka) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]  EWCA
Civ 1796

29. The Court of Appeal considered the question of  the  computerised  stop
    list in RS (Sri Lanka) which was handed down on 28 October  2019.   The
    appellant in RS had not been able to produce the arrest warrant or  the
    airport stop notice, unlike the present appellant. Lord Justice  Floyd,
    with whom Lady Justice King and Lord Justice Henderson agreed, held  at
    [22] that the existence of an unexecuted arrest warrant was  likely  to
    lead to the person the subject of the warrant  being  included  on  the
    airport computerised 'stop list'.  The  court  took  into  account  the
    respondent's CPIN report, noting that the evidence showed that the  Sri
    Lankan army had conducted a search for 'escapees'.

Remaking the decision

30. The core facts in this appeal are no longer in dispute.  The  appellant
    has a known connection to the LTTE, having had two of  its  members  as
    his customers in the building materials shop, and accommodated them  in
    his home.   The  authorities  know  if  it  and  arrested  him  on  two
    occasions, in 2007 and 2008, both before the end of the civil war.   On
    the second occasion, he was tortured, and he still has scars and mental
    health problems which, to the Istanbul Protocol standard, are  accepted
    as typical of the abuse he suffered.

31. In May 2009, the civil war came to an  end.   In  2010  and  2011,  the
    authorities showed a continuing interest in the appellant. He was  able
    to leave Sri Lanka openly on a Tier 4 visa in January  2011,  but  that
    was before the arrest of the two LTTE men  that  he  harboured  in  his
    home, in May 2011, and before they told the  authorities  that  he  had
    LTTE links.

32. The appellant in this appeal has established  past  persecution  and  I
    bear in mind that pursuant to paragraph 339K of the Rules:

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

33. In this case, there has been a change of  circumstances  in  Sri  Lanka
    following the end of the civil war, but the arrest warrants relied upon
    post-date the end of the war and there are indications, sufficient  for
    the lower standard of  proof  applicable  in  international  protection
    claims, that the authorities remain interested in the  appellant.   The
    respondent has not attempted to show good reasons to consider that  the
    persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

34. The evidence shows that this appellant has  been  charged  in  absentia
    with 'maintaining close relationships  with  the  LTTE's  international
    network and assisting the LTTE members by providing them  accommodation
    and helping them to get building materials for their operation'.  There
    is an arrest warrant against him and a stop order for his arrest at the
    airport on return.  He comes within the GJ guidance on  that  basis  at
    sub-paragraphs 7(a) because the authorities perceive him as maintaining
    close relationships with the international network and at 7(d)  because
    there is a stop notice requiring him to be arrested at the  airport  on
    return.

35. The appellant cannot safely relocate to live with his uncle  in  Kandy.
    There is no longer any area within Sri Lanka where the LTTE has control
    (see sub-paragraph [5]) and internal relocation is not  available  now.
    If arrested and detained, he remains at risk of  further  ill-treatment
    or harm and international protection is required (sub-paragraph [4]).

36. I have considered whether the exclusion  clauses  (Article  1F  of  the
    Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of  the  Qualification  Directive)
    are engaged, as [10] of the guidance requires.  The respondent has  not
    sought to rely on exclusion and, whatever the Sri  Lankan  government's
    perception, it does not appear to me that it is appropriate  to  invoke
    exclusion in this appeal.

37. For all of the above reasons, and treating the appellant's  account  as
    fully credible, I am satisfied that he has shown a  risk  engaging  the
    Refugee Convention and is a refugee.  I therefore substitute a decision
    allowing the appeal.

DECISION

38. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appeal.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     2 January 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
