
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00781/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 April 2018                             |On 08 May 2018                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     a i
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolahi, Counsel instructed by Maliks and
Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Greasley promulgated on 22 February  2018.   The  appellant  is  an
         Albanian national born on 4 March 1991. Her appeal from the removal
         decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  was  dismissed  on  asylum,
         humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds.


      2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Alis
         on 26 March 2018.  The  principal  ground  concerned  an  issue  of
         procedural fairness in the refusal to grant an adjournment  of  the
         hearing to  enable  expert  evidence  from  a  psychologist  to  be
         obtained.


      3. It is noteworthy that when the matter came before the judge in  the
         First-tier Tribunal, the appellant relied on  a  skeleton  argument
         prepared by Counsel. That skeleton argument dealt exclusively  with
         the substantive merits of the appeal. It did not indicate that  the
         appellant's first and primary submission would be that the  hearing
         should be adjourned.


      4. The purpose of skeleton arguments is to identify the issues  to  be
         determined, to summarise the party's  case  in  relation  to  those
         issues, and to assist the judge in his or her preparation and  pre-
         reading. A judge coming to the matter would have assumed  from  the
         skeleton argument that this was an effective appeal on  the  merits
         and that the previous adjournment applications had been included in
         the paginated bundle merely by way of background.  Such  impression
         would have been reinforced by the covering letter dated 9  February
         2018 sent by the appellant's solicitors when  lodging  the  bundle,
         which made no mention of a possible further application to adjourn.


      5. I consider these to have been professional misjudgements. It  would
         have been wiser, and certainly more helpful to the judge,  had  the
         appellant's case on the adjournment been set out  in  the  skeleton
         argument with the level of specificity as subsequently appeared  in
         the grounds of appeal, with the remainder of the skeleton  argument
         addressed, in the alternative, to the substance of  the  appeal  in
         the event of the application to adjourn being refused.


      6. Be that as it may, an oral application to adjourn  the  matter  was
         made to the judge at the outset of the hearing. The judge dismissed
         the application and his reasons appear at paragraphs 30 and  31  of
         the decision:

         "30.  Counsel  sought  to  renew  the  application  to  obtain  the
             psychological assessment which  she  also  believed  would  be
             relevant  not  only  to  mental   health   issues   but   also
             credibility, and risk on return factors. For  the  respondent,
             Mr Stevenson sought to  oppose  the  application  stating  the
             appellant had been in the United Kingdom since as long as 2015
             and that there had been ample opportunity in which  to  obtain
             such evidence and serve it on the tribunal.


         31.  I indicated to the representatives and the  appellant  that  I
             was not minded to adjourn proceedings  on  the  basis  that  I
             believe there was sufficient evidence before the tribunal upon
             which to assess the appellant's account cumulatively,  and  in
             the round.  I considered my overriding obligation to ensure  a
             fair and timely disposal of the appeal matter as well  as  the
             important principles of the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe which  I
             also considered. I indicated that to my mind there had been  a
             sufficient opportunity to  obtain,  and  serve,  all  relevant
             evidence on the tribunal, the refusal decision  itself  having
             been taken on 4 January 2018, the appellant having  instructed
             later solicitors on 23 January 2018.  Accordingly, the hearing
             would therefore proceed."

      7. Decisions on  whether  or  not  to  adjourn  proceedings  are  case
         management matters which  are  generally  dealt  with  swiftly  and
         pragmatically. The Upper Tribunal should be slow to interfere  with
         a discretion properly exercised by a First-tier Tribunal Judge.


      8. The judge in this  instance  made  reference  to  the  decision  in
         Nwaigwe (adjournment - fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  which
         emphasises that the question for the Upper Tribunal to consider  is
         whether a decision on an adjournment application is fair as opposed
         to whether it is reasonable. The underlying question is: "Was there
         any deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair  hearing?".
         See paragraph [7] which concludes, "In a nutshell, fairness is  the
         supreme consideration". Reference is then  made  to  the  Court  of
         Appeal authority of SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.


      9. What seems to have been a key feature in the  judge's  decision  in
         this instance was that the appellant had entered the United Kingdom
         in 2015 and that in those circumstances there had  been  sufficient
         time - "ample opportunity" as counsel put it - in which  to  obtain
         and to serve such evidence.  In truth, this was  a  more  expansive
         window than was really the case because the  Secretary  of  State's
         removal decision was not communicated until 4 January 2018 and  the
         matter came before the judge on 14 February 2018. The judge's  main
         focus should have been on the time elapsed since the  Secretary  of
         State's decision  as  opposed  to  the  period  of  time  from  the
         appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom.


     10. As is fully set out in the grounds of appeal, this is  not  a  case
         where a firm of solicitors has sat idly by and made a  last  minute
         application on the morning of the hearing.  On  the  contrary,  the
         chronology shows that a written application was made very  promptly
         following their instruction on 23 January 2018.


     11. The first request for an adjournment was made  in  the  pre-hearing
         review reply form dated 30 January 2018.  The  tribunal  caseworker
         who apparently dealt with the matter misread or  misunderstood  the
         basis upon which the application was pursued, believing  it  to  be
         seeking the admission of country evidence from an expert as opposed
         to a report from a psychologist.


     12. A second adjournment application was speedily made, which corrected
         the  caseworker's  previous  misapprehension.  It   was   summarily
         rejected. The basis of refusal inaccurately states: "an adjournment
         application made on the same grounds has already been  refused  and
         is again refused for the reasons already  given".  The  attempt  to
         correct the error had clearly not struck home.


     13. A third application to adjourn was duly made. This was met not with
         a reasoned refusal but with an open-ended question: "What  evidence
         is there that the appellant has engaged with mental health services
         in this country in the last 3 years prior to  the  refusal  of  her
         asylum application?"


     14. The appellant, therefore, did not have a  proper  determination  on
         the merits of any of her three written applications to adjourn  the
         matter.


     15. I also note that an appointment had  been  promptly  made  for  the
         appellant to see Dr Agnew-Davies, a clinical  psychologist,  on  20
         April 2018 on the basis that a report could be produced by  18  May
         2018. None of those considerations feature in the judge's reasoning
         at paragraphs [30] and [31], set out above.


     16. The judge's main reason for refusing the adjournment was not rooted
         in the fact that earlier written applications had been refused  but
         on the judge's assessment there was sufficient evidence before  the
         Tribunal upon  which  to  draw  a  conclusion.  This,  however,  is
         questionable because the issue of the appellant's mental health was
         expressly raised by the Secretary of State in  the  removal  letter
         and the Tribunal was likely to have been assisted  by  material  in
         that regard. In addition, such evidence as the  psychologist  might
         produce could also have been relevant to credibility  and  risk  on
         return, both of which needed to be assessed and determined.


     17. Whilst reminding myself that the Upper Tribunal should be  reticent
         to interfere with a case management decision made in the First-tier
         Tribunal, this is a rare instance where the judge's discretion  was
         not properly exercised.  The refusal of the adjournment  led  to  a
         risk of  injustice  on  the  appellant's  part  and,  adopting  the
         principle enunciated in Nwaigwe, the decision must be set aside.


     18. Both representatives are agreed, and  I  concur,  that  the  proper
         course in this instance is to remit the matter to be determined  de
         novo in First-tier Tribunal. The decision on the substantive appeal
         will need to be made  afresh  once  the  psychologist's  report  is
         available. No findings of fact will be preserved.



Notice of Decision

    1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
       set aside.
    2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross
       for a fresh decision to be made by a  judge  other  than  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Greasley.
    3) The re-hearing of the appeal is to be listed on the first  available
       date after 1 August 2018, to allow for Dr  Agnew-Davies  to  examine
       the appellant and prepare a report.
    4) Unless and until the  First-tier  Tribunal  otherwise  directs,  all
       additional evidence is to be filed and served  at  Hatton  Cross  no
       later than five clear days before hearing date.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     2 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


