
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00377/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 August 2017                         |On 17 August 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     JA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mohzam, instructed by Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The  appellant,  JA,  was  born  in  May  1982  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  By a decision dated  19  December  2016,  the  respondent
    decided to refuse the appellant's asylum and human rights claim and  to
    refuse to revoke a deportation order made in respect of  the  appellant
    under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007. On 8  April  2015,  the
    appellant had been sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment  for  a  sexual
    offence and had been recommended by the trial  judge  for  deportation.
    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ghani)  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 2 May 2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Froom, who considered the permission application  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, did not grant permission on all grounds.  He  considered
    that grounds 1 and 2 were not arguable.  These  grounds  concerned  the
    appellant's asylum and  Articles  2/3  ECHR  appeals.   Permission  was
    granted only in respect of the remaining ground  of  appeal  concerning
    Article 8 ECHR.  Judge Froom wrote:

         The  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  a  subsisting
         relationship with a British spouse.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         assessed her circumstances in terms  of  whether  there  were  very
         compelling circumstances but he does not  address  Exception  2  in
         Section 117C(5) of the  2002  Act  [as  amended]  which  poses  the
         question of whether the appellant's  deportation  would  be  unduly
         harsh on her.

 3. Judge Ghani considered the appellant's circumstances  by  reference  to
    paragraph 399(b) of HC 395:

         b)   the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported".

 4. He correctly concluded [52] that the appellant's case did not fall  for
    consideration under paragraph 399(b)  because  the  appellant  had  not
    formed his relationship with his wife at a time when he had been in the
    United Kingdom lawfully and  whilst  his  immigration  status  was  not
    precarious.  As Judge Ghani observed, "[the appellant] has  never  been
    granted any form of valid leave to remain.  He  therefore  cannot  meet
    the requirements".  The appellant complains that the  judge  failed  in
    addition to consider Section 117C of the 2002 Act (as amended):

         Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign
         criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

 5. The appellant's case falls for consideration under 117C(3)  because  he
    had been sentenced to imprisonment of less than four years.  It is  not
    argued by the appellant that Exception 1  applies  to  him  but  it  is
    claimed that Exception 2 should have been applied.  The respondent,  as
    noted above, accepts that the appellant has a  subsisting  relationship
    with a British spouse.

 6. What Judge Ghani did do at [52] is to consider  whether  or  not  there
    were "very compelling circumstances" to  indicate  that  the  appellant
    should not be deported.  The current  position  is  summarised  by  the
    Court of Appeal in its judgment of NE-A (Nigeria) [2017] EWCA  Civ  239
    at [15]:

         "None of this is problematic for the proper application of  Article
         8. That a requirement of "very compelling circumstances"  in  order
         to outweigh the public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
         criminals  sentenced  to  at  least  four  years'  imprisonment  is
         compatible with Article 8 was  accepted  in  MF  (Nigeria)  and  in
         Hesham Ali itself. Of course,  the  provision  to  that  effect  in
         section 117C(6) must  not  be  applied  as  if  it  contained  some
         abstract statutory formula. The context is that  of  the  balancing
         exercise under Article 8, and the "very  compelling  circumstances"
         required are circumstances sufficient to outweigh the strong public
         interest in the deportation of  the  foreign  criminals  concerned.
         Provided that a tribunal has  that  context  in  mind,  however,  a
         finding that "very compelling circumstances" do not exist in a case
         to which section 117C(6)  applies  will  produce  a  final  result,
         compatible with  Article  8,  that  the  public  interest  requires
         deportation. There is no room for any  additional  element  in  the
         proportionality balancing exercise under Article 8."

 7. I note that in NE-A, the Court of Appeal was considering an  appeal  to
    which Section 117C(6) applied rather than sub-section  (5)  as  in  the
    present case.

 8. The question before the Tribunal was summarised by Mr Mills as follows:
    by  considering  whether  or  not  there   existed   "very   compelling
    circumstances" did Judge Ghani consider all the relevant  circumstances
    and make the necessary findings which he would have made  had  he  also
    considered whether the effect of the  appellant's  deportation  on  his
    British spouse would be unduly harsh?  Mr  Mohzam  submitted  that  the
    paragraph of the decision [52]  in  which  Judge  Ghani  considers  the
    relevant circumstances was intended by him to deal with the appellant's
    private life only.  Mr Mills submitted that the paragraph departs after
    a few sentences from a consideration of the  appellant's  private  life
    only to consider the wider issues including his relationship  with  his
    wife.  I agree with Mr Mills.  The paragraph begins with the words  "as
    far as the appellant's private life is concerned ..." but quickly moves
    on to consideration of the appellant's relationship with his  wife  and
    her medical condition.  Judge Ghani wrote, "the appellant relies on the
    medical condition of his wife and maintains  that  these  circumstances
    are so compelling on the basis of which he  should  not  be  deported".
    Indeed, looking at the evidence and the submissions  which had been put
    before the First-tier Tribunal, it is clear that it was argued that the
    most significant negative impact of the  appellant's  deportation  upon
    his wife related to her medical condition and the  reliance  which  she
    placed upon him for care.  Judge Ghani discusses the  medical  evidence
    concerning the wife at length at  [52].   He  noted  that  the  limited
    evidence showed that the appellant had no obvious  abnormality  in  her
    hips but that in November 2016 she claimed that she had  pains  in  her
    face and head.  The appellant's wife claimed to have problems  sleeping
    and that she had become depressed as a  result.   She  had  suffered  a
    nervous breakdown in 2000 and had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
     However, Judge Ghani noted that, "regrettably,  there  is  no  medical
    report as such to outline the appellant's wife's various  ailments  and
    their impact on her day-to-day living".  The judge  recorded  that  the
    wife had indicated that it would be "very difficult" for her to go  and
    live in Afghanistan with the appellant because she could not speak  the
    language and because of these "health issues".  Judge  Ghani  concluded
    that there was

         "... no evidence to suggest that without the appellant's  presence,
         his spouse will not be  able  to  receive  care  from  the  medical
         professionals and/or her local authority.  She also has a sister in
         the UK.  On the evidence before me I find that  the  appellant  has
         not been able to show that there are very compelling  circumstances
         which should prevent his deportation resulting from the sentence of
         27 months for attempt - adult meet girl under 16  following  sexual
         grooming (sic)."

 9. As the Court of Appeal stated in NE-A at [14], Section  117C  "contains
    more than a statement of policy to  which  regard  must  be  had  as  a
    relevant consideration".  The statutory provisions are  provisions  "to
    which the Tribunal is bound by law to give effect".  To that extent, it
    is apparent that Judge  Ghani  erred  by  failing  to  include  in  his
    analysis a consideration of Section 117C(5).  The remaining question is
    whetherm having identified an  error  of  law,  I  should  exercise  my
    discretion not to set aside the decision.   I  have  concluded  that  I
    should exercise that discretion and I will not set aside Judge  Ghani's
    decision notwithstanding his error of law.  I shall not do so  for  the
    following reasons.  First, I find that the judge's analysis in  respect
    of "very compelling circumstances" is sound in law.  Secondly, I  agree
    with Mr Mills that there exists, on the facts of this case, little,  if
    any, "gap" between the "very  compelling  circumstances"  analysis  and
    that which would have been required to determine whether the impact  on
    the wife would be unduly harsh.  Thirdly, I find that, by carrying  out
    a thorough analysis of the facts, the  judge  has  substantially  dealt
    with those matters which had been advanced by  the  appellant  and  his
    wife as reasons why she would be unable to cope if  he  were  deported.
    Those reasons  were  essentially  connected  with  the  wife's  medical
    condition; no other reasons were  given  concerning  the  wife  in  the
    evidence before the Tribunal.  The judge  has  considered  the  reasons
    advanced by the appellant and his wife for not separating the couple by
    deportation and he has rejected them.  His rejection is not perverse on
    the facts; it is soundly reasoned.   Had  the  judge  gone  on  in  his
    decision to consider whether the impact of the appellant's  deportation
    on the wife would be unduly harsh, he would have been going over ground
    which he had already covered,  namely  the  wife's  medical  condition.
    Indeed, I do not consider that the judge would have erred had he  added
    a further paragraph to his decision dealing with "undue harshness"  and
    had simply rejected the appellant's case by reference to paragraph [52]
    from the analysis which  he  had  already  carried  out.   Any  further
    analysis, given the facts and the case advanced by the appellant, would
    have been nugatory.

10. For the reasons I have given, I find that the appellant's appeal should
    be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

11. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 16 August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 16 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

