
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00607/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 October 2016                          |On 14 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    [a k]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, instructed by Times PBS Limited
For the Respondent:    Miss S Vijiharan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated on  20  July  2016  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision by the  Secretary
    of State made on 8 January 2016 to refuse him asylum and to remove  him
    from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's history and the nature of  his  claim  is  set  out  in
    detail in the refusal letter and in the decision of the  judge  as  are
    the Secretary of  State's  reasons  for  disbelieving  the  appellant's
    account and concluding that he even what he said was true and  then  he
    would not be at risk on return to Afghanistan.

 3. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and  submissions  from  the
    respondent's Presenting Officer and also from  Mr  Nicholson  who  also
    appears for the appellant here today.  The judge in his findings  found
    that the appellant was not credible at was  at  considerable  pains  to
    point out why that was so.

 4. The judge did not find that the  appellant's  claim  was  credible  and
    found that he had fabricated the evidence.   He  also  considered  that
    there was no basis on which, even were the case taken at  its  highest,
    that the appellant had a plausible  claim  to  be  entitled  to  asylum
    and/or humanitarian protection.

 5. The challenges to the judge's findings of fact are fourfold.

 6. First, that although the judge had directed  himself  at  paragraph  28
    properly as to the burden  and  standard  of  proof  he  had  on  three
    separate occasions set out that he needed to be  convinced  that  those
    appeared in paragraphs 30, 31 and 41.  It  is  said  that  this  is  an
    indication that  although  having  directed  himself  properly  at  the
    beginning the judge had not applied the correct standard  of  proof  in
    reaching his conclusions.

 7. The second ground is that  the  judge  failed  properly  to  apply  the
    decision in Tanveer Ahmed in that he concluded that the  documents  the
    appellant had sought to rely upon had  been  manufactured,  not  merely
    that they were not reliable.

 8. The third ground is that the judge failed properly to  give  weight  to
    the evidence of Dr Giustozzi who had produced an expert report for  use
    in the appeal.

 9. The fourth grounds is that the judge had failed properly to  take  into
    account all the evidence in that he had said at paragraph 33 that there
    was no evidence provided that the appellant had returned to Afghanistan
    in 2005 whereas it is said that there appears in the bundle produced by
    the appellant at pages 61 - 65 medical  prescriptions  indicating  that
    the appellant had been present in Afghanistan in 2005 and subsequently.
     It is also averred that in any event the judge did not  in  fact  take
    case at its highest.

10. There is a response to that by way of a Rule 24 letter submitted by the
    respondent on 7 September 2016.

11. I consider the grounds in turn.

12. The first ground is, I consider, made out.  Whilst it is clear that the
    judge did properly direct himself at paragraph 28  as  to  the  correct
    burden and standard of proof he nonetheless on three separate occasions
    sets out that there was no convincing or credible evidence.  I consider
    that the use of the word "convincing" is indicative that the judge  was
    required a considerably higher standard of proof than  that  applicable
    in asylum appeals and  that  this  contradicts  the  self-direction  at
    paragraph 28.  Accordingly I find that this was an error of law.

13. Further, I consider that whilst the judge purported at paragraph 46  of
    his decision to take the case at its highest, he did not in fact do so.
     It is self-evident from what the judge says at paragraph  46  that  he
    made credibility findings and did not take into account the appellant's
    case at its highest which involved the submission that he would not  in
    fact be safe in Kabul and would in fact be at risk  there  either  from
    the police or from his adversary.

14. On that basis the error is material.

15. Given the nature of this it  goes  to  the  core  of  the  findings  on
    credibility it is unnecessary for me to  consider  the  other  grounds.
    However, I do consider that ground 4 is made out in that the judge  did
    clearly fail to take into account relevant evidence.   While  it  would
    have been open to him to say that it was not credible, that is not what
    he said.  He simply said that there was no evidence and that I consider
    does feed into the findings I have made with respect to ground 1.

16. Whilst there is less merit in grounds 2 and 3 given the findings I have
    reached there is no need for me to reach any conclusions on those.

17. For these reasons I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did involve the making of an error of law and I  set  it
    aside.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside

 2. I remit the decision to the First-tier tribunal for a fresh decision on
    all material issues.


Signed                                  Date:  13 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


