
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00319/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 15 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                             MR AREAN JAMAL ALI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson &
Canter
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an Iraqi national from Kirkuk.  He  left  Iraq  on  10
    September 2015 and made  his  way  across  Europe  eventually  claiming
    asylum in Finland, but this was refused. He travelled to Germany  where
    he was arrested and detained before being released. He finally  entered
    the United Kingdom on 12 December 2016 where he claimed asylum.

 2. On 31 December 2018, the respondent refused  his  application  and  the
    appellant appealed on 14  January  2019  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His appeal was  heard  by
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Chowdhury  and  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 11  April  2019  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal was refused by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Saffer on 16 May 2019 but Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission
    to appeal.

 4. He found it was arguable the Judge had failed  to  properly  apply  the
    country guidance decisions of AA (Iraq) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  944  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds-internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC)  in  determining  that  the
    appellant would be able to obtain a CSID shortly after arriving in Iraq
    which would enable him to relocate to the  IKR.  This  view  took  into
    account the Judge accepted the appellant  came  from  Kirkuk,  an  area
    where article 15(c) existed, and had no male relatives to assist him.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds although Upper Tribunal
    Judge Grubb said that he would not have granted permission on the other
    grounds alone.

 6. The respondent filed  a  Rule  24  response  dated  16  July  2019  and
    submitted that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  his  CSID
    information was not available to him or alternatively he would be  able
    to turn to his former police contacts in Iraq for help.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Ms Patel adopted, in particular, paragraphs 12 to 24 of the grounds  of
    appeal and submitted the Judge's reasoning on how the  appellant  could
    obtain a CSID was flawed. The Judge had accepted the appellant did  not
    have access to the original CSID but  concluded  that  because  he  had
    other documents on his mobile, it was likely he would have also  stored
    his CSID information on his mobile phone. She submitted this  was  mere
    speculation and there was no logic to that finding bearing in mind  she
    had had already accepted he had lost his CSID in  Europe.  The  Judge's
    other conclusion that he could  obtain  a  CSID  with  assistance  from
    former police colleagues was also flawed as she was unable to  say  who
    exactly would be in a position to provide  this  type  of  information.
    Without a CSID he would be unable to settle in the IKR  and  the  Judge
    erred by not properly applying the findings and guidance in AAH.

 9. With regard to  the  remaining  grounds,  she  submitted  in  assessing
    credibility the Judge failed to have  regard  to  the  content  of  his
    witness statement and she submitted this error was linked to whether he
    could obtain a CSID.

10. Ms Pettersen opposed the application and submitted the  Judge  properly
    addressed the question of whether the  appellant  had  access  to  CSID
    details and gave adequate reasons for finding that he did and  that  he
    could use this to obtain the CSID himself despite  his  claim  to  have
    been refused at the Consulate. As for him  obtaining  the  document  in
    Iraq she accepted that it may be speculative  to  suggest  that  former
    colleagues, from a contested area, would be able to obtain the CSID for
    him. She further submitted the adverse credibility findings  were  open
    to the Judge and invited the Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

11. The appellant had sought protection in this country having  spent  over
    14 months travelling across Europe during which time he had applied for
    asylum in Finland and left that country  and  thereafter  he  had  been
    detained in Germany.

12. The Judge considered his claim and in a detailed decision concluded:

      a) The appellant was a member of  the  Iraqi  police  force  based  on
         documents and photographs he had adduced.

      b) She rejected his claim that he was involved in Daesh/ISIS prisoners
         escaping from a police convoy.

      c) She rejected his claim that having been detained for questioning he
         was able to simply walk out of a  police-building  when  his  guard
         went for a coffee break. She rejected this claim having  regard  to
         country evidence about the country situation at that time.

      d) The appellant had had an asylum claim rejected in Finland  and  she
         rejected his claim that he had been unaware of the  outcome  as  it
         was in Finnish.

      e) Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
         etc) Act 2004 applied.

      f) He had lost contact with male relatives in Iraq.

      g) He has a young family to support.

13. Having reached those findings, the Judge quite properly turned her mind
    to the issue of return and whether the appellant could be returned.  It
    is in this area that permission to appeal was specifically given.

14. During submissions from the parties I indicated the two  areas  of  the
    Judge's decision that needed to  be  considered.  The  first  concerned
    whether the appellant could obtain a CSID in London and the second  was
    whether he could obtain a CSID within a reasonable period  of  time  in
    Iraq.

15. The Judge found at paragraph 68 and 71 he could obtain a CSID  in  Iraq
    because he was  an  educated  man  who  had  risen  to  a  position  of
    responsibility in the police force and he  could  re-establish  contact
    with former police colleagues.

16. This finding must be considered against the guidance issued in  AAH.  I
    do not set out the full guidance herein, but I feel  extracts  of  that
    decision will explain why I reached the findings I have in this appeal.



17. The Tribunal should ask itself:

      a) Does the  appellant  have  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
         information about the location of his entry in the civil  register.
         An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or  an  expired  CSID
         would all be of substantial assistance. For someone  in  possession
         of  one  or  more  of  these  documents  the  process   should   be
         straightforward. A laissez-passer should not be counted  for  these
         purposes: these can be issued without any other form  of  ID  being
         available, are not of any  assistance  in  'tracing  back'  to  the
         family record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad.

      b) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If it is in  an
         area held, or formerly held, by ISIL, is it operational?

      c) Are there male family members who would  be  able  and  willing  to
         attend  the  civil  registry  with  the  appellant?   Because   the
         registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant to  consider
         whether the relative  is  from  the  mother  or  father's  side.  A
         maternal uncle in possession of his CSID would be able to assist in
         locating the original place of  registration  of  the  individual's
         mother, and from there the trail would need to be followed  to  the
         place that her records were transferred upon marriage. It must also
         be borne in mind that a significant number  of  IDPs  in  Iraq  are
         themselves undocumented; if that is the case it  is  unlikely  that
         they could be of assistance.

      d) For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish origin in  possession
         of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from Baghdad to  the
         IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable and practical and can be
         made without a real risk of P suffering persecution, serious  harm,
         Article 3 ill treatment nor would any difficulties on  the  journey
         make relocation unduly harsh.

      e) The appellant will  face  considerable  difficulty  in  making  the
         journey between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or valid
         passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including  two
         checkpoints in the immediate  vicinity  of  the  airport.   If  the
         appellant has neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is  a  real
         risk of the appellant being detained at  a  checkpoint  until  such
         time as the security personnel are able to verify  the  appellant's
         identity.  It is not reasonable to require the appellant to  travel
         between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability of the appellant
         to verify his identity at a checkpoint. This normally requires  the
         attendance  of  a  male  family  member  and  production   of   the
         appellant's identity documents but may also be achieved by  calling
         upon "connections" higher up in the chain of command.

      f) For  those  without  the  assistance  of  family  in  the  IKR  the
         accommodation options are limited.

      g) An appellant cannot work without a valid CSID.

      h) If an appellant is from an area with a marked association with ISIL
         that may deter future employers.

      i) The Tribunal accepted that civil registries in the contested  areas
         have been left in utter chaos  and  there  is  evidence  that  many
         documents have been either lost or destroyed.

      j) Applying through a consulate abroad for  a  CSID,  the  authorities
         will require the applicant to first make a statement explaining why
         he needs a CSID and attach this to his application form, which must
         countersigned by the head of the applicant's family and stamped  by
         the consulate or embassy. He must then produce his  Iraqi  passport
         and proof of status in the country where he is applying,  the  name
         of a representative (proxy) in Iraq, an additional  form  completed
         by the head of the applicant's family verifying that  the  contents
         of his application form were true, four colour copies of  his  INC,
         and 10 colour photographs.    Crucially the applicant must be  able
         to produce something  which  can  establish  the  location  of  his
         family's details in the civil register. This should be a  CSID,  an
         INC or birth certificate. If none of these  are  available  to  the
         applicant, he must supply the identity documents of his parents.

      k) If you are in Iraq, and have all  of  the  required  documents,  in
         normal circumstances the process is straightforward and  quick  and
         should take no more than three days.

      l) The only way that a totally undocumented Iraqi could  realistically
         hope to obtain a new CSID would be  the  attendance  at  the  civil
         registry of a male family member prepared to vouch for him or  her.
         The production of a CSID from, for instance, an uncle, would enable
         the Registrar  to  trace  back  through  the  record  to  find  the
         individual's father, and in turn him.

18. If he did not have access to a CSID then I would have  agreed  with  Ms
    Patel that he would not have been returnable because the Judge accepted
    he had lost contact  with  all  male  family  members  and  any  former
    colleagues must have come from  a  contested  area  and  there  was  no
    evidence before the Judge that a former colleague was either  alive  or
    able to assist him. Following the guidance in AAH, it  is  unlikely  he
    would have been able to obtain a CSID within  a  reasonable  period  of
    time bearing in mind he  would  have  been  returned  to  Baghdad.  The
    guidance makes it clear that without a CSID, the appellant  would  face
    considerable difficulty in making the journey between Baghdad  and  the
    IKR by land because there is a real risk of him  being  detained  at  a
    checkpoint until such time as the security personnel are able to verify
    his identity.  It is not reasonable to require the appellant to  travel
    between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability of the appellant  to
    verify his identity at a checkpoint.

19. However, a key finding in this appeal is the finding by  the  Judge  in
    paragraph [63] of her decision that the appellant "either knows or  has
    access  to  details  or  copies  of  his  expired  CSID  and/or  family
    register".

20. In assessing whether he had access to such information I find the Judge
    was entitled to take into account any positive or  adverse  credibility
    findings when making the above finding.

21. The Judge noted that  the  appellant  had  available  to  him  personal
    information about himself and his involvement with  the  police  force.
    The Judge placed weight on that evidence when accepting he was a member
    of  the  police  force.  The  Judge  found  it  was   "remarkable   and
    inconsistent with his behaviour as a whole that he had no record of his
    CSID or of his details in the family register in Iraq". The  Judge  was
    aware he had the document at some time since he left Iraq. It  is  this
    finding that Ms Patel has  challenged  as  being  speculative,  but  Ms
    Pettersen argued that this  is  effectively  a  disagreement  with  the
    Judge's findings.

22. The Judge has provided her reasons for why she  was  satisfied  he  had
    those details and for there to be an error such reasoning would have to
    be perverse. The Judge concluded he was not telling the truth about his
    CSID and gave adequate reasons for that finding.  The  finding  is  not
    perverse and is well-reasoned.

23. The Judge then had to ask herself whether  this  information  would  be
    sufficient to obtain a new CSID and again reference needs to be made to
    the guidance set out above in AAH.  Applying  the  guidance  above  the
    appellant could appoint a proxy,  such  a  lawyer,  to  deal  with  the
    formalities in Iraq and on the basis the appellant has  been  found  to
    have access to his CSID information I find the Judge  was  entitled  to
    find he would be able to go back to the  Consulate  in  Manchester  and
    provide the necessary  information  and  be  issued  with  a  new  CSID
    enabling him and his family to return to Iraq and, in  particular,  the
    IKR. The Judge noted  he  was  educated  and  previously  worked  as  a
    policeman and having rejected his account to have been involved in  the
    escape of ISIS soldiers  the  conclusion  he  could  be  returned,  via
    Baghdad, was open to the Judge.

24. There is no material error.



NOTICE OF DECISION

I dismiss the appeal and uphold the original decision.


Signed                              Date     09/08/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal no fee award can be made.


Signed                              Date     09/08/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Judge Alis
