
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00287/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd February 2018                         |On 27th March 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               T S M (Nigeria)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie, Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Paul in the First-tier Tribunal,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    Secretary  of  State's  decision   to   refuse   refugee   recognition,
    humanitarian protection or leave to remain on human rights grounds,  on
    the basis of her assertion that she is lesbian.  It was  common  ground
    both at the First-tier Tribunal and today that if the  appellant  is  a
    Nigerian lesbian there is a risk requiring international protection  in
    Nigeria.

 2. The First-tier Judge disbelieved the core of the  appellant's  account.
    He did so without making a finding on the credibility of  the  evidence
    of her witness Mr James, and stating  that  there  was  before  him  no
    evidence that the  appellant  had  been  cohabiting  with  her  claimed
    lesbian partner while in the United Kingdom.

 3. It was not the case that there was no evidence of cohabitation:  on the
    contrary, there was the appellant's  own  evidence,  the  corroborative
    evidence  of  Mr  James,  and  a  large  number  of  documents  in  the
    appellant's bundle, which were jointly addressed to the  appellant  and
    her claimed partner at the address  where  she  says  they  both  live.
    There is no assessment of that  evidence  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.

 4. The Judge's decision is contrary to the evidence before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  That is capable of amounting to an error of law as  set  out
    at [90] in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke of R (Iran) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982  and  in  this
    appeal, the error is plainly material.

 5. There is no alternative but to allow the appeal and  remit  it  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  for  remaking,  with  no  findings  of  fact   or
    credibility preserved.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.



Signed:  Judith A J  C  Gleeson                     Date:          26  March
2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson








