
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00066/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC on 11 November 2020 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|At a remote hearing via Skype               |On 17 November 2020            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                      M
                          ANNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Saunders, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.



Introduction

      1. I have made an anonymity direction because this decision refers  to
         the appellant's international protection claim.

      2. This is an appeal by the appellant (who  was  born  in  1994),  who
         claims to be a citizen of Eritrea, against a decision of First-tier
         Tribunal  ('FTT')  Judge  Mark  Davies,  sent  on  18  March  2020,
         dismissing his appeal on asylum grounds.

      3. In a decision dated 6 July 2020 Upper Tribunal ('UT')  Judge  Finch
         granted permission to appeal observing all the grounds of appeal to
         be arguable.  Judge Finch was particularly concerned that  the  FTT
         failed to apply the appropriate standard of proof to  the  question
         of the appellant's nationality and failed to take into account  his
         age when his Eritrean parents died and the fact that he was  raised
         by an Ethiopian foster mother when making findings on  nationality.



      4. The matter now  comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  FTT
         decision contains an error of law, and if so whether it  should  be
         set aside.

      5. At the beginning of the hearing Mr McVeety conceded that the  FTT's
         decision contains material errors of law such that it should be set
         aside.  Mr McVeety was entirely correct to concede the  appeal  for
         the reasons I summarise below.

      6. Both representatives agreed that the error of law is such that  the
         decision needs to be remade completely.  This  will  require  fresh
         findings of fact.  I had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior
         President's Practice Statement and the nature  and  extent  of  the
         factual findings required in remaking the decision, and  I  decided
         that the matter should be remitted to the FTT.

      7. The appellant's evidence in support of his claim to be a citizen of
         Eritrea and  not  Ethiopia  is  clearly  set  out  in  his  witness
         statement dated 10 February 2020.  This includes the following:  he
         was born in Eritrea to Eritrean parents; his mother  died  when  he
         was a baby; his father along with the appellant moved  to  Ethiopia
         shortly after this, in order to work as a vet and to live with  his
         Ethiopian girlfriend; his father died when the appellant was  about
         4 years old and he continued to live with his  girlfriend  (who  he
         describes as a foster  mother);  the  appellant  never  had  lawful
         status in Ethiopia and in 2015 was placed in a refugee camp  before
         moving back to Eritrea; he  had  further  difficulties  in  Eritrea
         before leaving on foot to Sudan  in  2016;  in  Sudan  he  met  and
         married his wife, a citizen of Ethiopia; she returned  to  Ethiopia
         in 2017 and the appellant fled Sudan and claimed asylum in  the  UK
         in 2018.

      8. Mr McVeety was correct to concede that the FTT's  adverse  findings
         of fact and conclusion that the appellant  fabricated  his  account
         failed to take into account important aspects  of  the  appellant's
         evidence as summarised above.  I am also satisfied that McVeety was
         entirely correct to concede that the FTT erred in law in:

          i) drawing adverse inferences from the appellant's  inability  to
             speak the language of Eritrea  without  addressing  his  claim
             that he left Eritrea as a young child where he was brought  up
             by an Ethiopian foster mother and only spent a brief period of
             under a year in Eritrea between 2015 and 2016;

         ii) basing the conclusion that the  appellant  is  a  national  of
             Ethiopia on the lower standard of proof and not the balance of
             probabilities - see [63] and [67];

        iii) in any event failing to engage with the  evidence  as  to  the
             legal framework for the acquisition of  Ethiopian  citizenship
             particularly in the light of the  appellant's  claim  that  he
             resided in Ethiopia unlawfully and  never  lived  in  Ethiopia
             with his wife.



Decision

      9. The FTT decision contains errors of law.  Its decision cannot stand
         and is set aside.  The matter is remitted to the FTT, where it will
         be remade de novo by a judge other than Judge Mark Davies.


Signed:  Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 11 November 2020
