
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00873/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 13 December 2017                  |on 14 December 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [A B]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Reprsentation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G P McGowan, of Quinn, Martin & Langan,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Iran, sought asylum based on his conversion
    from Islam to Christianity.

 2. The respondent refused his claim for reasons explained  in  her  letter
    dated 13 January 2017.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mrs D H Clapham heard the appellant's  appeal
    on 27 February 2017 and dismissed it by a  decision  promulgated  on  4
    July 2017.

 4. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the  UT  are  set  out  in  the  8
    paragraphs of his notice dated 13 July 2017.  The grant  of  permission
    was not restricted.

 5. Mr McGowan submitted firstly on paragraph 1 of  the  grounds,  "...  no
    explanation within the decision why it was not reasonably practical  to
    issue it more timeously especially when dealing with a vulnerable child
    in respect  of  whom  issues  of  credibility  were  noted  to  be  key
    (paragraph 57)".  He drew attention to the expectation  that  decisions
    would be issued within 14 days,  and  to  the  principle  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective, delay might  be  incompatible  with
    rule 2 (1) (e) of the Tribunal Procedure (FtT) (IAC) Rules.

 6. Although Mr McGowan began by describing this as a "preliminary  issue",
    he accepted in course of his submission that  delay  alone  was  not  a
    ground on which the decision might be set aside.  He then advanced  the
    point as one to be taken along with the other grounds.

 7. At paragraph 87 the judge said, "It is telling that the appellant  does
    not know how many times he attended the house  church".   However,  his
    oral evidence recorded at paragraph 32 was that he  attended  "5  or  6
    times but does not exactly remember".  That appears  to  be  consistent
    with records of his interviews and with his written statements.  It  is
    difficult to see anything in that small degree  of  inexactitude  which
    might be telling against credibility.

 8. Paragraph 90 of the decision begins with two sentences  narrating  part
    of the appellant's evidence and continues, "All of this  account  lacks
    credibility ...".  The decision does not say why.  The events  narrated
    are not self-evidently preposterous.

 9. The respondent  had  no  effective  answer  to  any  of  the  foregoing
    criticisms.

10. There was also some force in the submission that the judge  went  wrong
    at paragraph 89 in saying that the appellant "was unable  to  give  any
    details" of others who attended the house church, whereas at  paragraph
    33 she recorded that he "named some by their first names".

11. Mr McGowan submitted that there was another obvious error at  paragraph
    86, in that the judge misunderstood the evidence, and the appellant had
    not claimed to have converted overnight.  After full reference by  both
    sides to the underlying evidence, however, it appears that the  judge's
    understanding of the evidence on that point might well be supportable.

12. There was also debate on whether the judge went  wrong  by  failing  to
    accept that the appellant was abused by an Islamic teacher,  when  that
    had not been rejected by the respondent, or by failing  to  decide  the
    point; by failing to take account of difficulty  in  relating  in  such
    evidence; and in failing to resolve what was  to  be  expected  of  his
    memory.  It is not always possible or necessary to resolve every  issue
    of fact, especially if distant in time, and not directly  part  of  the
    claim; what must be decided is whether the  appellant  established  the
    facts on which his claim turns.  These are  all  points  which  do  not
    raise obvious errors of law, but rather factual matters  which  may  be
    live at the fresh hearing.

13. I indicated at the hearing that the case would be remitted.

14. A period of three months delay was  at  one  time  a  rough  guide  for
    setting a decision aside. This decision was delayed for over four.   An
    inference that something has been overlooked or forgotten will be  more
    readily drawn  where  there  has  been  delay,  particularly  when  the
    decision  contains  no  explanation  for  the  delay  (see  Macdonald's
    Immigration Law and Practice, 9th ed., 20.136).  In that  context,  the
    criticisms accepted above are sufficient  to  show  that  the  decision
    cannot safely stand as a resolution of the appellant's case.

15. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

16. The nature of the case is such that  it  is  appropriate  in  terms  of
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice  Statement  7.2  to
    remit the case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

17. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge D H Clapham.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            14 December 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




