
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Pa/00684/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Bradford                        |           Decision and Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 12 May 2017                           |           On 26 May 2017            |
|                                         |                                     |
|                                         |                                     |
|Before                                   |                                     |
|                                         |                                     |


                                      DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
BAGRAL

                                   Between

                               AHMED ABDULLAH

                                           (anonymity direction NOT MADE)



                                                        Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, of Counsel, instructed by Halliday
Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    O'Hanlon (hereafter "FtTJ") dismissing his appeal on asylum  and  human
    rights grounds against a decision taken on 27 July  2015  refusing  his
    protection claim.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 1 January 1994.  He  last
    left Eritrea on 6 September 2011 and travelled to Libya. He entered the
    UK on 5 May 2015 and claimed asylum. The Appellant claimed that  if  he
    returned to Eritrea he would be arrested and ill-treated on account  of
    his familial  connection  to  his  father  and  brother  who  had  been
    imprisoned and that further, he would be punished for  leaving  Eritrea
    illegally and evading military service.

 3. There was no dispute by the Respondent as to the  Appellant's  identity
    and nationality, but she concluded that his account of past events  was
    not truthful. It was thus not accepted that he left Eritrea illegally.

The Decision of the FtTJ

 4. The FtTJ heard oral evidence from the Appellant and found his  evidence
    was not worthy of belief for the reasons he gave at [30]  -  [36].  The
    FtTJ proceeded to consider the issue of risk on return in light of  the
    Appellant's profile as a failed asylum seeker, and  further  considered
    whether there would be any risk to him for  evading  military  service.
    The FTTJ referred to the Respondent's country guidance  of  March  2015
    and stated thus at [37]:

 5.   "I find that on the  basis  of  the  country  guidance  that  if  the
    Appellant were returned any punishment that he may receive for  evading
    national service would be unlikely to include detention or imprisonment
    and in all likelihood lead to a return to national/military service."

 6. In dealing with the issue of illegal exit, the FtTJ further  relied  on
    the Respondent's country guidance which in turn relied  on  the  Danish
    Immigration Service 2014, and  concluded  that  "[40]....the  Appellant
    could pay the diaspora tax and send a letter of apology to an  Eritrean
    Embassy and that if that were done, the Appellant would not be at  risk
    upon return to Eritrea on account of any legal exit." (sic)

    [My Emphasis]

 7. The FtTJ then dealt briefly with Article 8 as it had not been seriously
    pursued before him and accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal


 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal essentially on the basis that
    the  FtTJ  erred  in  finding  that  the  Appellant  would  not  suffer
    persecution on return to Eritrea as he would only "face punishment  for
    evasion of military service, which would be a requirement to carry  out
    military/national service"; was in error in relying on the Danish Fact-
    Finding report and  failed  to  properly  apply  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    existing Country Guidance in respect of Eritrea.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on 9 December 2016.

10. In a Rule 24 response dated 10 February 2017, the  Respondent  conceded
    the FtTJ made an error of fact in relation to the evidence  about  risk
    on return to someone who left illegally, and further accepted that, the
    FtTJ failed to make clear findings as to whether the Appellant  did  in
    fact leave Eritrea illegally.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me to decide whether the decision contains
    a material error of law. At the hearing, Mrs Pettersen in-line with the
    Respondent's Rule 24 reply conceded the FtTJ materially  erred  in  law
    and I indicated my agreement  with  that  concession.  I  announced  my
    decision setting aside the decision of the FtTJ and  it  was  thus  not
    necessary to call upon Mr Hussain to make submissions.

Error of Law

12. It is not necessary to traverse in detail all the grounds raised by the
    application given the Respondent's concession that the FtTJ's  decision
    cannot stand, so I set out my reasons briefly below as follows:


      (1)   The issue of illegal exit remains an issue  of  significance  in
           Eritrean cases. That has been reaffirmed by this Tribunal in its
           decision in MST &  Ors  (national  service  -  risk  categories)
           Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC). While the factual  error  at
           [40] is likely to be a typing error, in that, the FtTJ meant  to
           refer to illegal rather than legal exit, it is apparent that  no
           clear findings of fact were made on the issue of  illegal  exit.
           The FtTJ thereby failed  to  make  findings  in  relation  to  a
           material issue. Such a  failure  impacts  on  all  that  follows
           resulting in a flawed assessment of risk on return.

       (2)  That assessment is further flawed by the fact that the FtTJ  was
           dealing with an Eritrean national of draft age who says that  he
           last left Eritrea in 2011. The Appellant's evidence was that  he
           was still subject to national service and will be treated  as  a
           draft evader on return. That risk is not adequately addressed in
           the Decision. The FtTJ failed  to  engage  with  the  categories
           identified in MO (illegal exit -  risk  on  return)  Eritrea  CG
           [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC), reconfirmed by  MST  (supra),  and  his
           reliance on the Respondent's country guidance incorporating  the
           discredited findings  of  the  Danish  Fact  Finding  report  to
           support a conclusion that the  Appellant  will  be  returned  to
           national service without punishment is clearly contrary  to  the
           Tribunal's Country Guidance.

13.   Taking those matters as a whole, I find that the decision  to  dismiss
    the Appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error  of  law
    and thus cannot stand.


Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    Both parties agreed that the appeal should be reheard by the First-tier
    Tribunal. I agree. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a rehearing of the Appellant's protection claim  before  any  judge
    apart from Judge O'Hanlon.





Signed                                  Date :                       22  May
2017



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Bagral

