
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA007712016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 April 2017                          |On 5 May 2017                     |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     N A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Caseley instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Sudan and a member of the Berti
    tribe.  She was born on [ ] 1988.  She claims to have  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 23 October 2015 when she claimed asylum  having  been
    encountered in the rear of a lorry.

 3. The basis of her claim is that she is a non-Arab  from  Darfur  of  the
    Berti tribe.  She claims that her husband was arrested on two occasions
    and ill-treated and that she was arrested and detained,  most  recently
    in December 2014, when she was  accused  of  being  involved  with  the
    Justice and Equality Movement ("JEM").

 4. On 12 January 2016, the Secretary  of  State  refused  her  claims  for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 15 August 2016, Judge Burnett dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on
    all grounds.  He made an adverse credibility finding and did not accept
    that she was a member of the Berti tribe or that she had been  arrested
    and detained as she claimed.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  six
    grounds challenging the judge's adverse credibility finding,  including
    that he did not accept that she was a member of the Berti tribe.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Ransley) on 20 September 2016.

 8. The Secretary of State initially filed a rule 24 response on 20 October
    2016 conceding that the judge had erred in law.  However, on 28 October
    2016 a further rule 24  response  was  served  seeking  to  uphold  the
    judge's adverse findings.

 9. Before me, Ms Caseley, who represented the appellant, did not  seek  to
    take any point against the Secretary of State on the basis  that  there
    were two rule 24 notices and accepted that the Secretary of  State  was
    entitled to rely upon the notice of 28 October 2016 and seek to  defend
    Judge Burnett's decision in the Upper Tribunal.

The Judge's Decision

10. The judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paras 35-51 of  his
    determination.  The central passages are as follows.

11. At para 36, the judge noted that the appellant's  credibility  was  "an
    important aspect of this appeal".  He then stated:  "I have taken  into
    account that the appellant is a vulnerable individual  when  making  my
    assessment".  He then noted the Presidential Guidelines  on  vulnerable
    witnesses and set  out,  in  some  detail,  the  proper  approach  when
    considering expert evidence derived from the decision  of  JL  (Medical
    Reports - Credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) to  which  he  was
    referred by the appellant's (then) Counsel.

12. At paras 38-39, the judge summarised aspects of Dr  Battersby's  report
    including what the appellant had told Dr Battersby  about  her  claimed
    experiences in Sudan and what  was  said  about  the  relevance  of  Dr
    Battersby's evidence that the appellant suffered from PTSD  to  explain
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence:

         "38.     The expert records the appellant's account leading to  her
             current situation.  The doctor asked her about events in 2014.
              The appellant described her situation to the doctor that  she
             was arrested at  home  and  the  authorities  accused  her  of
             knowing where her husband was.  The appellant stated that  she
             was kept in detention for 15 days.   I  noted  that  this  was
             [not] the account which the appellant recounted  to  the  Home
             Office when she was arrested collecting clothes to donate  for
             charity.  I raised this apparent inconsistent with the parties
             at the start of the hearing.  Mr McWatters asked the appellant
             about this apparent inconsistency during  the  hearing.   When
             making submissions Mr McWatters did not wish to state anything
             further regarding this particular aspect other than  repeating
             that  the  appellant  suffered  from  PTSD  and  so  I  should
             carefully assess the  appellant's  evidence  as  a  vulnerable
             person.

         39.  The doctor stated that the appellant coped relatively well  in
             her interview with the  doctor.   She  also  stated  that  the
             appellant understood the Tribunal process and had the capacity
             to fully participate in it.  She stated that the appellant had
             briefly dissociated during her interview  with  the  appellant
             and that  the  appellant  may  do  this  during  any  Tribunal
             hearing.   It  was  also  stated  that  the  cogency  of   the
             appellant's evidence maybe effected by her moderate  PTSD.   I
             have taken this into  account  in  assessing  the  appellant's
             evidence and the cogency of it."

    I have inserted into para 38 the word "not" which was  clearly  omitted
    by the judge as the sense of that passage makes clear.

13. Then at paras 40-41, the judge  dealt  with  the  appellant's  evidence
    concerning her claimed arrest and  detention  in  December  2014.   The
    judge noted an inconsistency in that evidence:

         "40.     The appellant described in her  interview  with  the  Home
             Office her arrest in December 2014.  She was asked a number of
             questions about her arrest and detention.  She stated she  was
             detained for 15 days.  She stated she  was  accused  of  being
             part of the Justice and Equality movement.  She stated she was
             with 10 other people when she was  detained.   She  then  said
             'four [of them] they attacked us in our  house'.   She  stated
             she was asked why she was assisting these people.   She  later
             in the interview stated she  had  experienced  other  problems
             because of her husband.  From questions  90-99  the  appellant
             answered questions about problems she had faced as a result of
             her husband.  She stated she had been  detained  twice.   Once
             for just the day.  The  other  occasion  for  two  days.   The
             appellant did not relate at any time the 15 day  detention  to
             her problems about her husband in the interview.  This  is  at
             striking odds to the account recorded by the doctor.   I  note
             that the account the appellant  gave  to  her  solicitors  and
             recorded in her statement for the appeal hearing is that given
             in  her  home  office  interview  save  she  adds   that   the
             authorities stated to her that she knew where her husband  was
             in respect of the arrest in December 2014.

         41.  The appellant also states although she was released to sign at
             the police station, she only went twice and then left Sudan on
             5th June 2015."

14. At paras 42-47, the  judge  dealt  with  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    particular in relation to her claim to be a member of the  Berti  tribe
    and concluded that her lack of knowledge  and  inconsistencies  in  her
    evidence were not explained by the  fact  that  she  was  a  vulnerable
    witness suffering from PTSD:

         "42.     The appellant states she is a member of the  Berti  tribe.
             She lived with her father.  She also stated she had  an  older
             sister and  a  younger  brother.   She  did  not  recount  any
             problems faced by any  of  these  individuals  that  could  be
             classed as persecution.

         43.  The appellant stated that she had only met one other Berti  in
             the  UK  and  he  was  an  interpreter.   I  find  this   very
             surprising.  The Tribunal hears numerous appeals  from  people
             from Sudan and from non-Arab tribes'  people.   The  appellant
             has provided no supporting statement or other information from
             anyone else to support her claims.  There is no expert  report
             provided to support her assertion that she is a non-Arab Berti
             tribe member.

         44.  The appellant did not know  the  answers  to  basic  questions
             about the Berti such as whether they cultivate any crops, when
             she was question by the respondent in her  substantive  asylum
             interview.  The appellant notably changed her  answer  at  the
             hearing to stating that they did cultivate crops ('grow  seeds
             in the land').  She  also  stated  that  the  Berti  are  Goat
             Shepherds  where  background  information   records   as   the
             respondent asserted in the RFRL.

         45.  It is difficult to make an appraisal that a person is a member
             of a particular tribe by conducting a general knowledge  quiz.
             I must look carefully though at the appellant's credibility as
             a witness and consider  whether  I  accept  her  evidence  and
             statement that he is a member of the Berti tribe.

         46.  In forming my decision in respect of the  credibility  of  the
             appellant's account I have taken into account the points  made
             in the RFRL.   I  note  that  the  date  recorded  as  to  the
             appellant's release. 1st July ie 01/07 which is  the  American
             date form for 7th January.  The appellant corrected this  date
             in her statement.  The date, 1st January, would be  consistent
             with a 15 day detention from 22nd December  2014.   I  do  not
             give this point any weight in my assessment.

         47.  However, the inconsistencies I have identified above  lead  me
             to the conclusion that I do not  accept  the  appellant  as  a
             credible witness.  I have  had  very  careful  regard  to  the
             assessment of the doctor and  her  detailed  report.   I  have
             noted a discrepancy with the appellant's account told  to  the
             doctor and that told to the Home Office and in  her  statement
             prepared for  the  appeal.   I  have  considered  whether  the
             inconsistencies could be explained by the  appellant  being  a
             vulnerable witness suffering from PTSD.  This does not however
             explain her lack of basic knowledge of the Berti."

15.  At  para  48  the  judge  added  a  further   point   concerning   the
    implausibility  of  the  appellant  and  her  family  experiencing   no
    difficulties despite her failing to comply with a requirement  to  sign
    on at the police station and leaving the country five months  later  as
    follows:

         "48.     It is also not plausible or credible that if the appellant
             was required to sign at the police station and that  she  only
             signed twice and left the country 5  months  later,  that  she
             would not have faced further problems from the authorities.  I
             also  note  that  the  appellant   does   not   describe   any
             difficulties for her wider family in terms of  persecution  as
             non-Arab tribes' people."

16. Then at para 49, the judge dealt with s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration
    (treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004  and  considered  that  the
    appellant's failure to claim asylum en route to the UK was damaging  of
    her credibility.

         "49.     I am required to take into account section 8  AITCA.   The
             appellant passed through a number of  European  countries  and
             did not claim asylum.  I am required by the Act to  take  this
             into account as damaging her credibility."

17. At para 50 the judge reached the following adverse finding:

         "50.     I have taken a holistic approach to the  totality  of  the
             evidence.  I do not find that  the  appellant  is  a  credible
             witness.  I reject her evidence entirely.  Applying the  lower
             standard of proof in asylum claims, I find that the  appellant
             has not provided a credible claim to asylum."

18. On the basis of that  finding,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

The Submissions

19. Ms Caseley relied upon the six grounds upon which permission to  appeal
    was granted and which she expanded upon in her oral submissions.

20. First, the judge failed  properly  to  take  into  account  the  expert
    psychiatric report of Dr Battersby.   Ms  Caseley  made  three  points.
    First, the judge failed to  indicate  which  parts  of  the  report  he
    accepted and which parts he rejected.  In particular, the judge  failed
    to make clear whether he accepted  that  the  appellant  suffered  from
    PTSD.  Secondly, the judge failed to take into account  Dr  Battersby's
    opinion (at A27 of the bundle)  that  the  appellant's  behaviour  "was
    highly consistent with someone who had experienced a highly significant
    traumatic experience".  Thirdly, and drawing on  the  third  ground  of
    appeal, Ms Caseley submitted that the judge failed to take into account
    Dr Battersby's report in assessing whether the appellant's  PTSD  might
    explain inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence and also  her  lack
    of knowledge of the Berti tribe.

21. Secondly, Ms Caseley submitted that the judge was wrong in para  48  to
    conclude that it was implausible that neither  the  appellant  nor  her
    family experienced any difficulties despite her failure to sign at  the
    police station as she was required after her release  and  having  left
    Sudan five months later.  Ms Caseley relied upon the Court of  Appeal's
    decision in HK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2006] EWCA  Civ  1037  where,  at
    [29]  and  [30]   Neuberger   LJ   cautioned   against   relying   upon
    implausibility  as  a  reason  for  disbelieving  an  account   without
    reference to "customs and circumstances" which might be very  different
    in another society.

22. Thirdly, Ms Caseley submitted that the judge  had  taken  into  account
    deficiencies in the appellant's knowledge about the Berti but  had  not
    taken into account that in her interview she  had  given  some  answers
    that were correct.  Ms Caseley also raised the  issue  of  whether  the
    answers relied upon by the judge were, in fact, inaccurate.

23. Fourthly, Ms Caseley submitted that the judge was wrong to require,  in
    effect, corroboration of the appellant's evidence when he had stated at
    para 43 that she had not provided any supporting statement from  anyone
    else and no expert report in respect of her claim to be a non-Arab from
    Darfur.

24. Fifthly, Ms Caseley submitted that the judge wrongly applied s.8 of the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  (the
    "2004 Act") when he concluded in para 49 that he was "required" to take
    into account as damaging of the appellant's credibility the  fact  that
    she had passed through a number  of  European  countries  and  had  not
    claimed asylum.

25. Mr Kotas, on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  submitted  that  the  judge
    disbelieved the appellant due to her lack of knowledge about the  Berti
    tribe and because of inconsistencies in  her  evidence.   He  submitted
    that the judge had not failed to have regard to Dr Battersby's  report.
    He submitted that it had  been  accepted  before  the  judge  that  the
    appellant suffered from PTSD.   The  judge  had  specifically  set  out
    Counsel's submissions made on behalf of the appellant  in  relation  to
    the assessment of her evidence in the light of Dr  Battersby's  report.
    The judge acknowledged, Mr Kotas submitted, that the  appellant  was  a
    "vulnerable witness".  He had correctly directed himself in relation to
    the approach to expert medical evidence citing at paras 36  and  37  in
    some detail the case of JL.  Further, the judge had properly dealt with
    Dr Battersby's evidence at paras 38 and 39 and had  specifically  taken
    it into account as he set out in para 47.  Mr Kotas submitted that  the
    judge had looked at the evidence correctly in the round in reaching his
    adverse findings.

26. Secondly, Mr Kotas submitted that it was properly open to the judge  to
    find that it was not plausible that the appellant and her family  would
    experience  no  difficulties  when  she  failed  to  comply  with   her
    obligation to sign at the police station.  There was nothing to suggest
    otherwise and the inference was properly  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence.

27. Thirdly, Mr Kotas submitted that the judge reached his adverse findings
    not only on the basis of inconsistencies in the appellant's account but
    also her lack of knowledge.  Mr Kotas submitted that he was entitled to
    take into account the appellant's lack of knowledge.   He  pointed  out
    that Dr Battersby's evidence was not based  upon  instructions  dealing
    specifically with the effect of her PTSD upon her  lack  of  knowledge.
    The judge had taken the  report  into  account  but  he  could  not  be
    criticised for failing to do so in respect of her lack of knowledge  as
    the expert did not deal with this.

28.  Fifthly,  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not   required,
    inappropriately, corroboration of the appellant's account.  In para 43,
    the judge was simply recognising that the appellant had not produced an
    expert report and that there was no supporting evidence  to  'back  up'
    what she said.

29. Finally, Mr Kotas submitted that the judge was entitled  under  s.8  of
    the 2004 Act to take into account the fact that the appellant  had  not
    claimed asylum in a number of European countries through which she  had
    passed before arriving in the UK.

Discussion

30. I deal first with Ms Caseley's points raised in relation to the judge's
    treatment of Dr Battersby's evidence.

31. First, it is clear that the judge had well in mind the submissions made
    by the appellant's  (then)  Counsel  that  Dr  Battersby's  report  was
    relevant in  two  respects:   first,  her  view  that  the  appellant's
    symptoms were "highly consistent" with the events  she  described  and,
    secondly that in assessing inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence
    regard should be  had  to  her  PTSD.   Judge  Burnett  set  out  those
    submissions at para 29 of his determination.  In reaching his findings,
    the judge directed himself (correctly) that he must have regard to  the
    appellant being a "vulnerable individual" in para 36,  again  referring
    to the submissions made on the appellant's behalf  and  Dr  Battersby's
    evidence at paras 38 and 39 before concluding at para  47  that  having
    had "very careful regard" to Dr Battersby's assessment and  report,  he
    was not satisfied that the inconsistencies in the  appellant's  account
    could not be explained on the basis of her PTSD  and  further  did  not
    explain her "lack of basic knowledge" of the Berti.

32. Ms Caseley relied upon the cases of Ibrahim v SSHD (1998) INLR 511  and
    R (AM) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 521 that proper account must be taken  of
    an expert  as  independent  evidence.   It  is  plain  that  the  judge
    accepted, as was the position of  the  Presenting  Officer  before  the
    judge (see para 28), the evidence of Dr Battersby, in  particular  that
    the appellant suffered from PTSD.  It is also clear on any fair reading
    of Judge Burnett's decision that he did take  Dr  Battersby's  evidence
    into account.

33. As regards the inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence, it was open
    to the judge to conclude that the inconsistencies in the  evidence  set
    out at paras 38  and  40  were  not  satisfactorily  explained  by  her
    suffering from  PTSD.   The  appellant  had  given  different  accounts
    concerning her claimed arrest and detention  in  December  2014  to  Dr
    Battersby and in her asylum interview and subsequent evidence.  It  was
    significant that in the former account she had told Dr  Battersby  that
    the authorities were interested in her because of her husband whilst in
    her interview and subsequent evidence her arrest and detention was  not
    said to relate to any problem arising from  her  husband's  activities.
    Rather, she was accused of being part of the JEM.

34. Further, I do not accept Ms Caseley's submission that the judge  failed
    to take into  account  Dr  Battersby's  opinion  that  the  appellant's
    condition was "highly consistent" with the events she claimed occurred.
      The  judge  clearly  had  this  well  in  mind  in  para  29  of  his
    determination.  Dr Battersby's evidence was not determinative.  Indeed,
    in relation to the appellant's "depressive illness" at page A20 of  the
    bundle Dr Battersby, in her report, noted that  it  "could  equally  be
    caused by the stress of her situation".

35. In my judgment, Judge Burnett properly took into account Dr Battersby's
    evidence both in assessing the inconsistencies in her evidence and also
    Dr Battersby's opinion concerning the consistency  of  the  appellant's
    symptoms with her claim.

36. Of course, Judge Burnett also  relied  upon  the  appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge  about  the  Berti  tribe.   Mr  Kotas  submitted   that   Dr
    Battersby's report was not relevant to explain that lack  of  knowledge
    as she had not been asked to comment upon this aspect of the  Secretary
    of State's reasoning which was subsequently adopted by  Judge  Burnett.
    Ms Caseley submitted that although the lack of knowledge issue was  not
    specifically part of Dr Battersby's instructions her opinion  that  the
    appellant's PTSD might affect her evidence was covered  by  her  report
    which  dealt  with  "internally  inconsistent  statements"  relied   on
    adversely to her credibility (see A30-A31 of the bundle).   Ms  Caseley
    relied on the point made by Judge Burnett at para 44 that the appellant
    had changed her evidence concerning what, if any, crops were cultivated
    by the Berti.  That was an inconsistency in her evidence.

37. To the extent that the  judge  relied  on  the  appellant's  change  of
    evidence at the hearing and set out at para 44, it  is  clear  that  he
    fully had regard to Dr Battersby's opinion of the effect,  if  any,  of
    the appellant's PTSD upon her  evidence.   However,  the  Secretary  of
    State identified a number of answers given  by  the  appellant  in  her
    asylum interview which were inconsistent with the  background  evidence
    at paras 16-19.  These included that the Berti tribe had never had  its
    own language, that they were traditionally goat shepherds and  did  not
    traditionally cultivate any particular crops, their homeland was  known
    as Mellit and that  there  were  no  Berti  ministers  in  the  current
    government or parliament.  Judge Burnett clearly had in mind  what  was
    said in paras 16-19 of the refusal letter when at  para  44  he  stated
    that the appellant did not know answers to basic  questions  about  the
    Berti "such as" and then referring to the appellant's  answer  relating
    to crops and the Berti being goat shepherds.

38. In my judgment, it was properly open to Judge Burnett to conclude  that
    the  lack  of  knowledge  by  the  appellant  adversely  affected   her
    credibility, in particular her claim to be a member of the Berti tribe.
     He was entitled to make that finding  despite  what  was  said  by  Dr
    Battersby about the possible effect upon the appellant of her PTSD.

39. Ms Caseley raised in her submissions, for the first time the suggestion
    that the appellant's answers were not shown  to  be  incorrect.   As  I
    pointed out to Ms Caseley during her submissions, the  points  made  by
    the Secretary of  State  at  paras  16-19  are  supported  by  footnote
    references to a number of documents.  Two of those, at  least  extracts
    from them, are contained within the respondent's bundle.  It  is  clear
    that it was no part of the appellant's case before Judge  Burnett  that
    her answers in interview, which were said to  be  inaccurate,  were  in
    fact correct.  Her (then) Counsel's skeleton argument does not  suggest
    otherwise.  It was part of the respondent's case before  Judge  Burnett
    that the answers were inaccurate and the appellant's (then) Counsel did
    not in his oral submissions (summarised at  paras  29  and  30  of  the
    determination) seek to argue the contrary.  Rather, he relied  upon  Dr
    Battersby's report to  explain  any  deficiencies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence.  Neither the appellant's witness statement dated 3  May  2016
    nor her oral evidence before the judge contended that  her  answers  in
    interview were correct.  Indeed, she changed one of her answers in oral
    evidence - in relation to crops grown by the Berti - to  be  consistent
    with what the respondent said was the position.  I see  no  basis  upon
    which it can be said that the judge erred in law in taking into account
    the appellant's  lack  of  knowledge  concerning  the  Berti  tribe  in
    assessing her credibility and, in particular, whether she was a  member
    of that tribe.

40. In her submissions, Ms Caseley also contended that the judge had failed
    to take into account that some of the answers given  by  the  appellant
    about her tribe were consistent  with  the  background  evidence.   The
    judge  was  clearly  alive  to  this  point.   At  para   11   of   his
    determination, the judge referred to the respondent's refusal  decision
    noting that: "Some of the answers that the appellant gave were  broadly
    consistent  with  background   country   evidence   i.e.   where   they
    traditionally live".  I do not accept Ms Caseley's submission  that  in
    reaching his adverse finding the judge failed to take into account that
    not all of the appellant's answers were incorrect.

41. For these reasons, I reject Ms Caseley's  submissions  based  upon  the
    judge's failure to properly  consider  the  psychiatric  report  of  Dr
    Battersby, and in addition, in assessing the evidence of the  appellant
    concerning her claimed membership of the Berti tribe.

42. I now turn to the other points raised by Ms Caseley.

43. Ms Caseley challenged the judge's reasoning in para 48 (set out  above)
    that it was not plausible that  the  appellant  and  her  family  would
    experience no difficulties from the authorities once she failed to sign
    at the police station and after she had left Sudan five  months  later.
    Ms Caseley referred me to the Court of Appeal's decision in HK  (Sierra
    Leone) v SSHD on the dangers of relying on  "inherent  probability"  in
    asylum cases.

44. It is not necessarily impermissible for a judge to rely in his  or  her
    reasoning on an aspect of an appellant's account as being impermissible
    (see Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 per Keene LJ at [26]).   There  are,
    however, dangers in doing so and caution is  required.   In  Y,  having
    referred to HK, Keene LJ identified the dangers (at [27]):

         "A decision maker is entitled to regard an account as incredible by
         such standards, but he must take care not to do so  merely  because
         it would not seem reasonable if it had happened  in  this  country.
         In essence, he must look through the  spectacles  provided  by  the
         information he has about conditions in the country in question."

45. Where a judge has recourse to reasoning which, expressly or implicitly,
    doubts the plausibility or possibility of the events  occurring  as  an
    individual claims, in the absence of other evidence such  as  documents
    to substantiate that reasoning, the judge runs the risk that his or her
    conclusion or a purported commonsense conclusion which does  not  stand
    up  to  objective  scrutiny.   However,  the   implausibility   of   an
    individual's account may form part of the reasoning leading a judge  to
    reject an individual's account as true.  A judge must  always  bear  in
    mind that sometimes the implausible happens.  The more features  of  an
    appellant's account that are implausible, the more likely  it  is  that
    the appellant's account cannot stand up to scrutiny.

46. Whilst it is true that Judge Burnett did not refer  to  the  background
    material relating to Sudan, Ms Caseley did not identify any  background
    material which would contradict the inference drawn by the  judge.   In
    fact, the judge had a number of background documents before him in  the
    appellant's bundle including the US Department  of  State:  Sudan  2015
    Human Rights Report and the Operational Guidance Note, Republic of  the
    Sudan (August 2012).  Both of those documents speak  to  the  continued
    human rights infringements against, in particular,  non-Arab  Darfurian
    and  also  the  continued  arrest,  detention  and   ill-treatment   by
    government forces including the security forces.  If, as the  appellant
    claimed, she was perceived as connected to the JEM either personally or
    through her husband, it was a reasonable inference open  to  the  judge
    that, having been released from detention over a fifteen day period and
    required to sign at a police station, when she subsequently  failed  to
    do so and left the country five months later it  was  implausible  that
    neither she nor her family faced any problems from the authorities.

47. Turning to Ms Caseley's submission  that  the  judge  wrongly  required
    corroborative evidence of the appellant's claim, a fair reading of para
    43 does not support that contention.  In para 43 (set  out  above)  the
    judge was, in my judgment, doing no more than observing that there  was
    no supporting evidence from individuals or an expert in relation to the
    appellant's claim to be a member of the Berti tribe.  It  was  no  more
    than a statement that the appellant's claim was unsupported by evidence
    of either type.  That was evidence  which,  certainly  as  regards  the
    expert report, could have readily  been  obtained  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to take that into account (see TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA
    Civ 40).  If the  judge  had,  as  Ms  Caseley  submits,  required  the
    appellant to provide corroborative evidence,  its  absence  would  have
    been determinative of his findings.  It is clear that what he  said  in
    para 43 did not  have  that  affect.   The  judge  looked  at  all  the
    evidence, noting the absence of supporting evidence,  in  reaching  his
    adverse credibility finding.

48. The final point raised by Ms Caseley concerned s.8  of  the  2004  Act.
    She submitted that in para 49 the judge had been wrong to say that  the
    appellant's failure to claim asylum despite travelling through a number
    of European countries "required" him  to  take  that  into  account  as
    damaging her credibility.

49. Section 8 of the 2004 Act identifies a  number  of  "behaviours"  which
    must be taken into  account  in  assessing  a  claimant's  credibility.
    Section 8(4) applies to a "failure by the claimant to take advantage of
    a reasonable opportunity to make an asylum claim or human rights  claim
    while in a safe country."  In JT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 878,
    to which Ms Caseley referred me, the Court of Appeal interpreted s.8 of
    the 2004 Act as requiring the various "behaviours"  to  be  taken  into
    account as "potentially" damaging  of  a  claimant's  credibility.   Ms
    Caseley submitted that the appellant had given an explanation  why  she
    had not claimed asylum whilst travelling.  That is set out at  para  28
    of her witness statement where it is stated that:  "I was with a  group
    of people and we were advised by other asylum seekers to carry  on  our
    journey to the UK because it was safer here than anywhere  else."   The
    appellant goes on to say  that  when  they  reached  Calais  they  were
    mistreated by the police.

50. It is far from clear that any submissions were made on the  appellant's
    behalf in relation to s.8 before Judge Burnett.  No mention of  s.8  is
    made by the appellant's (then) Counsel in his skeleton argument and the
    judge's summary of his oral submissions again  makes  no  reference  to
    s.8.  In any event, even if the judge's attention had been specifically
    drawn to the appellant's explanation in her witness statement, he would
    have been fully entitled to reject it as a  reasonable  explanation  of
    why she did not claim asylum.  Having done so the "potentiality" of her
    behaviour  "damaging"  (though  not   necessarily   'destroying')   her
    credibility matured into her credibility being damaged by her  failure.
    But, it was only a factor in the judge's reasoning.  Given the  judge's
    other reasons set out  in  his  determination  at  paras  36-48,  I  am
    satisfied that,  even  if  his  failure  to  consider  her  explanation
    amounted to a misdirection and application of s.8 of the 2004 Act, that
    was not a  material  factor  which  would  have  affected  his  adverse
    credibility finding and dismissal of the appellant's appeal.

51. For these reasons, I reject Ms Caseley's  submissions.   Judge  Burnett
    did not materially err in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse  credibility
    finding and in dismissing the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Decision

52. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal did not involve the making of a material error of  law  and  the
    decision stands.

53. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date 3 May 2017
