
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00706/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 8 December 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Abdella [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dougan, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox promulgated on 20 June  2016  allowing  the
    appeal against the respondent's decision made  on  21  August  2015  to
    refuse his protection claim.

 2. The respondent's case is that he is a citizen of Sudan whose father was
    a member of the Fong (alternatively Fung) tribe and his mother from the
    Tatliba tribe.  He had also been  a  member  of  the  Sudan  Liberation
    Movement ("SLM").  His case is, put simply,  that  the  Fong/Funj  (the
    spelling is inconsistent) are a black African non-Arab tribe  who  face
    the same level of ill-treatment at the hands of the Sudanese  State  as
    non-Arab tribes from Darfur.  On that basis he asserts that  he  is  at
    risk of persecution on return to Sudan.

 3. The Secretary of State  did  not  in  her  refusal  letter  accept  the
    appellant's ethnicity as a non-Arab Darfurian [33] to [36] noting  [34]
    that he had been inconsistent as to his tribal origin stating  only  in
    his asylum interview [Q50] that he is Fong.   The  respondent  did  not
    accept either the appellant's account of problems with  the  government
    because of his links with the SLM and drew  a  considerable  number  of
    inferences adverse to his  credibility  including  [46]  and  [47]  his
    failure to claim asylum on arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2010,
    having noted already [15] that he had claimed and been  refused  asylum
    in Ireland.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the respondent who also in turn relied on
    a report by Mr Peter Verney, dated 2 May 2016.

 5. The core of the judge's findings is set out at paragraphs 21 and 22

    21.      However, there is tacit consent of the Respondent  as  to  the
         other and first averment made by the Appellant as  to  his  claimed
         ethnicity. He derives the same from his  father.  He  is  from  the
         Fong/Funj tribe. The back information confirms this  tribe  suffers
         persecution and is an African tribe. Mr Verney lends weight to that
         consideration. As such he would be at risk upon return to Sudan.  I
         am therefore bound to follow the country guidance cases  in  regard
         to this  issue.  The  Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  make  no
         reference  to  the  Appellant's  father's  ethnicity  or  how   the
         Appellant may derive his ethnicity from that of  his  father.  That
         the Appellant's credibility has been damaged it is only in relation
         to those aspects of this story that I have referred to above. I can
         find no reason to doubt the ethnicity of his father or that he  can
         derive his own ethnicity from that of his father.

    22.  On the evidence before me today I am satisfied the  Appellant  has
         provided a credible basis for challenging the assertions,  analyses
         and conclusions of the Respondent's refusal  letter  regarding  his
         claimed ethnicity. On the evidence before me today, I am  satisfied
         those assertions,  analyses  and  conclusions  are  not  valid  and
         tenable. I am satisfied that the  Appellant  is  a  member  of  the
         Fong/fund tribe. He is at risk if returned to Sudan.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the ground that:

      i) that there was no evidence that the  Fong/Funj  had  any  links  to
         Darfur; and

     ii) that it might be arguable that the appellant is at risk as a result
         of his Fong/Fung ethnicity that had not been  part  of  his  claim;
         and,

    iii) was not open to the judge to find that the country  guidance  bound
         him to allow the appeal, AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - relocation)  Sudan
         CG [2009] UKIAT 00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT  00010
         being specific to the risk to ethnicities who have links to  Darfur
         such that they will be perceived as Darfurian regardless  of  where
         they were born.

 7. On 7 July 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson granted  permission
    on all grounds. The respondent applied by way of a notice  pursuant  to
    Rule 24 stating:

      i) that  the  judge  had  directed  himself  properly  and  found  the
         respondent to be a member of the Fong/Fung tribe and concluded,  on
         the basis of the expert report, that the tribe suffers  persecution
         and as a consequence would be at risk on return to Sudan;

     ii) that the  Upper  Tribunal  case  AA/07870/2014  confirms  that  the
         Fong/Fung is a persecuted African tribe and members of  that  tribe
         are at risk on return to Sudan;

    iii) that the expert evidence was that the Fong/Fung from the Blue  Nile
         is a part of a group of tribes described as  "black  African,  they
         existed  across  southern-central  Sudan  and  that  these  tribes'
         treatment is very similar to that of non-Arab Darfuris, the actions
         of the regime towards them being virtually indistinguishable.

 8. Mr Whitwell submitted, relying on the grounds, that the judge  appeared
    to have misapplied the relevant country guidance  and  appeared  to  be
    saying that the Fong/Fung  were  Darfurian.   There  was,  however,  no
    evidence that they were part  of  those  tribes,  indeed  the  evidence
    indicating that they are from the Blue Nile area, not Darfur.  This, he
    submitted was evident  also  from  Mr  Verney's  report  at  [87].   He
    submitted that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant is of the  Fong/Fung  although  he  did  not  demur  from  my
    observation that there was no direct challenge to that findings of fact
    in the grounds.  He submitted that the judge had erred significantly in
    stating that he was bound by the country guidance cases when  that  was
    not so albeit that, as the grounds accept, it  was  arguable  that  the
    Fong/Fung were faced the same ill-treatment.

 9. Mr Dougan submitted it had been open to the judge to conclude that  the
    respondent is of Fong/Fung ethnicity and on the basis of  the  evidence
    set out in Mr Verney's report, which was not challenged, he was at risk
    of the same type of ill-treatment as  non-Arab  Darfuris  and  on  that
    basis faced persecution.  He submitted that  properly  construed,  what
    the judge had said at [21] involved the finding of risk of  persecution
    before he then referred to the binding nature of MM and AA.

    Discussion

10. I am satisfied that, although the respondent's ethnicity was  an  issue
    in the refusal letter, the Secretary of State  did  not  challenge  the
    judge's finding that he is  of  Fong/Fung  ethnicity.   There  is,  for
    example, no submission that the  judge  failed  to  resolve  evidential
    conflicts in that respect or had reached an impermissible conclusion.

11. There is no submission from the Secretary of State that the report from
    Mr Verney is unreliable or that weight should not  have  been  attached
    thereto.  Mr Verney is, I note, an acknowledged expert  whose  evidence
    underpins a number of country guidance cases including MM.

12. There are a number of passages in  Mr  Verney's  report  which  require
    further consideration.  These  are  for  the  greater  part  under  the
    heading "Family Background - Risk to Non-Arabs".   He  notes  that  the
    respondent is:

    ...

    from the  geographical  belt  across  southern-central  Sudan  that  is
    characterised as "black African",  that  is,  containing  the  non-Arab
    tribes such as the Fung or  the  Blue  Nile,  the  Nuba  of  the  South
    Kordofan and the Fur, Masalit and other non-Arabs of Darfur.

    ...

    89.      All of these areas are being attacked by government forces and
         from the air.

    90.  There was a consistent thread  of  Sudan  government  attacked  on
         these people up to the present day.

    91.      This is coupled with arrests and shootings of people from this
         background in the major towns.

    92.  There have been government assisted land seizures all across  this
         belt from Darfur eastwards through South  Kordofan  and  Blue  Nile
         which are all war zones and whose non-Arab  populations  have  been
         targeted.  Again, persecution extends to people  from  these  areas
         who live in the capital and major conurbations.

    ...

    95.      I have dealt with the Berta, Funj, Ingessana and other  asylum
         applications from Blue Nile tribes.  These have  in  the  end  been
         successful.

    96.      They are black Africans whose treatment very similar  to  that
         of Darfuri non-Arabs.  The actions of the regime towards  them  are
         virtually indistinguishable.

    97.  For these reasons many people from these regions have  joined  the
         opposition to the Islamist regime.

13. Mr Verney went on to state [111] that the  Sudanese  authorities  would
    know the respondent's ethnic identity already and in  any  event  could
    simply demand to know what it is and he would be unable  to  lie  [112]
    and from that basis he would face persecution.

14. Once it was accepted that the respondent is a member of  the  Fong/Fung
    tribe, the judge was entitled in light of the unchallenged evidence  of
    Mr Verney to conclude that the appellant was at risk in the same way as
    non-Arab Darfuris.  That is not a finding that the  Fung  are  non-Arab
    Darfuris but merely a finding that they are treated in the same way.  I
    consider that on that basis, the finding that  the  respondent  was  at
    risk of persecution was open to the judge and that he gave adequate, if
    brief, reasons for doing so referring himself directly to the report of
    Mr Verney which had been available to the Secretary of State.  She must
    in  the  circumstances  have  understood  why  the  judge  reached  the
    conclusion that the respondent was at risk of persecution in  light  of
    the passages cited above.

15. It is, I accept, a little unclear what the judge referred to in stating
    "I am therefore bound to follow the country guidance cases in regard to
    this issue".  This could be a reference to what is likely to happen  on
    return to Sudan and in the  context  of  the  evidence  this  would  be
    permissible.  The decision, whilst it could have been  better  phrased,
    is that the  judge  considered,  having  had  regard  to  the  evidence
    effectively unchallenged evidence of Mr Verney,  that  members  of  the
    Fong/Fung would be treated on return to Sudan in  a  way  of  virtually
    indistinguishable from that of non-Arab Darfuris, and so,  for  similar
    reasons they too would be  at  risk  of  persecution.   It  is  not,  I
    consider, properly construed, a finding that the Fong/Fung are non-Arab
    Darfuris, merely that they are treated by the Sudanese  authorities  in
    the same way.

16. Accordingly, for these reasons, I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge
    reached conclusions which were not open to him or that his finding that
    the respondent is  at  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to  Sudan  is
    unsustainable.  I therefore  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in respect of the findings on asylum and Articles 2 and  3  of
    Human Rights Convention.

17. I note in passing that the judge did dismiss the appeal under Article 8
    of the Human Rights Convention.  The issue is not whether there was  an
    Article 8 violation but whether there was a potential violation of  the
    Human Rights Convention in itself.  The fact that he found  that  there
    would be an Article 3 breach means it was wholly unnecessary for him to
    consider Article 8 and he should not have gone on to do so.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.


Signed                                  Date:  8 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

