
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00144/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th December 2018                    |On 08th January 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [J O]
                        (no ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Jones, Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Griffith, promulgated on 20th July 2018, following a hearing at  Hendon
    Magistrates' Court on 29th June  2018.   In  the  decision,  the  judge
    allowed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon   the   Respondent
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.  For convenience I
    will refer to the parties as they were referred to  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



The Appellant

 2.  The Appellant is a citizen of Cameroon, and was born on  7th  November
    1975.  He is married to a Mrs RKO, a British citizen, and they have one
    child, "J", who was born  on  2nd  November  2008,  and  is  a  British
    citizen.  The Appellant also has two young adult stepdaughters,  M  and
    JA, who are the children from his wife's former marriage, and  who  are
    also British citizens.  He also has an adult daughter who is now living
    in Belgium, after leaving Cameroon some time in 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  in  Cameroon  he  was
    arrested and detained on  four  occasions  between  1997  and  2002  on
    account of his membership of the  Social  Democratic  Front  (SDF)  and
    Southern Cameroon National Council (SCNC).  He also relies on Article 8
    in respect of his family life, and in particular his relationship  with
    his son, "J", who suffers from autism  and  ADHD.   The  Appellant  has
    suffered for many  years  from  mental  illness  as  a  result  of  his
    experiences in Cameroon.

 4. A feature of this appeal was that there had been a previous hearing  in
    2012 when the judge had found against the Appellant.

The Judge's Findings

 5. In a lengthy decision, the judge had regard to the  previous  decision,
    noting the implications of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702, with  respect
    to which the judge stated that, "I must take as my starting  point  the
    findings of the judge in the previous  appeal  promulgated  in  October
    2012" (paragraph 80).  The judge  reminded  himself  how  the  previous
    decision should be taken into account (see paragraphs 80  to  81).   He
    then went on to say that "A significant new factor that was not  before
    the Tribunal in 2012 concerns the Appellant's son  J"  (paragraph  82).
    Consideration was then given to this son's situation, and it was  noted
    that "One of  the  things  mentioned  was  his  need  for  routine  and
    predictability, and that he would be  stressed  by  sudden  changes  or
    unexpected events and tend to react  negatively  at  those  times",  as
    mentioned in the medical report (paragraph 82).  The judge went  on  to
    say that "When the Tribunal made its  decision  in  2012,  the  medical
    evidence was confined to a report from Dr  Hogwood,  who  examined  the
    Appellant in 2006, six years before the appeal"  (paragraph  83).   The
    judge went on to say that, "The Appellant has since provided additional
    medical evidence for the purpose of this appeal in the form of a report
    form Dr Steen dated 19 March 2014, prepared  at  a  time  when  he  was
    detained" (paragraph 85).  Regard was also had  by  the  judge  to  the
    expert report from a Professor Walker-Said, dated 1 May 2018,  and  the
    judge observed that  "It  is  a  lengthy  and  detailed  report,  which
    concludes that the Appellant would likely be in grave danger should  he
    be returned to Cameroon ..." (paragraph 86).

 6. The judge then went on to make findings that were  in  the  Appellant's
    favour (see paragraphs 94 to 99) before also concluding  in  favour  of
    the Appellant in relation to Article 8 (see paragraphs 100 to 109).

 7. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  did  not  apply  the
    strictures of Devaseelan in the correct manner.   Moreover,  the  judge
    also applied the wrong legal test in relation  to  the  "unduly  harsh"
    test, which according to MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ  450,  meant  that
    the effect on the children  has  to  be  balanced  against  the  public
    interest, which increases in the  light  of  the  Appellant's  repeated
    offending behaviour.

 9. On 7th November 2018, permission to appeal was granted  by  Dr.  H.  H.
    Storey, on the basis that "in relation to  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    claim [the judge]  failed  to  properly  balance  the  public  interest
    factors when considering the issue of undue harshness".   It  was  also
    said that the judge gave  inadequate  reasons.   Moreover,  the  expert
    report appears to have been given added credibility purely  on  account
    of the expert's academic qualifications rather  than  the  contents  of
    what was being said.

The Hearing

10. This appeal was by the Respondent Home Office, and that  being  so  Mr.
    Whitwell, submitted that the judge had erred,  not  only  in  providing
    inadequate reasons for allowing the appeal, but also for implying that,
    whilst the public interest could not be factored into undue  harshness,
    that did not  mean  to  say  that  the  best  interests  of  the  child
    automatically  equated  with  "undue  harshness".   Having  said  that,
    however, he would have to concede that reliance upon MM (Uganda) [2016]
    EWCA Civ 450 was now misconceived, in the light of KO (Nigeria)  [2018]
    UKSC 53.

11. Mr. Whitwell also submitted that the judge's  treatment  of  Devaseelan
    (at paragraph 81), and in  its  efforts  to  distinguish  the  previous
    decision of October 2012 (see paragraphs 8 to 27)  was  not  made  out.
    Furthermore, as far as the expert was concerned, the judge  was  unduly
    impressed by the expert's  report.   This  was  important  because  the
    Respondent had taken the position  that  "it  was  submitted  that  the
    country expert did not have the expertise to make robust  findings  and
    her report was speculative".  However, the judge  dealt  with  this  by
    stating that, "A reading of  her  credentials,  however,  suggests  the
    opposite" (paragraph 95).  Just because the expert's  credentials  were
    impressive, did not mean to suggest, submitted Mr.  Whitwell,  that  an
    opposite conclusion could be reached, when the  complaint  against  the
    expert was that no robust findings had been made.

12. For his part, Mr. Jones submitted at the  hearing  before  me  on  17th
    December  2018,  a  well  compiled  Rule  24  response.   He  made  two
    fundamental submissions.  First, the judge's approach  in  relation  to
    the Rule in Devaseelan was entirely correct,  and  the  judge  properly
    distinguished the  earlier  2012  decision  from  the  current  changed
    circumstances of  the  Appellant,  before  concluding  in  his  favour.
    Second, the case of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53,  now  meant  that  the
    challenge on Article 8 grounds, on the basis that  MM  (Uganda)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 450, stated that when looking at "unduly harsh" test,  it  was
    important to balance in the public interest, alongside the  effects  of
    removal on the children, was plainly  now  wrong.   The  effect  of  KO
    (Nigeria) was that once it was decided that the best interests  of  the
    child suggested that it would be "unduly harsh" for the removal to take
    place, no public interest consideration fell to be  applied.   To  that
    extent paragraph 10 of the grounds of application was wrong.   To  that
    extent also, the grant of permission by the Upper  Tribunal,  in  terms
    that the judge had "failed to  properly  balance  the  public  interest
    factors when considering the issue of undue harshness", was also wrong.



My Decision

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007), such that it falls to be set  aside.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, it is plain that the reference to MM  (Uganda)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 450, is misconceived, both at paragraph 10 of the  grounds  of
    application, and in the grant of application by the Upper Tribunal when
    it is stated that the judge arguably  "failed  to  balance  the  public
    interest factors when considering the issue of undue harshness".   This
    is because on the question of "undue harshness" only the best interests
    of the child remains a relevant consideration, and the public  interest
    in favour of removal is not a factor to be considered.  This flows from
    the decision in KO (Nigeria) (see paragraph 32, and also paragraph 23).



14. In fact, as has been submitted Mr. Jones, the Secretary of State in his
    refusal letter (at paragraph 12) had conceded that the removal  of  the
    Appellant would be "unduly harsh".  Given that that is  the  case,  the
    appeal could not now succeed on the part of the Respondent Secretary of
    State, because the best  interests  of  the  child  required  that  the
    Appellant remain in this country, with the child, who could not himself
    be required to leave this country, given his  medical  needs,  and  his
    British citizen status, as well as the British citizen  status  of  his
    mother and his siblings.

15. Second, as far as the application of Devaseelan  is  concerned,  it  is
    plain that the judge gave very  careful  attention  to  this  case  (at
    paragraphs 80 to 81), before explaining why it was necessary to  depart
    from the October 2012 decision, this  was  done  on  the  basis  of  "a
    significant new factor" which was not before the Tribunal in 2012,  and
    this was to  do  with  the  child's  medical  condition,  who  required
    stability, and who "would be stressed by sudden changes  or  unexpected
    events and tended to react negatively at those times"  (paragraph  82).
    There was also further medical  evidence  (paragraph  83)  as  well  as
    additional further evidence in relation  to  the  Appellant  (paragraph
    85).  Accordingly, the judge had ample grounds, which were demonstrated
    as such, for him to be able to depart from Devaseelan.

16. Third, insofar as it is said that the judge  failed  to  give  critical
    consideration to the expert report by Dr. Walker-Said,  this  complaint
    also, on closer inspection, falls away.  It is true that the judge does
    initially  meet  with  the  explanation  that,  "a   reading   of   her
    credentials, however, suggest the  opposite",  when  dealing  with  the
    Respondent Secretary of State's concern that "the  country  expert  did
    not have the expertise to make  robust  findings  and  the  report  was
    speculative" (paragraph 95).  However, all that the judge  was  stating
    here was that "I consider I am entitled to attach  considerable  weight
    to her conclusions" (paragraph 95).  That is the same  as  saying  that
    the expert is a person of some substance,  who  has  the  expertise  to
    declare upon matters  that  fall  within  the  expert's  knowledge  and
    expertise.  Moreover, the judge went on to explain that the expert  had
    given specific regard to the  appellant's  mental  health  issues,  and
    quoted from the report by WHO, before pointing out that there are  only
    seven psychiatrists in a country  of  22  million  people  in  Cameroon
    (paragraph 96).  The conclusion of the expert was that  "the  Appellant
    would not be able to access advance  medicine  required  to  treat  his
    depression and mental  health  issues"  (paragraph  96).   That  was  a
    conclusion that stood quite aside from the expert's credentials.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law.  The decision shall stand.

18. No anonymity order is made.

19. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 4th January 2019



