
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00927/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 January 2018                        |On 02 February 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     M W
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Chung & Rea,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant claimed that she was at risk on  return  to  China  as  a
    member of the True Jesus Church.

 2. The respondent in her decision letter dated 18 January 2017 declined to
    accept that the appellant was a follower of the True  Jesus  Church  or
    that she was wanted by the Chinese authorities.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly dismissed the appellant's appeal  by
    decision promulgated on 28 August 2017.

 4. The submissions by Mr Forrest were  based  on  the  grounds  of  appeal
    stated in the application filed on 8 September 2017:
         The judge erred in law because on the evidence (see paragraphs  19,
         21) it was not open to him to conclude (see paragraph 25) that  the
         appellant's knowledge of Christianity was limited.
         Being a Christian ... is the core of her claim. Whether she  is  or
         not cannot be limited to "paper" knowledge  of  important  biblical
         events. It must be based on a rounded assessment  of  all  relevant
         factors (one of which includes specific  identification  of  issues
         not "peripheral to Christianity" -  see  last  sentence,  paragraph
         19). Other than observing (paragraph 20) that the appellant did not
         have a local church connection and  that  neither  child  had  been
         baptised, no such overall, rounded assessment has been made by  the
         judge.
         It is vital that this is done because the circumstances in which  a
         person [converts] to Christianity are varied ...  It  is  therefore
         wholly inappropriate for a person's religion - if this is the  core
         element  to  a  claim  -  to  be  assessed  on  the  basis  of  the
         "impression" (language used by the judge at  paragraph  19)  rather
         than taking all material circumstances into account.

 5. Mr Forrest also adopted the  terms  of  the  grant  of  permission,  in
    particular the last two sentences:
         At paragraph 21 the judge states that the  appellant's  performance
         at interview did not impress the judge and not suggest that she was
         a genuine believer. It is arguable that this  conclusion  does  not
         rest on sufficiently sustainable foundations.

 6. Mr Forrest asked for the decision of the FtT to  be  set  aside  and  a
    fresh hearing directed in the FtT.

 7. Having considered the grounds and submissions, I am not persuaded  that
    the decision of the FtT errs on any point of law, such that it ought to
    be set aside.

 8. As Mrs O'Brien pointed  out  (and  as  Mr  Forrest  acknowledged),  the
    appellant does not claim to be a convert, but to have been  brought  up
    by her parents as a Christian and to have played quite a  leading  role
    in her Church.

 9. Religious knowledge is not a simple test of  a  claim,  but  the  judge
    correctly directed himself on that matter at the beginning of paragraph
    19.

10. The appellant said she was a  member  of  a  Church  with  particularly
    strong beliefs about baptism and Pentecostalism.   Those  matters  were
    highlighted in the refusal letter at paragraphs 25 and 26.  It  was  in
    that context that her poor  answers  on  those  subjects  at  interview
    became significant.

11. There was perhaps some confusion  at  paragraph  19  between  John  the
    Baptist and John the Apostle (or John the Evangelist); but the force of
    the point derived from the interview loses nothing from that.

12. The judge's analysis was based not on a crude trap of bible  knowledge,
    but on what might  reasonably  have  been  expected  from  a  claim  of
    lifelong involvement in the True Jesus Church.

13. The appellant criticises only the adverse findings based on the  extent
    of her biblical knowledge, but there were other good  reasons  for  the
    failure of her case:
      i) The appellant submitted a directory of members of  the  true  Jesus
         Church for South London, but her name was not on the list  (refusal
         decision, paragraph 29);
     ii) The appellant came to the UK in February 2008  but  made  no  claim
         until August 2016;
    iii) In numerous applications to extend leave,  the  appellant  made  no
         mention of a fear of persecution;
     iv) The appellant claimed only after refusal of leave on other grounds,
         and at a stage of late pregnancy;
      v) The appellant's partner, the  father  of  her  two  children,  knew
         nothing of her Christian beliefs;
     vi) The appellant has not attended church in Glasgow;
    vii) It was not credible she did not know about asylum;
   viii) The appellant left China without difficulty on  her  own  passport,
         suggesting no interest from the authorities;
     ix) The appellant claimed to  have  lost  her  passport,  although  not
         reported to the police, and so it was not possible to check if  she
         has been back to China - cause for some scepticism;
      x) The appellant has not had her two children baptised;
     xi) Claims in  her  statement  about  earlier  problems  in  China  not
         referred to at interview - considered an embellishment.

14. It was open to the judge to give some weight  to  shortcomings  in  the
    appellant's religious knowledge. The challenge to that  aspect  of  his
    findings does not disclose error on that issue, or in the decision as a
    whole.  He did take all material circumstances into account.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

16. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  Anonymity has been preserved herein.




           [pic]


           31 January 2018
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
