
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00027/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th March 2016                             |On 21st April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Naser Ismael
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr C Cole, solicitor, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Robson made following a hearing at Bradford on 6th November 2015.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of  Iraq,  born  on  16th  August  1976.   He
    claimed  asylum  in  September  2002  but  was  refused   and   granted
    exceptional leave to remain  until  2006.   During  that  time  he  was
    convicted of a number of offences for which he received short suspended
    sentences.  He was granted indefinite leave to  remain  on  17th  April
    2007.

 3. He then committed two more offences in 2008 and 2011  before,  on  19th
    November 2012 being sentenced to  sixteen  months'  imprisonment  as  a
    consequence of a conviction of wounding.

 4. The Secretary of State made a deportation order on 2nd August 2013  and
    his appeal against that decision was dismissed on 15th November 2013.

 5. On 10th November 2014, his representatives wrote to  the  Secretary  of
    State stating that the claimant wished to make a fresh claim due to the
    current situation of violence in his home area Tuz Khormato and that  a
    return to Iraq was not possible because of the indiscriminate  violence
    there. She refused the fresh claim on 12th March 2015, and it was  this
    decision which was the subject of the  appeal  before  the  Immigration
    Judge.

 6. The judge considered the expert's  report  from  Dr  Rebwar  Fatah  and
    summarised his conclusions as follows.

      i) The claimant had spent the majority of his adult  life  in  the  UK
         during which time Iraq had drastically changed.

     ii) Whilst he may be relocated to Baghdad Airport with a laissez-passer
         he still needed to leave the airport to make his way to  his  final
         destination which was suggested to be the Iraqi  Kurdistan  Region.
         He could not move around Iraq without an Iraqi ID.

    iii) An Iraqi ID could only be  issued  against  information  which  was
         given in the civil register but sources agreed that there  remained



             "procedures to go through for IDs  and  people  attempting  to
             access replacement  documents  not  least  of  which  was  the
             requirement to have  at  least  some  documents  (original  or
             copied) but a witness linking the appellant to their records."



 7. He relied on the previous determination in which the panel said

         "Following appropriate cross-examination we can say that  we  found
         Mr Ismael to be a very honest and credible witness and based on his
         evidence we come to the findings of fact set out below."

 8. The judge noted that the claimant had no family in Baghdad and no  ties
    to the city and even if he could obtain a laissez-passer to  go  there,
    there was no evidence that he could readily obtain an ID card within  a
    realistic period of time.

 9. He cited the following passage from AA (Article 15(c)) [2015] UKUT  544



         "A person returned to Iraq who was unable to  replace  their  civil
         status ID card or nationality certificate would be likely  to  face
         significant difficulties in accessing  services  and  a  livelihood
         would  face  destitution  which  is  likely  to  breach  Article  3
         threshold."

10. The judge concluded that there was no real possibility of the  claimant
    obtaining an ID card within a realistic period of time  and  relocation
    to a Kurdish area would not be practicable without one.

11. On that basis he allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

12. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal, four weeks  out  of
    time, on the following grounds.

13. First, it was argued that the judge had failed to provide  any  reasons
    as to why the claimant's family could not assist him in  obtaining  the
    necessary identification document.  He gave no reasons as to why he had
    not been in contact with his family in Iraq since September 2014  other
    than personal choice.  He has failed to make an even cursory attempt to
    obtain the necessary documentation.  Furthermore the judge  had  failed
    to provide reasons as to why the  claimant's  little  Arabic  would  be
    insufficient to assist him in relocating to Baghdad.

14.  Second,  the  judge  failed  to  make  a  finding  on  the  claimant's
    credibility for himself which was material to the finding that  he  had
    no previous ties to Baghdad or access to a sponsor.

15. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Judge  Parkes  on  28th
    January 2016.  Judge  Parkes  admitted  the  late  application  on  the
    grounds that the Tribunal had been in error in sending it to the  wrong
    location.

16. The claimant served a reply on  3rd  February  2016  arguing  that  the
    application should not have been admitted. He relyied on  the  decision
    in RK (Allowed appeals  service  on  respondent)  Albania  [2015]  UKUT
    00331.   RK  held  that  service  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of   a
    determination allowing the appeal on the Presenting Officers'  Unit  in
    Cardiff, rather than on the Specialist Appeals Team in Angel Square was
    good service, despite what was said to be an  agreement  to  serve  all
    allowed appeals on the Angel Square team.

17. Second, with respect to ground 1, in AA the Tribunal stated

         "P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered  if
         P is unable to go  to  the  Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         governorate because it is an area where Article 15(c) serious  harm
         is occurring.  As a result of the violence alternative CSA  offices
         for Mosul Anbar and Saluhaddin have been  established  in  Baghdad.
         The evidence does not demonstrate that the  central  archive  which
         exists in Baghdad is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those  in
         need of them.  There is however a National Status Court in  Baghdad
         to which P could apply for formal  recognition  of  identity.   The
         precise operation of this court is however unclear."

18. Therefore even if the claimant's family were willing to assist  him  he
    would not be able to go to the  Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  in  his
    governorate to try to obtain a CSID because it  is  in  an  area  where
    Article  15(c)  serious  harm  is  occurring.   The  family  and  their
    assistance was irrelevant because his home was in a contested area;  it
    was accepted that anyone in such an area  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    serious harm. The claimant's home town had been rendered uninhabitable,
    and if that was the case it would explain why his  family  had  stopped
    being in contact with him since September 2014.

19. Finally, the judge was entitled to rely  on  the  previous  credibility
    findings of the first Tribunal.  In any event his credibility  was  not
    questioned in the reasons for refusal letter and not challenged at  the
    hearing.  No submissions were made regarding  his  credibility  by  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer.

Preliminary Issue

20. Whilst it may have been difficult for Mr Parkinson to have resisted the
    argument that  the  First-tier  Judge  should  not  have  admitted  the
    permission application which, in reliance on RK,  was  properly  served
    upon her, both parties agreed that the grant of permission was  not  an
    appealable decision and only challengeable by means of judicial review.



Submissions

21. Mr Parkinson relied on his grounds and submitted that the judge had not
    adequately reasoned why his family could not vouch for him.   The  fact
    that the claimant's home town was uninhabitable was immaterial  because
    there had been no attempt to obtain the documents and it was  clear  in
    any event that the claimant was in touch with his youngest brother  who
    could have  assisted  him.   It  had  not  been  established  that  the
    governorate's records were in his home town  and  nothing  to  indicate
    that it was not feasible to obtain the necessary documentation.

22. He also submitted that the claimant had misled the Tribunal in the past
    with respect to his previous convictions and that the judge  had  erred
    in merely relying upon the comment that he was an honest  and  credible
    witness in  the  first  determination.   Otherwise  he  relied  on  his
    grounds.

23. Mr Cole submitted that  the  grounds  had  no  merit.   It  was  simply
    impossible for the judge to return to get the ID document  because  his
    home town was in an area where an Article 15(c) risk  was  established.
    To suggest that he could do so was contrary to  the  country  guidance.
    Moreover the judge was entitled to  rely  on  the  first  determination
    credibility findings and indeed there was no basis for the judge to  go
    behind it.

Findings and Conclusions

24. There is no material error in this determination.

25. The Secretary of State relies on the following passage from AA

         "Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID P should as  a
         general matter be able to obtain one from the Civil Status  Affairs
         Office for P's home governorate using an  Iraqi  passport  (whether
         current or expired), if P has one.  If  P  does  not  have  such  a
         passport P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether P knows
         the page and volume number of the book holding P's information (and
         that of P's family).  P's ability to persuade the officials that  P
         is the person named on the relevant page is  likely  to  depend  on
         whether P has family members or other individuals who are  prepared
         to vouch for P."

26. Mr Parkinson's arguments today amounted  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision and an attempt to reargue the Secretary of State's case  which
    is that the relevant documentation could be obtained with the help of a
    family member. The judge was entitled to conclude that such help  could
    not be forthcoming if the town had become uninhabitable as reported  by
    Al Jazeera on 8th October 2014, which would  be  consistent  with  his
    evidence that he had not communicated with his family  since  September
    2014.  It is therefore not true to say that no reasons were  given  for
    the lack of contact other than personal choice.  The judge  could  have
    found that the youngest brother was able to assist but it  was  not  an
    error of law for him to conclude otherwise.

27. The Tribunal in AA accepted that for a person  who  has  no  family  or
    other support in Baghdad, such as this claimant and who also  does  not
    have a CSID and cannot obtain one reasonably soon after  arrival  would
    be at risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.  There is no error in the  judge
    relying on that decision and concluding that it would be  a  breach  of
    the claimant's Article 3 rights to return him to Iraq in  circumstances
    where he could not replace his ID card.  There was sufficient  evidence
    to support his conclusion that he would not be able to do so.

28. Finally, the submission in relation  to  the  credibility  findings  is
    misplaced.  Plainly the judge was obliged to take as his starting point
    the  positive  credibility  findings  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal.
    Furthermore, according to the Rule 24 Reply, no submissions  were  made
    to him challenging the claimant's credibility at the hearing.  In these
    circumstances there is no error in him following the conclusions of the
    original Tribunal.

29. The grounds do not establish an  error  in  the  decision  which  shall
    stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

