
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA005682015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 May 2016                                |On 16 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     s b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Manley instructed by Crowley & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of  the  appellant.   This  order  prohibits  the
    disclosure directly or indirectly (including by  the  parties)  of  the
    identity of the appellant and his son.  Any disclosure  and  breach  of
    this order may amount to a contempt of court.  This order shall  remain
    in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Congo-Brazzaville (the "Congo").  He  was
    born on [ ] 1991.  He entered the United Kingdom on 12 June  2002  when
    he was 11 years of age.  He came  with  a  number  of  members  of  his
    family, including his stepmother and step and half  siblings.   He  and
    his siblings were subsequently placed in local  authority  care  having
    been rejected by their stepmother.

 3. On 29 July 2005, the appellant applied for asylum but that  application
    was  refused  on  12  September  2005.    However,   he   was   granted
    discretionary leave until 11  September  2008  and,  thereafter,  on  8
    December 2010 he was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 4. On 6 August 2013, the appellant was  convicted  at  the  Cardiff  Crown
    Court of a number of offences of possessing with intent to supply Class
    A drugs, namely heroine and cocaine.  He was sentenced to a total of 40
    months' imprisonment.

 5. On 7 February 2014, the appellant was  informed  of  his  liability  to
    automatic deportation under the provisions of the UK Borders Act  2007.



 6. In a letter dated 10 March 2014, the appellant sought  to  prevent  his
    deportation by claiming that he was at risk in the Congo because of his
    father's politics, namely  that  he  was  a  member  of  the  Congolese
    Government or a commander in the Congolese Army or had been asked to be
    the President's bodyguard.

 7. On 16 January 2015, the appellant was served with a  notice  indicating
    that the Secretary of State intended to issue a certificate under  s.72
    of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the  "NIA  Act
    2002") that he was presumed to have been convicted  of  a  particularly
    serious crime and he  constituted  a  danger  to  the  community.   The
    appellant made no response to that letter but  was  interviewed  on  20
    March 2015.

 8. On 29 June  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    protection claim and human rights claim.  The Secretary  of  State  did
    not accept that the appellant would be at risk on return because of his
    father's political activity.  Further, the Secretary of State concluded
    that the appellant's mental health problems, namely  his  diagnosis  of
    PTSD would not result, if returned to the Congo, in a breach of Art  3.
    The Secretary of State also rejected the appellant's claim under Art  8
    based upon his relationship with his son ("K"), a British  citizen  who
    was born on 7 September 2013).  The appellant's relationship  with  K's
    mother ("AA") had come to an end by the date of decision.  In addition,
    the Secretary of State certified the appellant's protection claim under
    s.72 of the NIA Act 2002.

 9. As a consequence, the Secretary of State  decided  that  the  automatic
    deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007 apply and on 29  June
    2015 a deportation order was issued against the appellant.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decisions
    to refuse his protection claim and his human rights claim under s.82 of
    the NIA Act 2002 (as amended by s.15 of the Immigration Act 2014).

11. In a decision promulgated on 13 October 2015,  Judge  Holder  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

12. First, the judge upheld the certification of the appellant's protection
    claim under s.72 of the NIA Act 2002.  Consequently, he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on the ground that  his  removal  would  breach  the
    Refugee Convention without considering the merits of his asylum  claim.



13. Secondly, in respect of Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR,  the  judge  rejected
    the appellant's claim to be at risk because of the  political  activity
    of his father in the Congo.  He also dismissed  the  appellant's  claim
    under Art 3 based upon his mental health difficulties.

14. Thirdly, the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under  Art  8.   He
    found that the appellant could not succeed under para 399 or para  399A
    of the Rules.  As regards para 399(a), the judge accepted that it would
    be unduly harsh to expect K to live in the Congo.  However, he was  not
    satisfied that it would be unduly harsh on K to remain in the UK if the
    appellant were deported.  As regards  para  399A,  the  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant had been lawfully resident in the UK for most
    of his life and, although he was socially and culturally integrated  in
    the UK, the judge was not satisfied that there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into  the  Congo  if  he  returned  there.
    Finally, the judge concluded  that  there  were  not  "very  compelling
    circumstances" to outweigh  the  public  interest  represented  by  the
    seriousness of the appellant's offending.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    challenging the judge's decision in respect of the s.72  certification;
    in respect of Art 3 (at least as regard the judge's finding in  respect
    of the risk  based  upon  his  father's  political  activity);  and  in
    relation to the judge's finding in respect of Art 8 under paras 399 and
    399A as well as under the rubric of "very compelling circumstances".

16.  On 6 November 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Froom)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  Judge Froom's reasons, set out in  his
    grant of permission, were as follows:

         "In upholding the section 72 certificate the judge did not consider
         the  evidence  when  reaching  his  decision  that  the   statutory
         presumption that the appellant  posed  a  continuing  risk  to  the
         public was not rebutted.  He simply noted  the  appellant  had  not
         responded to the Home Office's letter.


         It is arguable the judge failed to give  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
         appellant's case when dismissing the appeal on article  3  grounds.
         Whilst the grounds are wrong  to  assert  the  respondent  had  not
         challenged the appellant's claim about his father's role (see  [29]
         RFRL), the judge does not appear to have made any allowance for the
         appellant's age when  he  left  Congo-Brazzaville.   Arguably,  the
         expectation that the appellant corroborate this aspect of his  case
         was unduly  onerous.   Nor  did  the  judge  address  the  possible
         relationship between  the  medical  evidence  and  the  appellant's
         account of past trauma.


         I grant permission to argue the grounds relating to the  protection
         claim but not the health claim, which appears to have  no  prospect
         of success given the high threshold applicable.


         I also grant permission to argue the article 8 grounds.  The  judge
         does not appear to have addressed the  evidence  adduced  regarding
         the impact on the child of his father being  deported  when  making
         his finding under paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) of the rules.  It is also
         possible  the  judge's  miscalculation  with  regard  to  paragraph
         399A(a) of the rules affected his further consideration."

17. On 25 November 2015, the Secretary of State  filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision in respect of  the  s.72  notice
    and Arts 2/3 and 8 of the ECHR.

The Hearing

18. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Manley relied, in large measure, on each
    of the points raised in the nine page Grounds of Appeal.  He  developed
    the points in his oral submissions in some detail.

19. Mr Richards, in his submissions on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
    argued that the judge's decision in relation to  the  s.72  certificate
    and Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR were properly sustainable in law.

20. I will deal with the detail of the submission as they arise below.

Discussion

21. I state at the outset that I have found sufficient merit in Mr Manley's
    detailed submissions to conclude that the judge's decision and findings
    in respect of the s.72 certificate, Art  3  (and  to  the  extent  also
    relied upon Art 2) and Art 8 of the ECHR cannot stand.

    The s.72 certificate

22. I deal first with the s.72 certificate.

23. Section 72 of the NIA Act 2002 creates rebuttable presumptions  that  a
    person convicted of an offence in the UK and sentenced to a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least two years:

         (1)  has been convicted by  a  final  judgment  of  a  particularly
             serious crime; and


          2) to constitute a danger to the community of the United Kingdom


    such that, even if he is a refugee, his removal is not contrary to  the
    Refugee Convention by virtue of Art 33(2) of that Convention.

24. When such a certificate is issued by the Secretary of  State,  then  by
    virtue of s.72(10) of the NIA Act  2002,  the  Tribunal  must  consider
    first whether the presumptions (here bringing the appellant within  Art
    33(2) of the Convention) apply and,  if  they  do,  the  Tribunal  must
    dismiss the appeal in so far as  the  appellant  is  relying  upon  the
    ground that his removal would breach  the  Refugee  Convention  without
    considering the merits of his protection claim.

25. Before the judge, the appellant argued that his offences, despite their
    nature and the term of imprisonment, did not amount to  a  particularly
    serious crime and sought to rebut the presumption  in  s.72(2)  on  the
    basis that he had  never  previously  been  involved  with  drugs,  his
    present involvement had only been for a two week period when he  was  a
    "courier" and that he had only profited to the tune of �20.

26. As regards the presumption that he was a danger to the  community,  the
    appellant relied upon a report dealing with his re-categorisation as  a
    prisoner dated 25 June 2014 (at pages 273-275 of the bundle) which,  on
    the face of it relying on earlier reports, stating he posed:

         "A LOW risk of re-offending OGRS  8/15%.   OVP  6/10%  respectively
         with a LOW risk of serious harm."

27. In addition, the pre-sentence report dated August 2013 (at  pages  133-
    140 of the bundle) stated that the appellant:

         "does not represent a risk  of  serious  harm  to  members  of  the
         public.  He has no history of aggressive offending.   His  lack  of
         previous offending history means  his  risk  of  offending  in  the
         future is assessed as low."

28. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Manley  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to take this evidence into account and had based his  conclusion
    that the presumptions in s.72(2) had not been rebutted  simply  on  the
    basis that the appellant had failed  to  make  any  representations  in
    response to the letter sent by the Secretary of State in  January  2015
    giving the appellant an opportunity to state, if he wished,  the  basis
    upon which the presumptions were rebutted.

29. Mr Richards accepted that the judge had not referred  to  the  evidence
    relied on by way of rebuttal.   Nevertheless,  he  submitted  that  the
    judge was  entitled  to  come  to  the  conclusion  he  did  given  the
    seriousness of the appellant's offence, the sentence imposed  and  that
    the conviction was only two years earlier.

30. Having set out the relevant statutory provisions, the judge set out his
    reasons and conclusion in respect of s.72 at paras 36-39 as follows:

         "36.      I  find  that  the  Appellant  did  not  respond  to  the
             Respondent's letter of 16th  January,  2015  inviting  him  to
             rebut  the  presumption  that  his  crimes  were  particularly
             serious and that his continued presence in the United  Kingdom
             constituted a danger to the community.


         37.  I find that the Appellant failed to make  any  representations
             in response to the Respondent's letter in that  regard.   This
             was not disputed by  the  Appellant's  representative  at  the
             hearing.


         38.  Given the provisions of Section 72 of the 2002 Act, Article 33
             of the 1951 Convention, the fact that his crimes  attracted  a
             sentence of 40 months  imprisonment  and  the  fact  that  the
             Appellant has failed to make representations, I find that  the
             Appellant has been convicted  by  a  final  judgement  of  the
             particularly serious  crimes  of  possession  with  intent  to
             supply class A drugs and that his continued  presence  in  the
             United Kingdom constitutes a danger to the community.


         39.  I uphold the certificate and, therefore,  do  not  proceed  to
             consider the Appellant's asylum claim."

31. Although the judge did make reference to the appellant's "low  risk  of
    reoffending" at para 85(f)  of  his  determination,  this  was  in  the
    context of Art 8 and not when he was considering the  s.72  certificate
    at paras 36-39.  It is evident that the judge did  not  refer  or  take
    into account the material relied upon by the appellant  to  rebut  both
    the presumptions in s.72(2) of the NIA  Act  2002.   His  reasoning  is
    limited to stating that the crime attracted a sentence  of  40  months'
    imprisonment and the  appellant  had  made  no  representations.   That
    latter point, of course,  only  related  to  the  position  before  the
    hearing.  The appellant had made representations at the hearing and had
    identified evidence which he relied upon to rebut the presumptions that
    he had been convicted of a particularly serious crime and that he was a
    danger to the community.

32. In my judgment, the judge's  reasons  are  inadequate  to  sustain  his
    finding that the appellant had  not  rebutted  the  presumptions.   The
    evidence  relied  upon  was  relevant  in  considering  whether   those
    presumptions were rebutted.  It may well be that the appellant had (and
    has) an uphill task seeking to rebut the presumption that he  has  been
    convicted of a  particular  serious  crime  given  the  nature  of  his
    offending but he was, at least, even in that regard  entitled  to  have
    taken into account by the judge  the  evidence  that  he  relied  upon.
    Certainly, I am not prepared to conclude  confidently  that  the  judge
    could only have rationally reached  one  conclusion.   The  appellant's
    case may  be  somewhat  stronger  rebutting  the  presumption  that  he
    constitutes a danger to the community given the  circumstances  of  his
    offending and the evidence to which I have referred relating to his low
    risk of re-offending seen in the context of the absence of any previous
    criminal history and his case as to his  actual  involvement  in  these
    offences.

33. For these reasons, the judge's decision  to  uphold  the  Secretary  of
    State's certification under s.72 is legally flawed and cannot stand.

34. That error might well not  be  material  if  the  judge's  decision  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 3 (to the extent it  reflected
    the appellant's claim under the  Refugee  Convention)  is  sustainable.
    For the reasons I now give, it is not.

    The Art 3 claim

35. I turn then to consider the judge's decision in respect of Art  3  (and
    Art 2 to the extent it is separately relied upon).

36. Mr Manley did not seek to argue that the appellant could succeed  under
    Art 3 based upon his mental health problems dealt with by the judge  at
    paras 45-47 of his determination.  Instead, he sought to challenge  the
    judge's decision under Art 3 only in respect of his  finding  that  the
    appellant would not be  at  risk  because  of  his  father's  political
    activity.

37. In that regard, the judge's reasons and findings are at paras 42-44  as
    follows:

         "42.     I find that the Appellant has not shown evidentially  that
             his father was a member  of  the  Congolese  Government  or  a
             Commander in the Congolese army or asked to be the President's
             bodyguard.


             I would have expected the Appellant or members of  his  family
             to provide some evidence of this had it been true.


             I say this given that he knows details about his father.


             For example, it can be seen  from  paragraph  (sic)  from  the
             Appellant's  screening  interview  of  29th  July,  2005,  his
             statement of evidence form dated 24th  August,  2005  and  the
             completed  Questionnaire  of  18th  February,  2014  that  the
             Appellant is aware of his father's name and date of birth.


             Furthermore, he stated in his Asylum Interview that his father
             worked for the United Nations.  He also asserts in a statement
             dated 24th August, 2005 that his father worked for  the  World
             Health Organisation.


         43.  In any event, he was to state at the hearing when  re-examined
             by his representative that,  in  effect,  his  concerns  about
             returning to the Congo were as  a  result  of  "an  assumption
             based on my father's name".


             The Appellant was to say that "I don't know" when asked by the
             Respondent's representative at the hearing  whom  he  believed
             would harm him in the Congo.


         44.  I find that he has  not  shown  that  any  witnessing  of  the
             killing of another when he was very young  indicates  that  he
             personally all these years later is at risk  himself  of  harm
             which would breach of either Article 2 or 3 of the ECHR.


             Even on the  Appellant's  account,  he  was  not  harmed  when
             witnessing that event and was released as he was recognised by
             friends during his alleged kidnapping incident."

38. Mr Manley submitted that the judge had, in  effect,  misunderstood  the
    appellant's claim.  The appellant's claim was not, as the judge  stated
    in para 43, based simply upon  "an  assumption  based  on  my  father's
    name".  The appellant relied upon a number of incidents  including  the
    specific one referred to by the judge  in  para  44.   The  appellant's
    position before the judge was that his father's  involvement  with  the
    Congolese Government put the appellant at risk and  his  father's  name
    was significant in putting him at risk.

39. Mr Manley also submitted that the judge had been wrong  not  to  accept
    the appellant's  evidence  about  his  father's  involvement  with  the
    Congolese Government because he had failed to  provide  evidence  from,
    for example, "members of his family" to support it.  Mr Manley  pointed
    out that the appellant had given details about his father's involvement
    and neither the appellant nor his sister in giving oral evidence before
    the judge had been challenged as to whether their father worked for the
    government.

40. Also, Mr Manley submitted that, whilst the evidence of the  appellant's
    mental health problems did not in themselves engage Art  3,  they  were
    consistent with his account to have suffered whilst in  the  Congo  and
    was therefore relevant evidence in assessing the  truthfulness  of  his
    account.

41. Mr Manley also pointed out that the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account  the  appellant's  statements  in  his  prison  medical  record
    concerning his being a 'war child' and having committed atrocities.  As
    I understood the basis for Mr Manley's submission in  this  regard,  it
    was not that the appellant was at risk as a consequence but rather that
    it further added support to his account and credibility.

42. I have come to the conclusion that the Judge's  findings  cannot  stand
    for an accumulation of reasons.

43. First, the judge's  consideration  of  the  appellant's  evidence  (and
    indeed that of his sister) in relation to  his  claim  to  be  at  risk
    because of his father's political involvement does not, as Mr  Richards
    accepted in his submissions, go into  any  great  detail.   There  was,
    however, a substantial amount of evidence from the appellant before the
    judge; for example, an SEF, screening interview,  an  asylum  interview
    and witness statements as well as the appellant's oral  evidence.   The
    evidence was considered in some detail in the respondent's decision  at
    paras 25(a)-(cc) to 40.  The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  knew
    details about his father but  nevertheless  did  not  accept  that  his
    father was who he claims.  It was not,  in  my  judgment,  therefore  a
    proper representation of the appellant's claim that his risk on  return
    was based on "an assumption based  on  my  father's  name"  alone.   Of
    course, his claim was based upon his association  -  and  on  his  case
    known  association  -  with  his  father  because  of   his   political
    activities.

44.  Secondly,  in  rejecting  the  appellant's  account  of  his  father's
    political  activities,  having  accepted  the  detail  given   by   the
    appellant, the judge could not, in my view, base his  disbelief  simply
    on the basis that the appellant and members  of  his  family  might  be
    expected to provide supporting evidence.  In  some  circumstances,  the
    absence of obvious supporting evidence available to an  individual  can
    be taken into account in damaging that individual's credibility (see TK
    (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40).  Here, and Mr  Richards  did  not
    suggest otherwise in his submissions, the background of the appellant's
    father was not put to  the  appellant's  sister  when  she  was  giving
    evidence.  It was not, therefore, justifiable for the judge to say that
    he would have expected  evidence  in  support  from  "members  of  [the
    appellant's] family".  If that was a point  to  be  taken  against  the
    appellant then the  matters  should  properly  have  been  put  to  the
    witnesses, in particular his sister.

45. Thirdly, there was extensive evidence in the appellant's prison medical
    records concerning his mental health, in particular  that  he  suffered
    from PTSD.  It was, perhaps,  unusual  in  this  case  that  no  expert
    psychiatric report was  produced.   Mr  Manley  acknowledged  that  the
    prison medical records did not necessarily tie the  appellant's  mental
    health problems with what  he  claimed  had  occurred  in  Congo.   The
    appellant, of course, has suffered abuse in the  UK  which  might  also
    explain, at least, some of his  mental  health  problems.   However,  I
    agree with Mr Manley that the evidence provided  some  support  to  the
    appellant's claim.

46. Fourthly, the judge did not set out aspects of the appellant's evidence
    concerning what the appellant claimed had happened to him in the  "very
    brutal" environment of the  Congo  in  which  he  grew  up.   The  only
    incident referred to is the one in  which  the  appellant  claimed  his
    father's friend had been killed cited by the judge at para 44.

47. I do not accept Mr Richards' submission that the judge's reasoning  and
    treatment of the evidence in paras 42-44 is sufficient to  sustain  his
    adverse finding.  There was simply much more to  the  appellant's  case
    than the  judge  gave  credit  for  in  those  three  relatively  short
    paragraphs.  There was considerably more evidence of what the appellant
    claimed had been the circumstances in the Congo before  he  left  as  a
    child; there was the medical evidence from his  prison  medical  record
    both as to his mental health  problems  at  least  supportive  (if  not
    determinative) of his claim and also his account of being a 'war child'
    to which the judge made no reference.  It is not clear  to  me  whether
    this latter matter was something relied upon before the judge with  any
    degree of prominence. Mr Manley pointed out, and Mr  Richards  did  not
    seek to dispute this, that the material concerning the appellant  being
    a 'war child' was raised during cross-examination to  the  extent  that
    the prison medical record were being put to the appellant.  In  itself,
    the judge's failure to deal with it would not lead me to conclude  that
    his finding cannot stand but seen in the context of the  other  matters
    cumulatively it adds weight to my concern that the judge has not  fully
    appreciated and analysed the appellant's claim in paras 42-44 to  reach
    sustainable adverse findings.

48. I do not accept Mr Richards' submission that the  judge's  decision  is
    sustainable because, in effect, in para 44 he accepted the  appellant's
    account but nevertheless determined that it  did  not  demonstrate  any
    future risk.  With respect to the judge, it is far from clear that that
    is the judge's finding although  he  does  say,  when  considering  the
    single incident  referred  to  in  para  44,  that  the  appellant  was
    unharmed.  Even if that were his finding, it relates only to  a  single
    incident and fails to  take  into  account  the  full  breadth  of  the
    appellant's account which he relied upon to support his claim to be  at
    risk on return.

49. For these reasons, therefore,  the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal under  Art  3  based  upon  his  father's  political
    activity, together with the findings made in that regard, cannot stand.



    The Art 8 claim

50. Finally, I turn to Article 8.

51. In respect of Art 8, the judge gave detailed reason at paras 50-87  for
    rejecting the appellant's claim under the relevant rules  namely  paras
    398, 399 and 399A and that the public interest was outweighed by  "very
    compelling reasons".

52. Mr Manley did not take issue with the judge's  structural  approach  to
    Art 8.  He was correct not to do so.  The judge applied the  well-known
    "complete code" approach to Art 8 in the relevant Rules  in  paras  398
    and 399-399A.  It is common ground that  para  398(b)  applied  to  the
    appellant because of his sentence of 40 months imprisonment, therefore,
    para 399 and 399A were, in principle, relevant to his Art 8 claim.

53. So far as relevant, para 399(a) provides as follows:
         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
              (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
              (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
              the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
              decision; and in either case
                  (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and
                  (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported;

54. In respect of para 399(a)(i) and  (ii)  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  K,
    his 2 year old son who is a British citizen.  Further, he accepted that
    it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  K  to  live  in  the   Congo   (para
    399(a)(ii)(a)).  However, he did not accept that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh  for  K  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the  appellant   (para
    399(a)(ii)(b)).  In reaching that conclusion, he  considered  K's  best
    interests and that he was cared for by his mother with whom  he  lives.
    His mother is a British citizen and there was no suggestion  that  she,
    particularly given that her relationship with the appellant had  broken
    down, should leave the UK.

55. Mr Manley criticised the judge's reasoning, particularly in para  59(d)
    in reaching his conclusion that it would not be "unduly harsh" for K to
    remain in the UK by finding that K's mother  was  his  "primary  carer"
    which failed to take into account the appellant's involvement with  his
    son which was to look after him whilst his mother worked long hours  as
    a bar manager.

56. Paragraph 59(d) of the judge's determination is in the following terms:

         "d)  it has not been shown that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
             child to remain in the United Kingdom  without  the  Appellant
             given that K ordinarily lives with his mother.  His needs  are
             provided for by her.  He is a  British  citizen  and  will  be
             entitled to all that entails.  I find when considering Section
             55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  that
             his best interests are met by  him  living  with  his  mother.
             There is no suggestion that  she  is  anything  other  than  a
             caring mother to K.


             It is obviously better that K has both parents  in  his  life,
             however, he is very young and, therefore, able to  adapt.   He
             also has not had his father living with him for  any  material
             period of time.  I am also mindful of the case of A. D. Lee  v
             SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 which acknowledges  that  the  tragic
             consequences  of  an  Appellant's   bad   behaviour   can   be
             justifiable deportation.


             I find that it is not shown that the consequences  for  K  and
             impact on him should his father be  deported  meets  the  high
             standard envisaged in MAB."

57. Mr Manley's reference to the judge's finding that  K's  mother  is  his
    "primary carer" is in fact  in  para  59(c)  and  not  in  para  59(d).
    Whether or not K's mother is properly described as his "primary carer",
    the judge made no reference to the evidence concerning the  appellant's
    daily involvement in looking after K whilst his mother was at  work  or
    to the evidence that his mother would not any  longer  have  anyone  to
    look after K while she was at work if the appellant was deported as her
    mother who had helped whilst the appellant was in prison had suffered a
    stroke and could no longer assist with  childcare.   Support  from  her
    friend was also now difficult as she had her  own  baby.   The  Judge's
    failure to consider that evidence amounts to  an  error  of  law.   The
    Judge's description of K's mother  as  his  'primary  care'  may  be  a
    reflection of the Judge's failure to consider  this  evidence  and  the
    role that the appellant claimed to play in K's life.

58. Mr Richards did not expressly submit that any error was  not  material.
    There may have been considerable difficulties facing the  appellant  in
    establishing, on the evidence before the Judge,  (1)  that  the  impact
    upon K reached the high threshold to  establish  that  the  appellant's
    deportation was "harsh" (applying MK (section 55  -  Tribunal  options)
    Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) at [46] and BM and others (returnees
    - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 293  (IAC)  at  [109]);
    and (2) that the impact upon K would be "unduly" harsh carrying out the
    required balancing exercise taking into  account  the  public  interest
    (see the Court of Appeal's recent decision in  MM(Uganda)  v  SSHD  (20
    April 2016) overruling the Upper Tribunal's decision in MAB (para  399;
    "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC)).  However, albeit with  some
    hesitation, I have concluded that such a  favourable  decision  is  not
    impossible, had the Judge considered all  the  relevant  evidence,  and
    consequently I cannot be confident that his  error  was  not  material.
    The judge's decision, therefore, in respect of para 399(a) is  not,  in
    my judgment, sustainable in law.

59. Turning to para 399A, that provides as follows:
         "399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -
         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and
         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
         (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."
60. Mr Manley submitted that in para 62(a) the judge had wrongly found that
    the appellant had not been resident for most  of  his  life  since  his
    arrival in 2002.  Whether or not his time in  custody  was  taken  into
    account, he had been here for more than half his life.  When he arrived
    he was 10 years and 7 months old and he was 23 and 7 months at the date
    of decision.

61. Mr Richards did not seek to counter Mr  Manley's  submission  that  the
    judge had miscalculated the appellant's time in the UK for the purposes
    of para 399A(a).  Instead, he submitted that it was not material as the
    judge had been entitled to find that para 399A(c) was not satisfied  in
    that there were not "very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration"
    into the Congo.

62. I accept Mr Manley's submission in respect of the miscalculation by the
    judge.  He met the requirement in para 399A(a).  Unlike para 276ADE(1),
    where periods  of  imprisonment  are  expressly  to  be  discounted  in
    calculating an individual's time in the UK under that rule, there is no
    equivalent in para 399A(a).  It absence can only be seen as  deliberate
    and so time in prison does count under para 399A(a).  But, in any event
    even if that time is discounted,  the  appellant  still  succeeds:  the
    maths is that he would have still spent 11 years and 4 months (most  of
    his life) in the  UK.   Either  method  of  calculation  leads  to  the
    conclusion that he has lived in the UK for most of his life.

63. However, that error in respect of para 399A(a) would only  be  material
    if the Judge's finding in relation to there not being "very significant
    obstacles" was itself unsustainable.

64. The judge's reasoning is at para 62(c) of his determination as follows:

         "62.     I find when considering paragraph 399A of the  Immigration
             Rules that the Appellant: ...


             c)   has not shown that there are very  significant  obstacles
                  to his integration into the Congo.  I say this because:


                  (i)  it can be seen from his 2005 screening interview that
                      his  preferred  languages  are  English  and  French.
                      French is a language used in the Congo;


                  (ii)     the Appellant does not dispute  that  his  mother
                      and father may still be in the Congo;


                  (iii)    he has the ability to work in  the  Congo  having
                      received education and worked in the United Kingdom;


                  (iv)     he has not shown evidentially that his mental and
                      physical health problems would  significantly  impact
                      on his ability to work or integrate into  the  Congo;
                      and


                  (v)  he is eligible  for  the  Facilitated  Return  Scheme
                      which is designed to assist him to resettle."


65. Mr Manley criticised the judge's reasoning  on  a  number  of  grounds.
    First, he submitted that the judge had been wrong to rely upon what the
    appellant had said about his facility in French given in his  screening
    interview in 2005.  His evidence now was that  he  could  not  actually
    speak French  but  only  understood  a  little.   Secondly,  Mr  Manley
    submitted that the judge was speculating  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant could find support from his mother and father in  the  Congo.
    He reminded me that the appellant's evidence was that he had  not  seen
    his mother since he was seven (sixteen years ago) and had not seen  his
    father for eleven years.  Both of them had disowned him and sent him to
    live with his stepmother.

66. The requirement that there  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration into Congo imposing a stringent test setting  a
    high threshold for success.  It requires an holistic assessment of  all
    the circumstances facing the appellant on return.  The appellant is  23
    years of age and left the Congo in 2002 when he was 10 years  old.   He
    had been rejected by his  parents  and  been  sent  to  live  with  his
    stepmother who brought him to the UK and subsequently also rejected him
    leading to the appellant (together with his siblings) being  placed  in
    care.  The appellant has no current  knowledge  about  his  mother  and
    father in the Congo.  He has not seen them  for  many  years.   On  the
    evidence, it looks very much like he has lost  all  contact  and  links
    with them and, indeed, there was little or any  evidence  that  he  has
    retained any ties with the Congo.  If the Judge was speculating that he
    could resume contact with them, he should have given reasons why, given
    the appellant's evidence, this was practical or feasible.  In assessing
    the appellant's linguistic facility in French, it was not enough simply
    to look at what he had said in 2005 without  taking  into  account  his
    more recent evidence in that regard.

67. In my judgment, the factors set out in  para  62(c)  fail  properly  to
    assess holistically whether there were "very significant obstacles"  to
    his integration in the Congo.  I do not suggest that there is only  one
    reasonable or rational outcome on that issue  but  merely  to  conclude
    that the judge's assessment fails properly to have regard to the  whole
    of the appellant's circumstances in reaching his adverse  finding.   On
    that basis, therefore, the judge's decision in respect of para 399A  is
    also flawed and cannot stand.

68. Mr Manley also sought to challenge the judge's decision that there were
    no "very compelling circumstances" over and above  those  described  in
    paras 399 and 399A.  He made a number of submissions based  upon  paras
    (xiv)-(xvi) of the grounds.  In particular, that the judge  had  failed
    properly to consider K's best interests; had been wrong  to  find  that
    there was no family life between the appellant and his  sister  because
    their relationship went beyond more than "normal" emotional ties  given
    their common history of abuse; and a failure to consider the fact  that
    the appellant had spent the majority of his childhood in the UK.

69. Mr Richards, in his submissions, submitted that the judge had  properly
    considered the appellant's claim having found that he  could  not  meet
    the requirements of para 399 or para 399A.  His finding that there were
    no "very compelling circumstances" was, Mr Richards submitted, properly
    open to him.

70. In my judgment, whether or not there is any merit in some or all of  Mr
    Manley's submissions, the plain fact is that the  judge's  decision  in
    respect of "very compelling circumstances" is premised on the fact that
    the appellant cannot succeed under para 399 and para 399A.  It is  only
    if there are circumstances "above and beyond" those  covered  by  paras
    399 and 399A that the  issue  of  "very  compelling  circumstances"  is
    engaged.  Here, I have found that the judge's decision  in  respect  of
    paras 399 and 399A cannot stand.  those decisions must be remade.  As a
    result, the premise upon which  the  judge  dealt  with  Art  8  issues
    outside paras 399 and 399A is removed and until fresh decisions in that
    regard are made there has been no proper  consideration  of  the  "very
    compelling circumstances" criterion in para 398.  It  would  be  wholly
    artificial for a  finding  in  respect  of  the  latter  to  survive  a
    conclusion that the decisions in respect of paras 399 and  399A  cannot
    stand.  Both must be remade so that the "very compelling circumstances"
    decision can be made in the light of any finding  yet  to  be  made  in
    respect of those rules.

71.  For  these  reasons,  the  judge's  decision  that   the   appellant's
    deportation would not breach Art 8 cannot stand.

Decision and Disposal

72. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  upholding  the  s.72
    certificate.

73. Further, the  First-tier  tribunal  erred  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal on the basis that his deportation to the Congo would
    not breach Art 3 (and to the extent also relied on Art 2) and Art 8  of
    the ECHR.

74. Those decisions cannot stand and are set aside.

75. It was common ground between the parties that, in these  circumstances,
    the proper course was to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a rehearing.  Having regard  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  fact
    finding required and to para 7.2 of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement, that is, in my view, the proper disposal of this appeal.

76. Consequently, the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    remake the decisions in  respect  of  the  s.72  certificate  (and  the
    rejection of the appellant's asylum grounds); and under Art 3 (together
    with Art 2) and Art 8 de novo.  The appeal to be heard by a judge other
    than Judge Holder.



                                                                      Signed



                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              16th June 2016

