
 [pic]


The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00250/2016






                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 June 2017                       |On 22 June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                    [I S]

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

     Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Hashmi, Counsel, instructed by Loshna and Co Ltd.
For the Respondent:  Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in August 1979. He came
      to the United Kingdom in July 2010 as a student with further periods
      of leave being granted. His wife and son subsequently joined him. His
      last leave was to expire on the 3rd July 2015 and the day before this
      he made a claim to protection.


   2. He claimed he helped the LTTE.In April 2010 he was arrested. After 10
      days his release was secured, with a requirement that he report at the
      end of July 2010. Instead, he came to the United Kingdom. He claims
      that the authorities have been to his family home enquiring as to his
      whereabouts, the last time being in May 2015.

   3. The respondent rejected this claim on credibility grounds. It was
      pointed out he had been in United Kingdom since July 2010 and did not
      claim protection until the day before his visa was to expire.

   4. His appeal was heard at Bradford. It was dismissed in a decision
      promulgated on 22 December 2016 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      Khan.

   5. In the decision the judge refers to a psychiatric report dated 29 May
      2016 as well as medical records in relation to the appellant. In
      submissions reference was made to this report and it was argued on his
      behalf that his mental health presented a significant obstacle to his
      return.

   6. The judge did not find the appellant to be credible. At paragraph 17
      the judge referred to the psychiatric report. The judge stated :

         "... I cannot see any conclusions about the appellant's mental
         health. There is no conclusion in the report about exactly what the
         appellant is suffering from and the causes.... Unless I have missed
         something, regrettably there are no specific findings about the
         appellant's claimed symptoms and I therefore do not find that the
         report has assisted me in my findings"

The Upper Tribunal

   7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable there
      were pages missing from the psychiatric report before the judge.


   8. In advance of the hearing I have checked the court file. It contains a
      faxed appeal bundle transmitted on 1 December 2016. Item three of the
      bundle is a psychiatric report which is paged 1 through to 23. Pages
      13 onwards concern the doctor's curriculum vitae. Pages 9, 10 and 11
      are missing. Ms Hashmi has shown me the report she has which contains
      the missing pages. It is clear from those pages that there was a
      definite diagnosis, namely, post-traumatic stress disorder and the
      view that the appellant's health would deteriorate if returned. Mr
      Diwnycz said that the report in the Home Office file was complete. I
      was referred to the skeleton argument produced at the hearing on
      behalf of the appellant and paragraph 11 refers to the psychiatric
      report and the diagnoses of post-traumatic stress disorder.

   9. I am satisfied that the crucial pages in the report before the judge
      were missing. Although the presenting officer may have had a full copy
      of the report they may not have appreciated the possibility the judges
      copy was incomplete. The judge may also have failed to notice the
      reference to the diagnoses in the skeleton argument.

  10. The decision was described in the grant of permission as being
      detailed and well reasoned. I would agree. However, the missing pages
      were fundamental and mean a material error in law has been
      demonstrated.

  11. Mindful of the principle in Mbanga that a fact finder must not reach a
      conclusion before surveying all of the relevant evidence it is not
      possible to preserve any of the findings in relation to the protection
      claim. Although it was accepted that the doctor is not in a position
      to assess credibility (see HE (DRC) [2004] UKIAT 00321 and JL (China)
      [2013] UKUT 00145) the report potentially could support the claim
      made, though this was a matter for the judge. Without the full report
      however this could not properly be taken into account.

  12. It is not the case that the appellant's mental health has been raised
      as a separate article 3 and article 8 issue.Rather; it was introduced
      to support his claim to protection. Consequently, it is not possible
      to sever this aspect of the claim and preserve the other findings.
      Unfortunately, the only option in the circumstance is to remit the
      appeal for a hearing de novo.


Decision.

The decision of First-tier Judge Khan dismissing the appeal contains a
material error in law and cannot stand. The appeal is remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Deputy Judge Farrelly

21st June 2017




Directions.

   1. Relist for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal before any
      judge except First-tier Judge A.W.Khan.


   2. Relist in Bradford if possible to convenience the appellant's
      representatives.


   3. A Sinhalese interpreter will be required. It would be preferable if
      the interpreter was not from Middlesbrough otherwise there is a
      possibility they may know the appellant

   4. It is anticipated that the appellant and his wife will give evidence.
      The hearing is likely to last around two and half hours.


Deputy Judge Farrelly

21st June 2017

