

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/00594/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 31 August 2017                     |      On 1 September 2017            |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               DANA SALIM ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent refused the appellant's  protection  claim  for  reasons
    explained in her decision dated 14 January 2016.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mrs D H  Clapham  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal for reasons explained in her decision promulgated  on  15  March
    2017.

 3. The decisions of the respondent and of the judge are based on AA (Iraq)
    CG [2015] UKUT 00544.

 4. UT Judge Pitt granted permission on 12 July 2017, saying:

      The judge appears to accept that the appellant  is  from  a  contested
      area and does not have a CSID.  Permission is granted only in relation
      to the correct application of AA (Iraq) in those circumstances.

 5. The guidance in AA has now been corrected and set out as an annex to AA
    (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944:
      A. INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ: ARTICLE 15(C) OF THE QUALIFICATION
      DIRECTIVE
      1. There is at present a state of internal armed conflict  in  certain
      parts of Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,  militias  of
      various kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL. The intensity  of
      this armed conflict in the so-called "contested areas", comprising the
      governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah
      Al-din, is such that, as  a  general  matter,  there  are  substantial
      grounds for believing that any  civilian  returned  there,  solely  on
      account of his or her presence there,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being
      subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm  within
      the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.
      2. The degree of armed conflict  in  certain  parts  of  the  "Baghdad
      Belts" (the urban  environs  around  Baghdad  City)  is  also  of  the
      intensity described in paragraph 1 above, thereby  giving  rise  to  a
      generalised Article  15(c)  risk.  The  parts  of  the  Baghdad  Belts
      concerned are those forming the border between the Baghdad Governorate
      and the contested areas described in paragraph 1.
      3. The degree of armed conflict in the remainder  of  Iraq  (including
      Baghdad City) is not such as to give rise to  indiscriminate  violence
      amounting to such serious harm to  civilians,  irrespective  of  their
      individual characteristics, so as to engage Article 15(c).
      4. In accordance with the principles set out  in Elgafaji (C-465/07)
      and QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA
      Civ 620, decision-makers in Iraqi cases should assess  the  individual
      characteristics of the person  claiming  humanitarian  protection,  in
      order to ascertain whether those characteristics are such  as  to  put
      that person at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.
      B. DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)
      5. Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region  (IKR)  will
      be to the IKR and all other Iraqis  will  be  to  Baghdad.  The  Iraqi
      authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom  to
      enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a current  or  expired  Iraqi
      passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.
      6. No  Iraqi  national  will  be  returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
      possession of one of these documents.
      7. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)  and
      Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ
      1276, an international protection claim made by P  cannot  succeed  by
      reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from  an  absence  of  a
      current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer, if the Tribunal
      finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account of  a  lack
      of any of those documents.
      8. Where P is  returned  to  Iraq  on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
      passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of  return
      by reason of not having a current passport.
      C. The CSID
      9. Regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it will  be  necessary
      to decide whether P has a  CSID,  or  will  be  able  to  obtain  one,
      reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in
      order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access  financial   assistance   from   the
      authorities; employment; education; housing; and medical treatment. If
      P shows there are no family or other members  likely  to  be  able  to
      provide means of support, P is in general likely to face a  real  risk
      of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the time  any  funds
      provided to P by the Secretary of State or her agents  to  assist  P's
      return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will  still
      have no CSID.
      10. Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P should as a
      general matter be able to obtain one from  the  Civil  Status  Affairs
      Office for P's home Governorate,  using  an  Iraqi  passport  (whether
      current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such a passport,
      P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether P  knows  the  page
      and volume number of the book holding P's information (and that of P's
      family). P's ability to persuade the officials that P  is  the  person
      named on the relevant page is likely to depend on whether P has family
      members or other individuals who are prepared to vouch for P.
      11. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered  if
      P is  unable  to  go  to  the  Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
      Governorate because it is in an area where Article 15(c) serious  harm
      is occurring. As a result of the violence, alternative CSA Offices for
      Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin  have  been  established  in  Baghdad  and
      Kerbala. The evidence does not demonstrate that the "Central Archive",
      which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those
      in need of them.  There  is,  however,  a  National  Status  Court  in
      Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal  recognition  of  identity.
      The precise operation of this court is, however, unclear.
      D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)
      14. As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
      for a person from a contested area to  relocate  to  Baghdad  City  or
      (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.
      15. In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh  for  P
      to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however, likely  to
      be relevant:
      (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (see  Part  C
      above);
      (b) whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are  less  likely  to
      find employment);
      (c) whether P has  family  members  or  friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
      accommodate him;
      (d) whether P is a lone female (women face greater  difficulties  than
      men in finding employment);
      (e) whether P can find a sponsor  to  access  a  hotel  room  or  rent
      accommodation;
      (f) whether P is from a minority community;
      (g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there  is
      some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers  are  provided  with
      the support generally given to IDPs.
      16. There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian  travelling  from
      Baghdad airport to the southern governorates, suffering  serious  harm
      en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).
      E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION
      17. The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if P originates  from
      the  IKR  and  P's  identity  has  been  'pre-cleared'  with  the  IKR
      authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P  to  have  an
      expired or current passport, or laissez passer.
      18. The IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article 15(c) risk
      to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.
      19. A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR  can  obtain  entry
      for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry  permission  for  a
      further 10 days. If K finds  employment,  K  can  remain  for  longer,
      although K will need to register  with  the  authorities  and  provide
      details of the employer. There is no evidence that the IKR authorities
      pro-actively remove Kurds from the IKR whose permits have come  to  an
      end.
      20. Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected  to
      avoid any potential undue harshness in that city by travelling to  the
      IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is likely to involve an assessment of
      (a) the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the  IKR  (such  as  to
      Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of K's securing  employment  in  the
      IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance from family and friends in
      the IKR.
      21. As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a home area
      in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.
      F. EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS
      22. This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq.

Submissions for appellant

 6. At paragraph 48, the judge  said  that  evidence  from  the  respondent
    seemed to suggest that Gwer, the appellant's home town, is in the  IKR.
    The appellant had provided a report by Dr R Fatah,  dated  15  November
    2016. The report made it clear that Gwer is in the IKR and had recently
    been fought over.

 7. At paragraph 148, Dr Fatah said that he "would not consider Gwer to  be
    habitable just yet". At  paragraph  170,  the  report  says  that  non-
    possession of a CSID would be a barrier to the  appellant's  relocation
    to Iraq.

 8. The judge accepted at paragraph 42 that the appellant  had  no  contact
    with his family.

 9. AA at headnote 17 established that the respondent would return  to  the
    IKR only someone whose identity had been  "pre-cleared"  with  the  IKR
    authorities. It was for the respondent to  prove  pre-clearance,  which
    she had failed to do.

10. The judge,  also  at  paragraph  48,  said  that  it  was  "a  complete
    misreading" of AA "to suggest that a Kurd cannot return simply  because
    he does not have a passport and other  documentation.  That  is  not  a
    claim upon which asylum can be based. It is an  administrative  problem
    only".  That was itself a misreading.  A case for protection cannot  be
    based only  on  absence  of  documentation,  but  the  difficulties  an
    appellant may face through absence of documentation, once in Iraq, have
    to be assessed.

11. The judge went on to say that the appellant's statement  was  "entirely
    self-serving", but that had no clear meaning. She went on to  say  that
    the appellant stated that he did not know the details of his CSID,  but
    made no finding. Even if it were to be assumed that the appellant could
    be returned to the IKR, the absence of a CSID was a significant  factor
    which  should  have  been  taken  into  account  in  relation  to   the
    difficulties of relocation. Gwer might no longer be  a  contested  area
    within the IKR but it was not an area  where  the  appellant  could  be
    expected to go. The judge made no findings by  which  the  practicality
    and difficulty of settling elsewhere in the IKR could be assessed.

12. The decision should be set aside and a further hearing fixed, either in
    the UT or in the FTT, for a fresh decision to be made.

13. The report of Dr Fatah says at paragraph 171, "Gwer is  under  the  KRG
    control, thus Mr Ali will have access to free movement within the IKR".
     Mr Winter submitted that was not a finding that  the  appellant  would
    necessarily be granted a CSID, which he would need to take  employment,
    and for other purposes.

14. (I indicated that I  would  decide  the  "pre-clearance"  point  as  in
    several similar recent cases, in some of which Mr Winter  had  appeared
    for appellants, and so did not need to hear from the respondent on that
    issue.)

Submissions for respondent.

15. The appellant is a Kurd from the IKR, to be  returned  directly  there.
    His case is covered by AA at headnotes 17 - 18: the  IKR  is  virtually
    violence free, with no article 15(c) risk to an ordinary civilian.  The
    rest of that case is concerned  with  complexities  of  return  to  and
    relocation within the rest  of  Iraq.   Those  do  not  apply  to  this
    appellant.  Once his return is feasible, the rest falls away.

16. The case is unusual in that the appellant comes from  one  of  the  few
    areas of the IKR which have been fought over, but that does not  affect
    the outcome.  The expert report which the appellant produced shows that
    he can move  freely  anywhere  else  in  that  region.   The  appellant
    appeared to be arguing that he would be at risk in terms of article  3,
    but that could not be sustained simply by absence of a CSID, or on  the
    findings in AA.

17. The report of Dr Fatah concludes at paragraph 242  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk in the IKR "and as a Kurd from Gwer has the  right
    to move freely as he wishes in the IKR".  The judge did not mention the
    expert report, and nothing appeared to have been made of it in the FtT;
    but reference to the  report  confirmed  that  the  judge  reached  the
    correct outcome.

Reply for appellant.

18. The appellant did not advance his case under  article  3,  but  on  the
    lesser standard of the unreasonability or undue harshness  of  internal
    relocation.  The  report  was  concerned  with  the  level  of  general
    violence, which was not the only issue in relocation.

19. AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 00544 at paragraph 47 cites  country  guidance
    from MK, which accepted the importance of a CSID,  throughout  and  not
    only in parts of Iraq, and at  paragraph  57  dealt  with  difficulties
    arising from lack of a CSID.

Discussion and conclusions.

20. The argument that there is a burden on the SSHD to prove  that  a  Kurd
    from the IKR has been pre-cleared for return does not  appear  to  have
    been put to the FtT, and is not in the grounds of appeal to the UT.

21. The country guidance as summarised  in  the  headnote  and  as  annexed
    (before and after amendment by the Court of Appeal) does not state that
    there is any such burden.

22. In so far as any passages in AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 00544 may be read
    to suggest that there might be such a burden, that has  not  found  its
    way into the formal guidance, and is contrary to principle.

23. The respondent makes travel arrangements after not before conclusion of
    an appeal.  It would be unworkable to have to put such arrangements  in
    place prior to appeal hearings.

24. It would generally be unlawful for the SSHD to approach the authorities
    of a person with an unresolved asylum claim to arrange removal.

25. Issues about practicality of return in the  event  of  an  unsuccessful
    appeal are for resolution later between the parties (if  necessary,  by
    way of judicial review) not while the appeal process remains live.

26. AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 00544  at  paragraph  47  does  cite  previous
    country guidance in MK, but the main point of AA was to consolidate and
    update guidance; and the headnote cited from MK begins by stating  that
    absence of a CSID "is not a factor likely to make return to any part of
    Iraq unsafe or unreasonable".

27. AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 00544 at paragraph 57  is  a  narration  of  a
    submission, not a finding.

28. The FtT judge was not right to say that absence of a passport or  other
    documentation is "an administrative problem only".  It is correct  that
    non-returnability,  due  only  to  lack  of  documentation,  does   not
    translate into qualification for protection; but problems arising  from
    lack of documentation may be part of the assessment of difficulties  on
    return, a theme which runs through the guidance.

29. To say that the appellant's statement  is  "entirely  self-serving"  is
    vague and unhelpful.  It is neither a conclusion nor a reason for  one.
    That is followed by a statement of his evidence that he does  not  know
    the page and volume  number  of  his  CSID;  perhaps,  in  context,  an
    indication that his statement is not accepted, but far from clear.

30. I do not find those two points to amount to error of law,  such  as  to
    require the decision to be set aside.

31. The appellant has not shown that even if he does not have a CSID,  that
    might entitle him to protection, or that the Judge erred by failing  to
    make such a finding.  He did not state any  comprehensible  case  along
    such  lines  in  the  FtT.   His  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT  are
    misconceived.  They are based  (a)  on  alleged  difficulty  in  onward
    travel from Baghdad to the IKR, in a  case  which  is  clearly  one  of
    return directly to the IKR and does not involve  internal  travel,  and
    (b) on the possibility of ejection from  the  IKR  if  unable  to  find
    employment, which does not apply to someone who originates from the IKR
    (and which is negated by reference to the report from his expert).

32. It is likely that those misconceptions in the grounds led to the  grant
    of permission,  because  they  obscured  the  fact  that  although  the
    appellant was from a contested area, that area is inside the IKR.

33. Pre-clearance by the authorities of the IKR is  the  basis  of  return.
    That means recognition of the appellant's identity and origins.   Taken
    with the expert's views on his freedom of movement in the IKR,  he  has
    not shown that he would be at greater disadvantage than any other young
    Kurdish man from there.

34. The appellant has not shown that current non-possession of a  CSID  and
    reference to AA discloses any error of  law  such  as  to  require  the
    decision of the FtT to be set aside,  or  such  as  might  bring  about
    another result.

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

36. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            31 August 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


