
                                        [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00639/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 April 2019                        |On 17 April 2019                     |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     MKA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, counsel (8 January 2019)
      Ms A Harvey, counsel. (4 April 2019)
For the Respondent:    Mrs N Wilocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
                    Officer (8 January 2019)
      Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer. (4 April 2019)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


An order has been made under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellant being identified. Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to a contempt of court.

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 23 July 2018 dismissing his appeal against  the
    respondent's decision of 29 December 2017 refusing his application  for
    asylum.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1  July  1999.   He  claims
    that he left Iraq on 26 November  2015  with  the  help  of  an  agent,
    travelling through Turkey, Greece, Austria and other unknown  countries
    before arriving in the UK on 24 December 2015.  He claimed asylum on 25
    December 2015 on the basis that he would be at risk  on  return  as  an
    Iraqi Kurd, who fled after his father was killed fighting ISIS and  his
    brother was later kidnapped and killed.

3.    The appellant is from Kirkuk where he lived with his  mother,  brother
    and sisters.  He claimed that his father worked as a  labourer  and  in
    2011 he joined the Peshmerga for a better income.  In October 2015  his
    father disappeared after he was captured  during  the  war  with  ISIS.
    Some five days later his brother who worked in a  shop  in  the  market
    disappeared.  He had left to go to work in the morning  but,  when  the
    shopkeeper called their home to ask where he was, they became  worried.
    A few days later his body was found and his mother was  called  to  the
    police station to identify him.  It was clear that he  had  been  shot.
    The appellant does not know where the incident occurred nor  where  his
    brother's body was found.

4.    A few days later his mother decided to go and  stay  with  her  father
    who lived about 20 minutes away by car as she was not able to cope with
    the situation and being left alone.  The appellant did not wish to stay
    with his grandfather.  He stayed at home but, as he felt sad about  the
    situation, decided that he wanted to leave  Iraq.   He  did  so  on  26
    November 2017 with A, a wealthy friend of his brother.  They  travelled
    by bus to Turkey using his Iraqi passport.  They went  to  Izmir  where
    the appellant gave his passport to  A  to  take  back  with  him.   The
    appellant continued his journey across Europe until he arrived  in  the
    UK.

5.    The respondent accepted that the appellant was from Iraq and  that  he
    was of Kurdish ethnicity.  However, he did not accept that  his  father
    worked as a Peshmerga soldier, that his brother had been killed or that
    the appellant would be at  risk  from  ISIS  because  of  his  father's
    activities.  It was the respondent's view that the appellant  could  be
    removed to Baghdad and would be able to internally  relocate  there  or
    within other southern governorates within Iraq.   The  respondent  also
    considered whether the appellant could relocate to Erbil or  any  other
    part of the IKR and was satisfied that he would be able to do  so.   In
    any event, it was the respondent's view that the appellant could return
    to Rahimawa, Kirkuk, which was no longer a contested area and where the
    records of the appellant's identity could be  easily  accessed  at  the
    Civil Status Affairs  Office.   His  application  was  refused  on  all
    grounds.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.     At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   the   appellant
    maintained his claim that he would be in danger  if  returned  to  Iraq
    because his father had disappeared.   He  believed  that  he  would  be
    killed in the same way as his brother and he would not be  able  to  go
    and live safely anywhere else in Iraq.  The appellant accepted that  he
    had left Iraq with a passport and that he had had a CSID, his  identity
    document in Iraq.  The judge found that he had  not  given  a  credible
    explanation for leaving his identification behind when he  embarked  on
    his journey [53] and that, when the appellant left  Iraq,  he  did  not
    have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution,  either  objectively   or
    subjectively, neither was he at risk on return for the reasons  he  had
    given [54].  He was not a specific target and had given no  reason  why
    he could not live in Kurdistan where in his updated  witness  statement
    he said that his mother  divided  her  time  between  Sulaymaniyah  and
    Rahimawa.

7.    The judge referred to the country guidance in AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq
    CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  at  [57]-[58]  (the   guidance   being   amended
    subsequently by the Court of Appeal at [2017] EWCA Civ 944) and then to
    AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT  212  at
    [61], setting out new guidance, supplementing the guidance in section C
    and the replacing section E  of  the  guidance  in  AA  but  making  no
    amendments to sections  A,  B  and  D.   She  considered  at  [62]  the
    reasonableness of  the  appellant's  internal  relocation  to  the  IKR
    against the factual background, by reference to the guidance in the new
    section E.

8.    She said that the appellant should be able to travel from  Baghdad  to
    Erbil without any difficulty, his family could  provide  him  with  his
    CSID and he could board an internal flight or pass through  checkpoints
    with no problems.  AAH suggested that the appellant would  be  admitted
    to the IKR without any difficulty.  He spoke Sorani and  identified  as
    Kurdish.  He had not produced a copy of his CSID but, even if it showed
    him to be from Kirkuk, there was unlikely to be any dispute as  to  his
    ethnicity.  As a Kurd he would not  be  required  to  have  a  sponsor,
    although he could if needed reference his family  in  Sulaymaniyah  and
    pass  through  security  screening  without  any  problems.   Once  the
    appellant entered the IKR, there would be no legal  impediment  to  him
    remaining there.  He had his mother and sisters living there. He  would
    not have to be entirely self-sufficient and was unlikely  to  be  in  a
    position where basic necessities such as food, clean water and clothing
    were not available.  For these reasons the appeal was dismissed.


The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions.

9.    In ground 1 it is argued that the judge determined the appeal  on  the
    basis of the country guidance in AAH.  The appeal was heard on 22  June
    2018 but AAH was not issued until on 26 June 2018,  after  this  appeal
    had been heard. Accordingly, deciding the appeal on the  basis  of  AAH
    was a material error or, alternatively, on any analysis, it was  unfair
    to do so because the parties were not able to make submissions  on  its
    impact and the guidance it contained.

10.   Ground 2 argues that the judge maintained  that  the  appellant  could
    safely travel after returning to Baghdad because his  family  would  be
    able to assist him in retrieving his CSID  but  that  was  not  a  safe
    approach on the appellant's evidence which was that  he  did  not  know
    where his CSID was and had not seen it for a very long time.


11.   In ground 3 it is argued that the judge erred by failing to  determine
    the appellant's claim that the Kirkuk region was his home area and  was
    unsafe, that he could not reasonably or safely relocate  elsewhere  and
    that, in the light of his individual circumstances (no  CSID,  being  a
    Sorani speaking Kurdish Sunni with no  family  living  in  the  Baghdad
    area), he could not safely or reasonably return to Baghdad or travel on
    from there.


12.   Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on the  basis  that  the  grounds  raised
    arguable  errors  of  law  and,  in  particular,  the  fact  that   the
    representatives were precluded from making submissions on AAH and  this
    cast doubt on the safety of the findings made by the judge.


13.   Mr Hayward relied primarily on grounds 1 and  3.   He  submitted  that
    the country guidance set out in AAH and relied on by the judge at [61]-
    [63] raised issues which had not been canvassed before her and on which
    he had not been given the opportunity of making  representations,  and,
    in particular, the issues of accommodation and employment.  He  further
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  adequately  to  analyse   the
    appellant's individual circumstances when considering whether he  could
    relocate either in Baghdad, travel on from there  or  relocate  in  the
    IKR.


14.   Mrs Wilocks-Briscoe  submitted  that,  whilst  the  judge  could  have
    called back the parties for further  submissions  following  AAH  being
    issued, the evidence before her was such that she was able  to  proceed
    to determine the appeal fairly.  She had been entitled  to  proceed  on
    the basis that the appellant was someone who had a passport which would
    be safe with A and there was no reason to believe that he would not  be
    able to obtain a CSID, if necessary, with help from  his  family.   She
    had been entitled to find that the appellant would not be  at  risk  of
    harm on return and that, even if there was a risk of  serious  harm  in
    his home area, he  could  in  any  event  relocate  in  the  IKR.   She
    submitted that any further arguments on the appellant's behalf based on
    AAH would not have led to a different result.


Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

15.   I am satisfied that the judge erred in law by taking  into  account  a
    country guidance case  issued  after  the  hearing  was  concluded  but
    without  giving  the  parties  an   opportunity   of   making   further
    representations, whether orally or in writing.  However, that does  not
    mean that the decision must  necessarily  be  set  aside.   If  further
    submissions could not have affected the outcome, then the  appeal  need
    not be set aside.


16.   It is not entirely clear from the decision whether the judge  accepted
    that there would be  an  article  3  or  article  15(c)  risk  for  the
    appellant in Kirkuk, his home area.  At [57] she set  out  the  country
    guidance from section A1 which refers to Kirkuk as one of the contested
    areas where there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
    civilian returned there would face a real risk of  being  subjected  to
    indiscriminate violence amounting to serious  harm.   The  judge  noted
    that the respondent did not dispute that the appellant was from Kirkuk.
     At [56] she commented, in the context of the evidence that his  mother
    travelled regularly between Sulaymaniyah and Kirkuk, that in the  light
    of the expert report of insecurity in Kirkuk it was not evident why she
    should divide her time by going to an area said to be  unsafe.   It  is
    clear from the respondent's  decision  (para  85  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal  letter)  and  the  submissions  at  [41]  that  it   was   the
    respondent's contention that the appellant could now live in safety  in
    Kirkuk

17.   In any event, the judge went on to consider issues  of  relocation  in
    relation to the IKR and whether it could be reached  successfully  from
    Baghdad without the risk of harm. At [58] the judge referred to section
    E 20 of the guidance in  AA  identifying  a  number  of  issues  to  be
    considered.  However, that guidance was replaced by the new  section  E
    in AAH, which introduced a number of  new  factors  to  be  taken  into
    account. Section E7 confirms that the issue  of  whether  an  applicant
    would be at particular risk of ill-treatment during security  screening
    must be assessed on a case-by-case basis and that there are  additional
    factors which might increase the risk such as coming from a family with
    a known association with ISIL, coming from an area associated with ISIL
    and being a single male of fighting age.

18.   Section E9 deals with accommodation, noting  that  those  without  the
    assistance of family in  the  IKR  with  means  have  limited  options.
    Section E10 deals with whether an applicant can secure employment.  The
    judge clearly considered these issues as they are referred to in  [63].
    It follows that she took into account additional factors in the amended
    country guidance but neither party had an opportunity of commenting  on
    them or making further submissions.

19.   On balance, I cannot be confident  that  the  judge  would  inevitably
    have come to the same decision, even if she had  heard  submissions  on
    the substituted section E.  Ground 1  is  made  out  as  the  appellant
    should have had an opportunity of making further submissions on the new
    country guidance in AAH and of considering whether  there  was  further
    evidence he wished to adduce in the light of the amended  guidance.   I
    am also satisfied that ground 3 is made out as  a  number  of  relevant
    matters set out in the new country guidance were not taken into account
    when assessing whether the appellant could safely and reasonably return
    to Baghdad and travel on from there and relocate in the IKR.  There  is
    nothing in ground 2 which merely seeks to reargue an issue of fact.

20.   I am, therefore, satisfied that the judge erred in law such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.  I  am  also  satisfied  that  the  right
    course is for this appeal to remain  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the
    decision to be re-made.  I gave further directions and in the light  of
    the issues raised in the appeal made an order under Rule 14(1)  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008   prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead to the appellant
    being identified.

21.   At the resumed hearing the following further  evidence  was  filed  on
    behalf of the appellant, a further witness statement from the appellant
    and witness statements from his social worker and his foster carer  and
    on behalf of the respondent the CPIN, Iraq Internal  Relocation,  Civil
    Documentation and Returns February 2019 with three articles relating to
    defeat of Isis.  Ms Harvey produced a skeleton argument dated 30  March
    2019 and a list of authorities.  The appellant's bundle (A) before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  and  the  respondent's  CPIN  Iraq:  Security  and
    humanitarian situation March 2017 were referred to by both  parties  in
    submissions.

Further evidence


22.   The appellant adopted his witness statement dated 4  April  2019.   He
    said that he still feared  returning  to  Iraq  in  the  light  of  the
    situation there and because he had left at a very young age.  He  could
    not live in an Arab controlled area nor in a Kurdish area  because  the
    culture was different.  It was also difficult for someone to live alone
    without a family connection.  He had given his passport back to A,  his
    brother's friend.  He could not remember when his passport  was  issued
    but knew that his father had got it for him.  He would have to have  an
    ID card to get a new passport, but the card was never in his possession
    and he did not know where his documents were now.

23.   His mother was currently living in Kirkuk in the area of Azadi,  about
    an hour from where he had previously lived with  her,  his  father  and
    brother.  His mother was travelling between Kirkuk and Sulaymaniyah  to
    take one of his sisters to hospital where she was  receiving  treatment
    from Kurdish doctors.  She had had an accident when she was little  and
    had learning difficulties and a mental disability.  If he had to get  a
    new ID card in Baghdad, he would need to be there  and  have  immediate
    family there.  His father had died and his grandfather could not travel
    to Baghdad as it was not safe there.  He had no family in  Baghdad  and
    did not speak Arabic.

24.   The area where his mother lived was  still  a  disputed  area  between
    Arabs, Kurds and Turkmans.  The Kurdish flag  was  not  allowed  to  be
    flown there  and,  although  the  Kurdish  forces  and  Peshmergas  had
    defeated Isis, the Iraqi government had now forced the Peshmerga Forces
    out.  He had  heard  that  high-ranking  Kurdish  police  officers  and
    Kurdish officials were being targeted.


25.   In his oral evidence he confirmed that he had no family or friends  in
    Baghdad.  His mother lived in Kirkuk alone with his three sisters.  She
    had told him that any documents she had in  her  possession  were  lost
    when she had to move.  He confirmed that he was  studying  at  college.
    He could not go back to Kirkuk because his  life  would  be  in  danger
    there and he did not know anyone in the IKR.  He did not know how  life
    would be in the Kurdish area or how he could live there.   He  was  not
    familiar with it.  He had been advised to have some counselling and had
    contacted someone to make an appointment but had not yet had time to go
    there.  He said he would not like to live alone in Iraq as he had never
    lived alone and did not know what it would be like.

26.   The statement from the appellant's social worker  is  dated  28  March
    2019.  She says that the appellant  has  bonded  excellently  with  his
    foster carer and has remained living  with  her  under  a  Staying  Put
    arrangement since his 18th birthday on 1 July  2017.   He  is  learning
    skills for living independently but  it  is  her  view  that  he  needs
    support for his emotional well-being and she  does  not  feel  that  he
    would manage living on his own.  He has been offered professional well-
    being support but has declined it on the basis that this type  of  help
    is unknown to him and is not typical  in  Kirkuk.   She  describes  his
    social and emotional development of that of a younger child which could
    leave him vulnerable to being taken advantage of  without  the  correct
    support and guidance and there have been concerns about  the  potential
    for him being groomed by older people.

27.   In the statement from  his  foster  carer  dated  4  April  2019,  she
    described the appellant as finding  it  hard  to  interact  with  other
    students due to a lack of social skills and confidence and said that he
    is quiet, whereas the other students come across as confident and loud.
     He is scared of going out on his own especially at night  and  on  one
    occasion when he went with other members of the family to the beach, he
    became very frightened when he was taken out in a dinghy as it reminded
    him of a time on his journey to the UK of being a dinghy with about  30
    others at night in the pitch black and cold.  In her view the appellant
    is not ready to leave her care as he still has so many fears and  would
    not manage on his own due to his lack of social interaction with groups
    of people, his lack of confidence in matters such as making a  doctor's
    appointment and his struggle to understand  the  management  of  money.
    She described him as still very na�ve.


Further Submissions.


28.   Ms Kenny submitted that the basis of the appellant's  claim  could  be
    summarised as a fear arising from his background and from the deaths of
    his father and brother, but his evidence had been vague.  However,  the
    situation in Kirkuk had changed  as  the  threat  from  Isis  had  been
    defeated.  She submitted that it was now possible for him to return  to
    Kirkuk; he was in contact with his mother and she and his sisters  were
    apparently living safely there.  The appellant was unlikely to face any
    problem in obtaining documents for his flight to Baghdad  and  for  his
    onward journey to Kirkuk or the IKR.  He would be able to relocate,  if
    necessary, in the IKR and there was no reason to believe that he  would
    not be  able  to  feed  and  clothe  himself  there.  She  argued  that
    relocation would not be unduly harsh.  He would have some  prospect  of
    support from his family in Kirkuk.  He had referred to attacks on high-
    ranking Kurdish officials but there was no reason to  believe  that  he
    would be targeted.


29.   Ms Harvey  submitted  the  appeal  essentially  raised  three  issues,
    whether the appellant would be at real risk of serious harm in  Kirkuk,
    whether it was realistic to expect him to be able to travel to Baghdad,
    obtain a CSID and then travel in safety to the IKR and whether it would
    be reasonable for him to relocate in the IKR.  She  argued  that  there
    was no reason to believe that the respondent was  proposing  to  return
    anyone by any route other than via Baghdad.  The letters from the Iraqi
    ambassador at annexes A and B of CPIN February 2019 tended to show that
    obtaining documents was not as clear cut as suggested.

30.   The country guidance in AA was that  Kirkuk  was  not  a  place  where
    there would be no real risk under article 3.  She  accepted  that  Isis
    had lost control there, but Kirkuk remained a contested area, referring
    to the report of Dr Ghaderi at A476.  The Iraqi government  was  active
    in Kirkuk seeking to maintain its control against any  Kurdish  forces.
    The situation there still gave rise to a risk  of  harm  under  article
    15(c) and there was no compelling reason to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance in AA and affirmed in substance on this issue in AAH.


31.   So far as  getting  to  Kirkuk  or  to  the  IKR  was  concerned,  she
    submitted that the appellant  was  in  all  likelihood  going  to  have
    considerable difficulty, firstly in obtaining a CSID  in  Baghdad.   He
    could not reasonably be expected to travel to Kirkuk to obtain one.  He
    would be at risk when travelling from Baghdad because he  was  Kurdish,
    had no proper documentation and was likely to fall foul  of  roadblocks
    set up by the militias.  Further,  she  submitted  that,  even  if  the
    appellant could reach the IKR, when the guidance set  out  in  AAH  was
    taken into account, it  was  clear  that  he  would  have  considerable
    difficulties finding accommodation and  work.   The  dire  humanitarian
    situation in the IKR was evidenced in the report from Dr Ghaderi.   She
    submitted that the appellant was not well placed to secure  employment,
    he had no CSID and enjoyed no patronage.  He had left Iraq when a child
    and had not acquired skills that would assist him in finding work.   In
    his circumstances, so she submitted, it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect him to relocate to the IKR, even if he could get there.


Assessment of the issues.


32.   There was no error of law in the First  tier  Tribunal's  decision  on
    the asylum claim and, in any event, the basis of that  claim  has  been
    significantly reduced by the defeat of Isis in Iraq.  The issue  before
    me relates to humanitarian protection.  The first issue to consider  is
    whether the appellant would be at risk of serious harm within the scope
    of article 15(c) as a civilian who solely on  account  of  his  or  her
    presence there faces a real risk of being subjected  to  indiscriminate
    violence amounting to serious harm.  In AA at  section  A1,  Kirkuk  is
    amongst the contested areas identified where the situation is such that
    as a general matter the threshold  within  article  15(c)is  met.   The
    First-tier Tribunal judge appears to have  accepted  that  the  article
    15(c) threshold was met there in the light of the comment  at  [56]  of
    her decision that it was not evident why the appellant's mother  should
    divide her time going to an area said to be unsafe.

33.   In the decision letter at [89] it is argued that the  part  of  Kirkuk
    the appellant originated from no longer meets the threshold of  article
    15(c) in the light of improvements in the security situation.  Ms Kelly
    relies on the CPIN March 2017 report which at 2.3.27 argues that  there
    are strong grounds to depart from the assessment in AA of article 15(c)
    and that Kirkuk, except for Hawija and the surrounding areas, no longer
    meets that threshold.

34.   Isis has been defeated in Iraq at present, and,  although  it  is  not
    clear to what extent there is a future terrorist threat if  Isis  seeks
    to regroup, there is, nonetheless, evidence of  continued  conflict  in
    Kirkuk between Kurdish forces and the Iraqi army.  Kirkuk is ethnically
    mixed, it is a contested province and the area is still  volatile:  see
    the report from Dr Ghaderi at A475-481 and in para  48  at  A481.   Her
    view that Kirkuk as a disputed region remains unsafe  is  supported  by
    other background evidence, by way of example by the  NIQASH  report  at
    A190-191, the US  State  Department  report  at  A209  and  the  Danish
    Immigration Report A371 at A387 para 3.2.

35.   Taking these factors into account, I am not satisfied that  there  are
    sufficiently clear and  cogent  reasons  to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance in AA relating to the threshold of harm in Kirkuk.

36.   The removal directions envisage a return via Baghdad.  I was  referred
    to evidence that the  Iraqi  government  has  now  lifted  the  ban  on
    international flights to the IKR (CPIN February 2019 2.7.2)  but  there
    is no evidence that the respondent intends to make a return other  than
    by way of Baghdad.


37.   When considering  the  feasibility  of  the  appellant  returning  via
    Baghdad, I must consider whether he has a  CSID  or  will  be  able  to
    obtain one reasonably soon after arriving in  Iraq  (AA,  section  C9).
    This document is important not only to facilitate travel  but  also  on
    the issue of whether and to what extent he  would  be  able  to  obtain
    financial assistance from the authorities.  I accept that the appellant
    does not currently have in his possession his  passport  or  his  CSID.
    There is evidence about how replacement documents can be  obtained  but
    the practical realties are such that I am satisfied  at  least  to  the
    lower standard of proof that the appellant will have real  difficulties
    in doing so.

38.   Even assuming he is able to obtain a passport, and  the  letters  from
    the Iraqi Embassy suggest that this in not an entirely straight forward
    process, it will be even more problematic to obtain a CSID.  He  cannot
    reasonably be expected to obtain a CSID from Kirkuk in the light of the
    situation there (AA, annex C10).  I am also  satisfied  that  he  would
    have  considerable  difficulties  in  obtaining  a  CSID  in   Baghdad,
    particularly in the light of the risks for young, male Kurds there (see
    A494 at para 89 of Dr Ghedari's report).

 39.  I am also satisfied that he would have considerable difficulties  with
    his travel arrangements and, in  particular,  his  onward  travel  from
    Baghdad in the light of the fact that he may well not be able to obtain
    a CSID, he is a Kurdish Sorani speaker, he does not have family in  the
    Baghdad area and is a member of two minority communities, a young  male
    Sunni and a Kurd.

40.   However, even if the  difficulties  in  getting  to  the  IKR  can  be
    overcome, in the light of the guidance in AAH, I am satisfied  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate  there.   Whilst  I
    approach the appellant's evidence with some caution in the light of the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal, I must take into account  his  age
    and lack of maturity as set out in the statement of his  social  worker
    and foster carer.  I am satisfied at least to  the  lower  standard  of
    proof that his father and brother have been victims of the conflict  in
    Iraq and that his mother and sisters continue to live in Kirkuk and the
    trips to Sulaymaniyah are to obtain medical treatment for her daughter.

41.   In the IKR the appellant's  accommodation  options  are  limited  (AAH
    section E9). He does not have family members with whom we can live  and
    the likelihood is that he would not gain access to one of  the  refugee
    camps there.  He has very limited prospects  of  obtaining  employment.
    He has no family connections which  might  give  him  an  advantage  in
    obtaining work (AAH section E10).  In summary, the appellant is  likely
    to fall into the category of those without access to basic  necessities
    such as food, clean water and clothing.

42.   A further and important factor, which must  cause  concern  about  the
    appellant's ability to get to the IKR and relocate there,  arises  from
    the evidence of his social worker  and  foster  mother  which  was  not
    challenged and which I accept. Their evidence makes it  clear  that  he
    would have difficulty living by himself in an area he knows, let  alone
    in an area he has never been to before.  When considering the viability
    of relocation, I must consider not only  the  background  circumstances
    but also the appellant's  own  individual  profile  and  circumstances.
    Taking these factors together, I am satisfied that for  him  relocation
    in the IKR or elsewhere in  Iraq,  leaving  aside  the  problems  about
    whether or how he could get there, would not be reasonable and would be
    unduly harsh.

43.   In summary, in the light of the evidence before me  I  find  that  the
    appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection in the  light  of  the
    situation in Kirkuk and that the  option  of  internal  relocation,  if
    available, would be unduly harsh.

    Decision


44.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  the  decision  has  been  set
    aside.  I remake the decision by allowing the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection and  human  rights  grounds  but  dismissing  it  on  asylum
    grounds.




Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated:  11 April 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
