
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/00147/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26th March 2019                      |On 16th April 2019                  |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                  ms o. a.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Mallick, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  6th  July  1984.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history and on 26th  April  2016
    applied for asylum.  That application was based on  a  contention  that
    she had a well-founded fear of persecution in Nigeria on the  basis  of
    her membership of a particular social  group  (a  potential  victim  of
    F.G.M.).  Her application was refused by Notice of Refusal  dated  13th
    December 2017.  The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Asjad sitting at Birmingham on 26th February
    2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  6th  April  2018  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 2. On 6th April 2018 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Those Grounds of Appeal asserted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  the
    approach to Article 8 and failed to consider paragraph EX.1 of Appendix
    FM and Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 in circumstances where the Appellant was the mother of a child who
    had lived in the UK continuously for more than seven years.

 3. On 20th June 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe granted permission
    to appeal.  Judge O'Keeffe noted that at paragraph 37 of  the  decision
    the judge had made a finding that the best interests  of  the  children
    were to be with their mother and father.  The judge however did not  go
    on then to consider whether it was reasonable to expect the children to
    leave the  UK  and  return  with  the  parents  to  Nigeria.   In  such
    circumstances it was arguable that the judge had fallen into error.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note firstly that the basis of the appeal
    is somewhat different from the  original  application  for  asylum  and
    Grounds of Refusal on the asylum  application  in  that  they  are  now
    maintained on human rights  grounds.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    anonymised this matter.  No application is made to vary that order  and
    the anonymity direction will remain in place.  The Appellant appears by
    her instructed Counsel, Ms Mallick.  The Secretary of State appears  by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Whitwell.

Submission/Discussion

 5. Ms Mallick points out that there are two children of the Appellant born
    respectively on 17th December 2010 and 21st November 2013 and that they
    both have different  fathers.   She  submits  that  the  error  of  law
    submissions are based  on  the  grounds  that  if  the  Appellant  were
    returned to Nigeria the two children would return with her and that  on
    such return they would be at risk  of  being  subjected  to  FGM.   She
    submits that the judge has, at paragraph 20 of his  decision,  set  out
    the risk and goes on to comment that in addition a second child suffers
    from pulmonary stenosis and has been referred to social services,  i.e.
    that the social services are consequently aware of the position of  the
    children.  She comments that there are  no  specific  findings  of  the
    judge to be found in the body of the decision although she acknowledges
    that at paragraph 36 the judge has found that the Appellant's daughters
    are not at risk in Nigeria and that if he is wrong in  that  assessment
    then internal relocation and state protection would be available.  What
    she emphasises however is that at paragraph 37  it  is  her  contention
    that the judge has thereinafter  gone  on  to  make  specific  findings
    regarding her daughter.

 6. The main submission is that the reasonableness question of  return  has
    not been considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and that the judge
    has failed to give full and proper consideration to the guidance  given
    by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and Others v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2018] UKSC.  She asked me to remit the  matter
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 7. In response Mr Whitwell points out there  are  two  Grounds  of  Appeal
    which have been slightly elaborated within the grant of permission.  He
    accepts that there has been no express finding with regard to the issue
    of reasonableness in the meaning of KO  but  questions  whether  it  is
    material.  He points out that so far as the first ground  is  concerned
    at paragraph 121 of the Notice of Refusal  the  judge  noted  that  the
    eldest child was not a qualifying child  at  the  date  of  application
    although the Secretary of State admits the child is now and that  would
    explain the basis upon which paragraph 38 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision was reached and why the Rules were not met.

 8. He acknowledges that the main paragraph in the decision upon  which  we
    are  concentrating  is  paragraph  37  and  that  that  makes  specific
    reference to the best interests of the Appellant's  daughter,  pointing
    out there was access to education in Nigeria and that the  judge  found
    there are no concerns regarding the medical  treatment  that  could  be
    available in Nigeria.  He considers that the judge has  addressed  many
    of the submissions made by Ms Mallick.

 9. He takes me to the findings of paragraph 33 pointing out that both  the
    Appellant and her husband are opposed to FGM and  that  the  judge  has
    consequently given reasons as to why her decision is reasonable even if
    he has not couched them in express terms.  He points out that KO as  an
    authority did not disturb the reasoning of returning to a country  such
    as Nigeria with both parents and therefore  the  decision  may  not  be
    unreasonable.  He asked me to maintain the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.



Findings on Error of Law

12. I remind myself that the issue before me is whether or not there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     I am satisfied that there is on the basis that it is  not  appropriate
    for a judge to reach conclusions without making findings.  This is what
    the judge has done at paragraph 37.  The judge has not set out what  is
    reasonable in respect of the two children.

13. It is appropriate as a matter of law for a Tribunal to carry out a full
    proportionality analysis.  The judge has  unfortunately  failed  to  do
    this.  I remind myself of the general approach to  the  application  of
    Article 8 in immigration cases as set out at paragraphs 12, 17  and  23
    of KO.  It is further considered, albeit of course at a lower level, in
    the Upper Tribunal decision of  JG  (Section  117B(6):  "reasonable  to
    leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72  (IAC)  which  is  authority  for  the
    proposition that Section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 require a court or Tribunal  to  hypothesise  that  the
    child in question would leave the United Kingdom even if  this  is  not
    likely to be the case, and ask whether it would be reasonable to expect
    the child to do so.

14. It is the failure of the judge to pose those questions that  constitute
    the material error of law.  In such circumstances I am  satisfied  that
    the correct approach is to send  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.   I  do  however  express  one  caveat  to  the
    Appellant.  What the First-tier Tribunal Judge appears to have done  is
    to have made his conclusions without setting out his reasons  and  that
    creates the error of law.  There is a  requirement  of  fairness  which
    clearly means the judge must go through this exercise.  That is not  to
    say that another judge hearing this matter will not come to exactly the
    same conclusion as the First-tier Tribunal Judge having heard  all  the
    evidence  and  setting  out  his  or  her  reasons  in  reaching   that
    conclusion.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereafter for the  rehearing  of
this matter:

1.   That on finding that there is a material error of law in  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision  is  set  aside  and  the
    matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham  on
    the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.

2.   That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

3.   That the rehearing  is  to  be  before  any  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal other than IJ Asjad.
4.   There be leave to either party to file and serve an  up-to-date  bundle
    of objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they seek to rely at
    least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

5.   That the Appellant do attend the hearing  for  the  purpose  of  cross-
    examination.

6.   That in the event  that  the  Appellant  requires  an  interpreter  her
    instructed solicitors must notify the Tribunal  within  seven  days  of
    receipt of these directions giving details of the language requirement.

7.   That the First-tier Tribunal Judge  granted  the  Appellant  anonymity.
    That anonymity direction will remain in place.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           15th April 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           15th April 2019
