
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00051/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2018                           |On 30 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Medley-Daley


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, AO, was born on 15 January  1983  and  is  a
    female citizen of Nigeria.  She entered the United Kingdom as a student
    in 2006 and has resided here ever since.  She is married to a  Nigerian
    citizen and they have three children, all of  whom  were  born  in  the
    United Kingdom and who are Nigerian citizens.  Her eldest child in  the
    United Kingdom will be 7 years old on 21 February 2018.  As at the date
    of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, that child has been living in
    the United Kingdom for more than seven years.   The  appellant  claimed
    asylum on 15 June 2017 but by a decision dated 12  November  2017,  she
    was refused international protection.  She appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Myers) which, in a decision promulgated on 12  February
    2018, allowed the appeal both on  asylum  grounds  and  also  on  human
    rights grounds.  At the outset of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal,
    Mr Tan, who appeared for the Secretary of  State,  confirmed  that  the
    respondent was not seeking to dispute the  decision  of  the  judge  to
    allow the appeal under Article 8, ECHR.   The  only  issue  before  the
    Upper  Tribunal  is  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  internal  flight
    alternative.

 2. At [28], the judge wrote:

         In relation to whether it is reasonable for the appellant  and  her
         family to internally relocate within Nigeria I must take account of
         whether in doing so there would be a disproportionate  interference
         with her Article 8 rights.  The respondent relies on  the  findings
         made by the First-tier and Upper Tribunal in the appellant's appeal
         in 2013  when  it  was  held  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
         obstacles  to  the  family  relocating  in  Nigeria  and  the  best
         interests of the children would  lie  in  their  remaining  in  the
         custody of their parents who could return to Nigeria  as  a  family
         unit.  If their family had returned at that point  as  they  should
         have done I have no doubt they would have been able to establish  a
         stable family life in Nigeria  with  limited  disruption  to  their
         children.  However, they did not return and time has moved on.

 3. Thereafter, the judge considered the best interests of the children, in
    particular of the eldest child D who, by the  time  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, had been living in  the  United  Kingdom  for  almost
    seven years.  The judge considered a report of  an  independent  social
    worker (Christine Brown) who  had  found  the  children  to  be  highly
    westernised and regarded themselves as British, rather  than  Nigerian.
    The judge noted that "[Ms Brown] told me that although families can and
    do relocate successfully to  different  countries  in  the  world  much
    depends on the circumstances and whether the family  wishes  to  move."
    The judge concluded [31] that, "it would  be  in  the  children's  best
    interests to remain in their happy and stable  environment  which  they
    are used to.  However their best interests  are  not  determinative  in
    deciding whether it is reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  and  her
    family to leave the UK and relocate to Nigeria."  The judge went on  to
    consider Part 5A of the 2002 Act  (as  amended).   She  considered  the
    Secretary of State's guidance in respect  of  Section  117B(6),  noting
    that "strong reasons would be required in order to refuse a  case  with
    continuous residence of more than seven years."  The judge  found  [35]
    that "the children would adjust to life in Nigeria in time."   However,
    she went on to allow the appeal.

 4. I agree with the Secretary  of  State  that  the  judge  has  seriously
    confused the distinct issues of internal flight and  Article  8,  ECHR.
    The judge  considered  internal  flight  because  she  found  that  the
    appellant had a genuine and well-founded fear of the children suffering
    FGM if returned to their home area of Nigeria.  That  finding  has  not
    been disputed.  However, the judge should have confined her analysis to
    the principles set out in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 in  determining  whether
    internal flight within the country of origin would be unduly harsh, the
    focus is upon the circumstances which an appellant would  face  in  the
    country of origin.  That much is made clear by the UNHCR guidelines  to
    which the House of Lords refer in Januzi as the appellant's own Rule 24
    statement indicates:

         The guidelines refer to respect for  fundamental  human  rights  in
         particular non-derogable  rights  to  economic  survival  including
         issues of access to land, resources, protection, family links or  a
         social  safety  net  trivial  or  cultural  difficulties  (sic)  or
         conditions of severe hardship and  would  deem  to  be  helpful  in
         concentrating attention on the standards prevailing in the  country
         of nationality.

 5. In her  analysis  of  internal  flight,  the  judge  has  dealt  almost
    exclusively with the circumstances of the family in the United Kingdom.
     The judge herself found that the children would  "adjust  to  life  in
    Nigeria in time" which hardly supports her conclusion that it would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to live in Nigeria.  The rationale of the
    judge's decision is that, having lived for seven years  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the child D in particular has established private  life  links
    with others in this jurisdiction which  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect him to severe by returning to Nigeria.  Those are considerations
    which are wholly different from determining whether it would be  unduly
    harsh for any member of this family to live outside their home area  of
    Nigeria.  The judge has stated in terms that, if the children  did  not
    exist, then she would find  that  it  was  not  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant and her husband to exercise internal flight.  She has  failed
    to address at all the circumstances which  any  member  of  the  family
    would encounter in Nigeria outside their home area which might  concede
    that it would be characterised as unduly harsh  or  even  unreasonable.
    The judge's focus has been upon the circumstances of the family in  the
    United Kingdom;  it  should  have  been  upon  their  circumstances  in
    Nigeria.

 6. I have set aside the judge's decision.  The Secretary of State does not
    dispute that the appellant should be granted  leave  to  remain  having
    succeeded in her appeal under Article 8, ECHR.  Considering  the  facts
    which were before the First-tier Tribunal and, indeed, Judge Myers' own
    observations regarding the likely circumstances which the family  would
    encounter outside their  home  area  having  exercised  the  option  of
    internal flight I remake the asylum decision dismissing the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  12
    February 2018 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appeal is
    allowed on human rights grounds  (Article  8,  ECHR).   The  appeal  on
    asylum grounds is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 26 November 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 26 November 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

