
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00697/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th October 2016                          |On 8th November 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              Miss Marjorjy [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muzenda (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Zimbabwe, who was born on  21st
    February 1971.  She appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of  the  Respondent  dated  12th  January  2016  refusing  her
    application for refugee asylum status and for  humanitarian  protection
    on the basis that there would be no  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under the Refugee Convention and the European Convention on
    Human Rights.

 2.  The  Appellant's  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Heatherington at Birmingham Sheldon Court.

 3. The Appellant's appeal relied heavily upon sur place activities in  the
    United Kingdom and at the hearing before the judge below, the Appellant
    produced details of MDC meetings in the  UK.   The  judge  observed  at
    paragraph 28 that:

         "The minutes of MDC meetings are word processed and appear to  have
         been printed at the same time using the same template.   I  do  not
         find these demonstrate regular attendances by the Appellant.   They
         may  have  been  dated  to  give  the  impression  of  longstanding
         attendance." (Paragraph 28)

 4. The judge also observed (at paragraph 30) that:

         "The photographs (pages 14-39 in the Appellant's bundle) identified
         the Appellant  has  attended  protests  and  has  held  banners  at
         protests.  These have the potential to demonstrate support for  the
         MDC in the United Kingdom and that she is politically active in the
         United Kingdom."

 5. The judge concluded from this evidence that, "taking  the  evidence  in
    the round, I attach little weight to this evidence.  She is an economic
    migrant who has cynically engaged in political activities in the United
    Kingdom solely to bolster her claims".  The decision does not make  any
    reference to the body of case law in relation to sur place  activities,
    even in circumstances where such activities have been contrived by  the
    person making a protection claim.

 6. In RM (Zimbabwe) [2008] EWCA Civ 824, Sedley LJ said that,  "that  even
    opportunistic opposition sur place is capable of creating or  enhancing
    an asylum  claim"  (at  paragraph  7)  and  this  was  followed  in  TM
    (Zimbabwe) [2010] by Elias J at paragraph 26.  Of  course,  such  dicta
    must be placed in its proper context and the observation made in Danian
    [1999] EWCA Civ 3000 with respect to the jurisprudence in  this  regard
    deserves better recognition when it is  stated  that,  "nothing  in  it
    should be read as giving any  kind  of  green  light  to  bogus  asylum
    seekers".  Even so, the rejection of sur place activity evidence in  an
    appeal such as this without giving proper reasons for such a conclusion
    demonstrates an error of law.

 7. At the hearing before me on 17th October 2016, Ms Z Ahmed, appearing as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, conceded  right  away  that  the
    determination exhibited an error of law  on  account  of  the  lack  of
    reasoning given by the judge.  This was not only  in  relation  to  the
    matters set out above, but also in relation to the  fact  that  if  the
    Appellant had  produced  minutes  of  MDC  meetings,  which  were  word
    processed, and appear to have been printed at the same time  using  the
    same template, this did not  in  itself,  without  the  giving  of  any
    further reasons, demonstrate that such evidence was not  to  be  relied
    upon, particularly given the express recognition  in  the  photographs,
    given by the judge, that the Appellant has attended  protests  and  had
    held banners at protests (at paragraph 30).

 8. Mr Muzenda, appearing on behalf of the Appellant, explained  that  with
    respect to the key elements of the evidence before the judge, there had
    been no reasoning given for the conclusions.  The judge  had  not  only
    failed to make a finding whether the Appellant was an active member  of
    the MDC in Zimbabwe and the United Kingdom (see paragraphs 29  to  30),
    but had also failed to apply  the  relevant  country  guidance  law  in
    circumstances where the Appellant had been involved at a low level with
    the MDC.  This was important because the Appellant's home area was  one
    where the Appellant would be required to demonstrate loyalty  to  ZANU-
    PF.  The express finding that the Appellant was an  "economic  migrant"
    (paragraph 30) was uncalled for and without proper basis  in  reasoning
    and that I should make a finding on an  error  of  law  and  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by  a  judge  other
    than the original judge in this case.

 9. Both parties before me agreed that the proper course of action  was  to
    remit this matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are  those
    set out above.  Accordingly, under Practice Statement 7.2(b)  I  remake
    the decision by remitting the matter back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
    necessary for the decision to be properly remade is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This matter  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a  judge  other
    than Judge Heatherington.

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 5th November 2016


