
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00841/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2016                           |On 4 November 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                John FREEMAN


                                   Between

                                   [S I O]
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Sihwa, solicitor, Duncan Lewis & Co
For the respondent:    Mr Keith Norton


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     This is the appeal of [SIO], who was born in Nigeria on 26  July  1995.
    She appeals against the decision of Judge Bernard Andonian, sitting  at
    Taylor House on 6 July 2016, dismissing her  asylum  and  human  rights
    appeal.

2.   The appellant came to  this  country  on  10  September  2013,  with  a
    student visa valid until 29 October 2015; but on 3 September  2015  she
    claimed asylum.  Her case was that she would face risk on return  as  a
    Lesbian.  She said she had Lesbian feelings when she  was  8,  and  she
    knew what they were called from the time she was 14.  She  claimed  one
    actual relationship with a female British citizen  called  Jade,  which
    had lasted from July 2015 until December that year or January 2016.

3.   Her brothers Gabriel and Michael gave oral  evidence  in  her  support.
    The judge did deal with their evidence at  paragraph  10,  but  on  the
    basis that they said no more than might be  expected  of  them  as  her
    brothers.

4.   At paragraph 13 the judge noted that the  appellant  had  claimed  that
    she had told her parents in Nigeria that she was a Lesbian.  Her mother
    had supported her all along.   Her  father  had  disapproved,  but  was
    coming round.  At paragraph 19 the judge made a clear finding that  the
    parents knew about her appeal, and that she was  a  Lesbian  and  could
    have provided statements in support of her, but did not.

5.   The judge made a number of other negative credibility findings  against
    the appellant, including the fact that there was no signed statement or
    oral evidence from Jade, which may well have been justified; but it  is
    accepted that his finding at paragraph 19 was wrong.  Both parents  had
    provided a statement in support of the appellant, making it clear  that
    she had told them about her orientation.  Her father confirmed that  he
    had come round to supporting her, and her mother said that she had even
    met Jade on her visit to this country in December 2015.

6.   Mr Sihwa, who appeared for  the  appellant  before  me  as  before  the
    judge, has assured me that he did  draw  those  dates  to  the  judge's
    attention in the course of his closing submissions.  The judge does not
    record those, and there is no legible  note  of  them  in  the  judge's
    record of proceedings or in the presenting  officer's  note,  but  that
    assurance is of course accepted, and  it  follows,  despite  the  other
    findings of fact against the appellant, that the  judge's  point  about
    the lack of statements from the appellant's parents involved a material
    error of law, and the result is that the decision will have to  be  re-
    made.

Appeal allowed: decision to be re-made
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge Andonian

                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)

