
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/00521/2016
                                                AA/13548/2015, AA/13688/2015
                                                AA/13689/2015, AA/13690/2015
                                                AA/13691/2015, AA/13687/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2020                   |On 26 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     im
                                     ny
                                     hm
                                     am
                                     zm
                                     lm
                                     am
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

    Background

 2. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 17 September  2019  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill  which  refused  the  asylum  and  human
    rights appeals of the appellants.

 3. The seven appellants are a family of Stateless  Palestinians  who  were
    resident in Lebanon prior to their entry to the  United  Kingdom.   The
    family comprises the  father,  IM,  and  mother,  NY,  and  their  five
    children, the oldest of whom is now an adult.

 4. The second appellant and the children arrived in the UK on  6  February
    2015 and applied for asylum on arrival.

 5. IM arrived in the UK on 24 August  2015  and  also  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival.

 6. The asylum claims of the second appellant and the children were refused
    by the respondent in a decision dated  30  November  2015.   The  first
    appellant's claim was refused in a decision dated 5 January 2016.

 7. All of the  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Their
    appeals were linked as they all relied upon the claim  put  forward  by
    the appellant.  For the same reason, in this decision I refer  only  to
    the appeal of IM (the appellant) in this decision.

 8. The appeal has a  somewhat  complicated  procedural  history.   It  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis in a decision promulgated
    on 25 November  2016.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Bruce in a decision dated 20 February 2017.   The  error
    of law decision came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana who, in a
    decision issued on 19 May 2017, found no error of law in  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis.

 9. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal.
    On 26 July 2018, permission was  granted  by  consent  and  the  appeal
    remitted to the Upper Tribunal in order for a new decision  on  whether
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Anstis  disclosed  an  error  on  a
    point of law.

10. The appeal then came before Upper Tribunal Judge Blum and in a decision
    issued on 22 November 2018 he found a material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis and  set  it  aside.   The
    appeals were remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  hearing
    with no findings preserved.

11. The appeal then  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mill  on  9
    September 2019. In the decision dated 17 September 2019 which is  under
    challenger here, Judge Mill refused the appellant's  asylum  and  human
    rights appeal.

12. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    This was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin in a decision dated  30
    October 2019 but, on renewal, granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  in
    a decision dated 3 December 2019.  Thus the  appeal  came  for  hearing
    before me on 14 January 2020.

13. The core of the appellant's claim is that he lived in the Al  Rashidiya
    refugee camp for the majority of his life.  In 2014  he  began  working
    for the Palestinian Liberation Organisation/Fatah (Fatah). He was given
    funds of $400,000 to spend on refugees coming from Syria.  In order  to
    dispense this money he went to live in the Ein Al-Hilweh refugee  camp.
    While he was living in Ein Al-Hilweh camp, the appellant visited a camp
    in an area of Lebanon called Arsal, close to the Syrian border. He  did
    so of his own accord and without informing Fatah.

14. The appellant maintains that whilst working in Ein Al-Hilweh  camp,  at
    the beginning of December 2014 he was approached by an official of Jund
    Al-Sham, a militant Islamic group, and  asked  by  this  individual  to
    register his family and others as Palestinian refugees from  Syria  and
    to give them funds of approximately $100,000.  He also  requested  that
    the appellant work as a spy against Fatah.  The appellant refused to co-
    operate. The official from Jund Al-Sham  threatened  to  kill  him  and
    kidnap  his  wife  and  children.   Fearing  reprisals,  the  appellant
    returned immediately to Al Rashidiya camp with his family.

15. The appellant maintains that after he returned to Al Rashidiya camp, on
    9 December 2014, the Lebanese Army stopped one of his brothers  at  the
    entrance to the  camp,  believing  that  he  was  the  appellant.   The
    appellant's brother was questioned about the nature of the  appellant's
    work, whether he went to Arsal and  whether  he  supported  the  Syrian
    people financially  or  provided  them  with  weapons.   The  appellant
    maintained  that  his  brother  was  questioned  by  various   Lebanese
    intelligence agencies and by Hezbollah who believed that the  appellant
    had been providing weapons to the Syrian opposition.   The  appellant's
    brother was released after 24 hours.

16. The appellant maintains that when he next re-entered Al Rashidiya  camp
    he was stopped and questioned by the Lebanese Army for about six hours.
    He states that he was released with the assistance of senior members of
    the Popular Committee of Fatah.  The appellant maintains that he  found
    out that the reason that he was detained was because of the  suspicions
    that he had been assisting the Syrian opposition.

17. The appellant maintains that a few days later he was informed that  the
    Lebanese authorities were looking for him and  had  requested  that  he
    hand himself over for the purposes of an investigation into a  security
    matter.  Believing that Hezbollah were behind this and that he would be
    seriously mistreated, he went to the leader of Fatah.  He informed  the
    leader about his visit to Arsal and was advised to deliver  himself  to
    the Lebanese authorities  for  investigation.  At  the  same  time  the
    appellant also received calls from the Islamic Jihad Movement  ordering
    him to deliver himself to the Lebanese authorities and threatening that
    his wife and children would be kidnapped if he did not do so.

18. The appellant maintains that he feared for his safety and the safety of
    his family.  His wife's father paid $40,000 to an agent  to  facilitate
    the journey of the appellant's wife and  children  to  the  UK,  having
    obtained visas for the USA.  The appellant remained  in  hiding  in  Al
    Rashidiya camp while his father-in-law made  arrangements  for  him  to
    escape.  The appellant escaped from the camp along the  seacoast,  went
    to Beirut, then to Tripoli where he met an agent who arranged  for  his
    journey to the UK via Turkey and Italy.

19. The appellant gave evidence at the hearing before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mill. He  also  relied  on  three  bundles  of  documents.  Those
    materials included a country expert report dated 8 November 2016 of  Dr
    Alan George.  It is of note that  this  report  was  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Anstis as long ago as 18 November 2016 when  the  appeal
    was first heard. The issues arising from the report of Dr  George  have
    been live since then. In summary, Dr  George's  opinion  was  that  the
    appellant's claim was "very generally plausible" but subject  to  "very
    significant caveats and exceptions"; see paragraph 107 on page  281  of
    the appellant's first bundle. Dr George also stated that aspects of the
    appellant's claim troubled him "considerably", those concerns being set
    out in paragraphs 117 to 122 on pages 283 to 285 of the appellant first
    bundle.  Dr George also  found,  after  making  enquiries  of  personal
    contacts in Lebanon, that they provided a very different profile of the
    appellant as someone known to have fallen out with a volunteer  in  Al-
    Rashidiya camp who had given  false  information  against  him  to  the
    Lebanese intelligence services. This had led to the appellant's  arrest
    by Lebanese Army Intelligence, his release  following  intervention  by
    the Palestinian Embassy; see paragraphs 123 to 129 on pages 285 to  286
    of the appellant's first bundle. Dr George identifies in paragraph  128
    that the appellant's evidence "conflicts very  significantly  with  the
    information I have received from my contacts in the Rashidiya camp" but
     considered that the account from Lebanon was still capable of  showing
    that the appellant would be at risk on return.

20.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mill  made  detailed  findings   on   the
    credibility appellant's claim. For the purposes of this  error  of  law
    decision it is necessary to set those findings out somewhat extensively
    as follows (verbatim):

         "34. Before the First Appellant gave evidence, I provided him  with
             a detailed introduction and  guide  as  to  how  to  give  his
             evidence.  I explained that he should
              listen to the whole question before answering it.  I explained
             that he should not answer any questions he did not understand.
              I explained that he should focus his answers on the questions
             asked and not give evidence about things that he was not asked
             about.  The Appellant quickly fell foul of  all  these  simple
             rules.  He was persistently evasive in answering quite  simple
             questions put to him  in  cross-examination.   I  required  to
             intervene on more than one occasion in order to seek to assist
             the First Appellant in the smooth running of  the  hearing.  I
             did not find the Appellant a credible or reliable witness.


         35. I required to ask questions of the First Appellant myself  for
             clarification purposes.  This was with specific  reference  to
             the family members who he had referred to as remaining present
             in Lebanon.  I did so bearing in mind that I  was  aware  that
             the Appellants  representative  was  to  rely  upon  Paragraph
             276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  The  First  Appellant
             was  entirely  contradictory  in  his  responses   about   the
             circumstances of his family members and the  extent  to  which
             they had influence and were instrumental  in  the  running  in
             particular of Al Rashidiya camp.  He gave  clear  evidence  to
             the effect that a number of family members were  significantly
             involved at a senior level.  He then changed his position  and
             stated that it was only his sister who has involved  with  the
             PLO to the degree of assisting  disabled  refugees.   He  also
             made reference to one uncle of his wife at that time.   I  was
             surprised by such significant inconsistency and was obliged to
             put it candidly to the First Appellant that he had been wholly
             inconsistent given that if I  had  raised  such  issue  in  my
             determination without having put this to the  First  Appellant
             then no doubt this could attract  criticism.   The  Appellants
             representative  at  this  juncture  objected  to  my  line  of
             questioning suggesting that I had entered into  the  arena  of
             cross-examination.  This was, of course, clearly not the  case
             and I indicated to the Appellants representative  that  I  was
             seeking to establish facts which I believed were pertinent  to
             the determination of the Article  8  matter.   The  Appellants
             representative  persisted  in  his  objections  and  in  those
             circumstances I indicated that  I  would  question  the  First
             Appellant no further and that he should be allowed  a  further
             opportunity to re-examine.  Very surprisingly he  immediately,
             in the absence of taking any further  instructions,  indicated
             that he was asking  no  further  questions,  that  the  second
             witness anticipated to be called, namely the Third  Appellant,
             would no longer be called and that he was closing his case.


         36. The First Appellant was not an  impressive  witness.   He  was
             vague and evasive.   He  was  contradictory  in  his  evidence
             regarding the circumstances  of  his  family  members  who  he
             clearly keeps in contact within Lebanon.


         37. It is a matter for the Appellant to establish  that  documents
             which he has provided can be  relied  upon.   They  cannot  be
             looked at in isolation and require to be  looked  at  together
             with all other evidence in  the  round  -  Tanveer  Ahmed  IAT
             [2002] UKIAT 00439.


         38. The Appellant has lodged copies of an ID  card  said  to  have
             been  issued  by  the   Palestinian   Organization/Palestinian
             National Liberation Army.  The copy of the front  and  reverse
             of the card is produced at pages 218 and 220 of the Appellants
             primary consolidated bundle.  The relevant translated versions
             are correspondingly found at pages 219 and 221 of the  bundle.
             The principal ID card was  produced  at  the  hearing  for  my
             scrutiny.


         39. The Appellant also relies upon two letters he says were issued
             to him by the popular committee of the PLO which are found  at
             pages 228 and 230 of the Appellants consolidated  bundle  with
             the translated versions appearing at pages 229 and 231 of  the
             bundle.  These both bear a date of 20 June  2015.   The  First
             Appellant states they were not delivered to him personally  as
             he remained in hiding at that point.


         40. The Appellant relies upon an expert report  dated  8  November
             2016 prepared by Dr Alan George who is 70 years of age and has
             worked  for  40  years  as  a  freelance  writer,  journalist,
             consultant,  academic  and  expert  witness,  specialising  in
             Middle Eastern political and economic affairs.  Having  regard
             to the nature and extent  of  his  relevant  experience  I  am
             satisfied that he is an  appropriate  witness  to  provide  an
             expert report and opinion evidence.  I am  satisfied  that  Dr
             George has complied with his responsibilities  and  duties  to
             the Tribunal.


         41. I have regard to the expert opinion of Dr George in  assessing
             the weight to be attached to the ID card and letters from  the
             popular committee which the First Appellant relies upon.


         42. At paragraph 117 of Dr George's Report he states that he could
             discern nothing about the ID card itself which would cause him
             to doubt its authenticity.  However Dr George  refers  to  the
             fact that the ID card  describes  the  First  Appellant  as  a
             payroll manager for the Palestinian National  Liberation  Army
             which is a regular armed force linked with the PLO.   This  is
             indeed what the certified translation which  appears  at  page
             219  of  the  Appellants  bundle  records.    The   Appellants
             representative  suggested  to  me  in  submissions  that   the
             signature on the document was of a payroll manager and the  ID
             card does not purport  that  the  First  Appellant  held  that
             position.  The First Appellant denied  in  his  oral  evidence
             being a payroll manager.


         43. Dr George is clearly acquainted with the type of ID card which
             the  First  Appellant  has  produced  and  relies  upon.   His
             interpretation of the card  is  at  one  with  the  translated
             version at page 219 of the Appellants  bundle  which  suggests
             that the First Appellant held the  role  of  payroll  manager.
             Despite  the  First  Appellant's  position  that  he  was  not
             employed as a payroll  manager,  he  has  taken  no  steps  to
             address this in any of his written witness  statements.   This
             discrepancy, and the alleged erroneous  interpretation  by  Dr
             George, is not something which the  Appellant,  despite  being
             represented, has sought to address by way of  the  instruction
             of a supplementary or up to date Report from Dr George.  Ample
             opportunity  has  been  available.  I  rely  on  Dr   George's
             assessment and this undermines the Appellant's credibility.


         44. I find the ID card presented by the  First  Appellant  in  the
             circumstances is authentic and confirms his position with  the
             Palestinian  National  Liberation  Army  as  one  of   payroll
             manager.   This  undermines  entirely  the  First  Appellant's
             claims to have worked for  the  PLOs  Fatah  Organization  and
             having been provided with  a  budget  of  $400,000  to  assist
             Palestinian  refugees  from  Lebanon.   Dr  George  states  in
             paragraph 117 of his Report, "There are  nevertheless  aspects
             of [IM's] testimony that trouble me considerably."   He  calls
             into question that given the First Appellant is  certified  as
             having been a payroll manager which is a regular  Armed  Force
             linked with the PLO, it is unclear as to why  such  a  manager
             would be provided with $400,000 to assist Palestinian refugees
             from Syria.  Dr George goes on to state "... I  am  also  very
             surprised that an organization such as the PLO, which is under
             permanent financial pressure, would be expending  $400,000  on
             aid for refugees from Syria."  This evidence  from  Dr  George
             seriously undermines the First Appellant's credibility.


         45. At paragraph 118 of his Report, Dr George  observes  that  set
             against the First Appellant's claims to have received  threats
             from  the  Islamic  Jihad  movement,  that  whilst  the  First
             Appellant may have kept a low  profile  in  the  camp  he  was
             certainly known to be there and given that the  Islamic  Jihad
             group is an armed extremist group who would  not  hesitate  to
             take some form of  physical  action  against  antagonists,  Dr
             George states "I am therefore very surprised that IM was  able
             to reside without problems from Islamic  Jihads  in  Rashidiya
             for some 5 months, from December 2014 until May  2015".   This
             evidence from  Dr  George  undermines  the  First  Appellant's
             credibility.  This  would   also   seriously   undermine   the
             Appellant's  claims  to  have  received  direct  threats  from
             Haitham which led to no action on  his  part  when  given  the
             opportunity.


         46. Dr George considered the two letters  issued  by  the  popular
             committee of the  Al  Rashidiya  refugee  camp  found  in  the
             Appellants commencing at page  228.   Dr  George  has  special
             knowledge of the popular committee and  in  February  2016  he
             visited Rashidiya and met with the popular  committee's  head,
             [AK].  Dr George states that in 2016 he had been investigating
             an asylum claim in which two handwritten letters issued by the
             popular committee in November and December 2015 and signed  by
             [AK] were remarkably similar in content  (down  to  words  and
             phrases used)  to  the  letter  submitted  by  the  now  First
             Appellant.  Dr George states that  during  his  February  2016
             visit [AK] confirmed that  he  had  written  the  two  letters
             relating to that former  asylum  case  and  that  it  was  his
             signature that appeared on the base of each.


         47. Concerningly, at paragraph 121 of Dr George's Report he states
             that the handwriting  and  signatures  on  those  two  earlier
             letters (which  were  authentic)  differ  from  those  on  the
             letters submitted by the now First Appellant.   Such  were  Dr
             George's concern  about  the  differing  presentation  of  the
             letter submitted by the now First Appellant, that he contacted
             the First Appellant's  legal  representatives  and  thereafter
             contacted the First Appellant himself and made  enquiry  about
             how he had obtained the  letters.   The  First  Appellant  had
             stated that he had obtained them via his wife's family.


         48. Dr George has ongoing  ties  and  contacts  at  Al  Rashidiya.
             Accordingly during October 2016, he contacted well placed  and
             trusted sources inside the  Al  Rashidiya  refugee  camp.   Dr
             George states at paragraph 122  of  his  Report  that  he  has
             complete faith in those individuals  whom  he  contacted.   Dr
             George is candid in  stating  that  he  appreciates  that  the
             information gleaned in such circumstances cannot be assumed to
             be beyond reproach.  The nature of the enquiries are not open.
              It is not realistic to expect local researchers to explain in
             detail to interviewees why  they  are  making  enquiries.   Dr
             George states that in paragraph 122 that his sources  in  turn
             spoke with their sources who  included  personal  friends  and
             acquaintances of the First Appellant.  He states  "It  is  not
             possible to know with complete confidence the  reliability  of
             the information".   Dr  George  does  however  state  that  Al
             Rashidiya is a close knit  community  where  people  generally
             have a good knowledge of each other's lives.


         49. Dr George states that the information which was returned  from
             his sources in Al Rashidiya confirmed that the First Appellant
             had been working in the Arabian Gulf as he states but returned
             to Al Rashidiya during the Syrian crisis - in early 2011.  The
             date of the First Appellant's return conflicts with the  First
             Appellant's position.  Dr George's sources confirmed that  the
             First  Appellant  worked  as  a   volunteer   with   a   youth
             organisation named [X].  The sources claimed that the  manager
             of the organisation is named [AM] and that the First Appellant
             was said to have fallen out with  the  manager.   The  sources
             believed that the manager in revenge  had  told  the  Lebanese
             Army Intelligence that the First Appellant belonged  to  Daesh
             which had led to the First Appellant's arrest  for  one  week.
             The information was  also  that  the  Palestinian  Embassy  in
             Lebanon had intervened along  with  the  Al  Rashidiya  camp's
             popular committee to resolve the matter  and  that  the  First
             Appellant was released based on the  signed  pledge  from  the
             popular committee, including  that  the  First  Appellant  was
             prohibited to leave Al Rashidiya refugee camp.   A  subsequent
             attempt by the Lebanese  intelligence  requested  the  popular
             committee to surrender the First Appellant to them failed  due
             to the fact that the First Appellant had by then fled.


         50. The two letters from the popular committee of the PLO which he
             relies upon which are dated 20 June 2015  are  in  conflicting
             terms and at odds with the terms of the  information  obtained
             by Dr George.  This undermines the credibility of the  letters
             which the Appellant has  produced  further  beyond  Dr  George
             highlighting that the handwriting and signature are  different
             from  letters  which  he  has   specifically   confirmed   the
             authenticity of previously.


         51. Dr George confirms at paragraph 126 of his Report that the two
             letters submitted  by  the  First  Appellant  were  considered
             authentic by a member of the Al Rashidiya  popular  committee.
             In particular the  notepaper  was  considered  authentic.   Dr
             George states  however  that  he  was  cautioned  that  family
             relationships are extensive and close in the Palestinian camps
             and it is not inconceivable that persons on or  close  to  the
             popular committee might be connected to the First  Appellant's
             family and might feel honour bound to tell untruths  or  half-
             truths on his behalf.  The Appellant states  that  his  sister
             and brother in law were involved in the popular committee.  He
             states his wife's uncle had influence in  Al  Rashidiya  camp.
             Taking all factors into account, I do not find the letters  by
             the popular committee of the PLO to be authentic.  I find them
             to be fabricated and I attach no weight  to  them.   The  fact
             that the First Appellant has gone out of  his  way  to  obtain
             such false documentation undermines his general credibility.


         52. Dr George highlights at paragraph 127 of his Report that  none
             of his informants in  Al  Rashidiya  refugee  camp  had  heard
             anything to the effect that the First Appellant had  lived  in
             Ein al-Hilweh camp or worked distributing aid  to  Palestinian
             refugees from Syria.  Given the close  knit  community  in  Al
             Rashidiya and standing that the First  Appellant  states  that
             his sister and brother in law had connections to  the  popular
             committee and that his wife's uncle had influence in the camp,
             this seems very odd in the event that  the  First  Appellant's
             claims are true.


         53. The First Appellant's claims to have been detained for 6 hours
             upon re-entry to Al Rashidiya refugee camp from Ein  al-Hilweh
             camp have not  been  consistent.   In  the  First  Appellant's
             initial evidence and in particular in his originating  witness
             statement dated 7 December 2015 he made no mention at  all  of
             having been stopped or detained or arrested.  This feature  of
             the First Appellant's claims were contained for the first time
             in his second substantial written witness statement  which  is
             dated 25 October 2016.  No good reason has been advanced as to
             why such an important part of the First Appellant's core claim
             had not  been  raised  by  him  before.   Moreover  the  First
             Appellant's claims in relation to his detention at  that  time
             were also inconsistent.  In his oral  evidence  the  Appellant
             was clear that he had been asked  openly  and  confronted  and
             accused openly and candidly about the assertions that  he  had
             been assisting the Syrian opposition by, amongst other things,
             providing  them  with  weapons.   By  comparison   the   First
             Appellant's written witness statement dated 25 October 2016 at
             paragraph 16 states that he was given no information at all as
             to why he was stopped at the time itself.  This is a major and
             material inconsistency at the heart of the  First  Appellant's
             core claim. The First Appellant states in the  statement  that
             he was assisted by senior other confidants and members of  the
             popular committee and released and was subsequently  told  the
             reasons why.   I  find  this  entirely  incredible  given  the
             serious nature of the allegations which  the  First  Appellant
             then faced.  I also note that the First Appellant's claims not
             to have been told about the reasons why he had been stopped in
             his  original  witness  statement  differ  from  the  apparent
             treatment of the Lebanese Authorities of the First Appellant's
             brother who he states had also been  detained  at  around  the
             same time after his brother had been  misidentified  for  him.
             The First Appellant's position is that the  First  Appellant's
             brother was interrogated openly about the same allegations and
             this supports the conclusion that it is most likely  that  the
             Authorities would have made further direct  enquiry  with  the
             First Appellant at the time if his  assertions  regarding  the
             allegations against him are  true.   I  find  that  the  First
             Appellant's claims  to  have  been  detained  an  afterthought
             manufactured by him to bolster his asylum claim.   His  claims
             to have been detained are inconsistent and incredible.


         54. At paragraph 129,  Dr  George  points  out  that  despite  his
             information from Al Rashidiya  conflicting  considerably  with
             the First Appellant's, the information he obtained does  agree
             with one key point, namely that the First Appellant is  wanted
             by the Lebanese Authorities.  In the opinion of  Dr  George  a
             person detained by those Authorities as a  suspected  Islamist
             extremist would  be  in  serious  danger  of  maltreatment  of
             torture.  He refers back  to  earlier  generic  parts  of  his
             Report as justification for this conclusion.  Later within the
             conclusion section, Dr George at paragraph 140 states that his
             firm view based both upon the First Appellant's testimony  and
             on his research is that the First  Appellant  would  encounter
             real risks if returned to Lebanon.  These real risks appear to
             specifically  relate  to  the  Lebanese  Authorities   adverse
             interest in the First Appellant.


         55. The  First  Appellant  was  specifically  asked  under  cross-
             examination whether or not he now associated with the evidence
             obtained by Dr  George  regarding  his  involvement  with  the
             organisation named [X] and the conflict which arose  with  the
             manager, [AM].  The First Appellant was unequivocally clear in
             dissociating himself from this background.


         56. Dr  George  fully  acknowledges  at  paragraph  122  that  the
             information which he obtained is not beyond criticism  due  to
             the fact that the sources relied upon are anonymous  and,  for
             example, it is not at all possible to identify whether or  not
             the information is first or second hand or  even  less  direct
             than this.


         57. Whilst Dr George confirms clearly that his direct contacts are
             well placed and trusted, and he has complete faith in them, it
             is of course impossible for Dr  George  to  certify  the  same
             about  other  unknown  anonymous  sources.  Dr   George   also
             highlights that sources may well tell untruths or half truths.




         58. Given the fact that the  First  Appellant  wholeheartedly  and
             vehemently dissociates himself from the  information  obtained
             from Dr George's contacts, taken together  with  the  lack  of
             information regarding the original source of the  information,
             then I attach no weight at all to the  background  information
             obtained by Dr George from Rashidiya camp.


         59. The fact that the First Appellant ultimately  has  claimed  to
             have been detained and  wanted  by  the  Lebanese  Authorities
             (which he did not do  originally),  and  Dr  George's  sources
             indicate likewise, this one fact does not in fact  bolster  or
             add weight to the First Appellant's claims at all.


         60. There are  serious  issues  regarding  the  First  Appellant's
             credibility.  I do not find the First Appellant's stated claim
             to be plausible.  Despite Dr George at paragraph  138  of  his
             Report stating that the First Appellant's testimony is broadly
             plausible, I do not find that this  necessarily  accords  with
             the rest of Dr George's Report in which he casts serious doubt
             over the First Appellant's claims and indeed  stated  that  he
             was very surprised (his emphasis)  that  the  First  Appellant
             regardless of this employment capacity with the PLO would have
             had access to $400,000  for  refugees  in  Syria.  I  find  Dr
             George's conclusions flawed when I read the report as a whole.




         61.  I  reject  the  First  Appellant's  evidence  as   inherently
             unreliable and incredible. I  have  rejected  the  Appellant's
             account as I find he is not a witness of truth. I also  reject
             the alternative proposition that the Appellant is at risk  due
             to the reasons stated to  Dr  George  in  the  course  of  his
             enquiries for the reasons as set out.  I  dismiss  his  asylum
             claim. The Appellants representative indicated that the Second
             to Seventh Appellants were not truly dependent upon the  First
             Appellant's claim but were all asylum claimants in  their  own
             right given that the circumstances relied upon for success for
             the First Appellant would all directly impact  upon  them  and
             they were all at direct risk.  Given my dismissal of the First
             Appellant's claim for the reasons set out, I also dismiss  the
             Second to Seventh Appellants claims for asylum.


         62. I find that the Appellant is of no interest  to  the  Lebanese
             Authorities.  I also find that the Appellant is of no interest
             to  Hezbollah  or  the  Islamic  Jihad  movement  and   groups
             operating in Al Rashidiya or elsewhere in Lebanon."

21. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on four grounds.  The first
    was described as a  combination  of  credibility  and  fairness  in  Mr
    Fripp's most helpful skeleton argument dated  14  January  2020.   This
    first ground maintained that at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  as
    indicated in paragraph 35 of the decision, the judge put  questions  to
    the appellant and that Mr Fripp, also representing  on  that  occasion,
    objected to that questioning.  The grounds  maintain  that  the  points
    being put to the appellant included a mistake of fact by the  judge  on
    the appellant giving evidence that he had several  family  members  who
    were involved in the running of the  Al  Rashidiya  camp  at  a  senior
    level. The grounds maintained that the appellant had  not  changed  his
    evidence on this issue and that putting an incorrect proposition to the
    appellant as to what his evidence had been was unfair. The grounds also
    maintain that in dealing with this  issue  at  the  hearing  the  judge
    intervened unduly  and  unfairly,  descending  into  cross-examination,
    putting leading questions and doing so in a hostile  manner  suggesting
    bias.

22. I did not find this ground had merit, firstly  because  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant gave contradictory  evidence  about
    his family members and entitled to put that inconsistency to  him.  The
    appellant  maintains  that  he  did  not  provide  discrepant  evidence
    concerning whether he had  relatives  who  were  senior  in  the  Fatah
    management structure of Al  Rashidiya  camp.  I  was  referred  to  the
    appellant's evidence in paragraph 15 of his witness statement  dated  7
    December 2015 which is at page 86 of the appellant's first  bundle.  He
    stated that his sister, S,  worked  for  Fatah  in  the  special  needs
    department. In the same paragraph he also stated that his wife's  uncle
    worked for Fatah and had "a senior role in the organisation." Mr  Fripp
    submitted that this had also been the appellant's evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and that he had therefore  remained  consistent  on
    his relatives' involvement with Fatah.

23. In support of the grounds of appeal, Mr Fripp provided a  statement  of
    truth  prepared  by  him  dated  1  October  2019  attesting   to   his
    understanding of what  happened  at  the  hearing  and  exhibiting  his
    handwritten note of what was said.  On page 3 of that handwritten note,
    Mr Fripp identified that in the seventh question, headed by the  letter
    "J" to identify it was the judge asking the question, the appellant was
    asked whether any of his  relatives  were  involved  with  the  Popular
    Committee.  Mr Fripp clarified  at  the  hearing  before  me  that  the
    "Popular Committee" was the  Fatah  management  committee  for  the  Al
    Rashidiya camp.  The appellant's response is recorded as:

         "N but BiL was and my S = PLO, [undecipherable] disabled."

    There was agreement that this response should be understood as  stating
    "No, but my brother-in-law  was  and  my  sister  worked  for  the  PLO
    concerning the disabled". I pause here to point out that  this  reading
    of this response is consistent with what Judge Mill says in  paragraphs
    51 and 52 of his decision on the appellant's  evidence  concerning  his
    sister, brother-in-law and his wife's uncle.

24. Mr Fripp  also  referred  to  page  5  of  his  handwritten  record  of
    proceedings which shows that from question  7  onwards  the  judge  put
    questions to the appellant concerning his ID document.  In the  twelfth
    question on page 5, the appellant clarified that there were five  girls
    in his family, three of them in the Al Rashidiya camp, the others being
    in Bas camp and his other siblings in  other  camps.   The  judge  then
    asked in the first question on page 6 of 8 of  Mr  Fripp's  handwritten
    note "Were they  all  involved  in  the  running  of  the  camp?"   The
    appellant's response read:

         "Not my B or BiL.  Only my S = captain in rank"

    There was agreement that this response should be understood as "Not  my
    brother or brother-in-law. Only my sister who was a captain in rank."

25. The next question from the judge on page 6 of  Mr  Fripp's  handwritten
    note reads:

         "J U confusing me further thought understood  family  high  ranking
         then you said no - evidence completely contradictory.

         J Which relatives"

    The appellant responds:

         "I sd members of  family  rels  like  pat  uncle  to  W  is  senior
         official."

    There was agreement that this exchange should be understood as follows:

         "Judge:       You are confusing me further. I thought I  understood
                      that members of your family  were  high  ranking  and
                      then you said that they were not.  Your  evidence  is
                      completely contradictory.

                       Which relatives are high ranking?

         Appellant:        I said members of  my  family/relatives  like  my
                      wife's paternal uncle was a senior official."

26. After a further question which appears to be  about  the  rank  of  the
    uncle, the record of proceedings shows that  Mr  Fripp  intervened  and
    submitted that the judge risked descending into the arena  and  putting
    an  inaccurate  version  of  the  appellant's  account  to  him.    The
    handwritten note in the middle of page 6  shows  the  judge  responding
    that he was "trying to establish facts" and the note then  records  the
    judge saying "then won't ask anymore". The note then indicates that the
    appellant's case was closed at that point.

27. I was able to identify the relevant parts of the  handwritten  note  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and confirmed to the parties that it  was
    consistent with Mr Fripp's note.

28. My reading of the  evidence  set  out  above  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled  to  find  the  appellant's  evidence  on  having
    relatives who were senior officials or influential in Al Rashidiya camp
    was  contradictory  and  entitled  to  seek  clarification  by   asking
    questions. It is undisputed that the appellant's evidence was that  his
    wife's uncle was a senior official in Fatah.  It was open to the  judge
    to find that the appellant's evidence set out in paragraphs 23  and  24
    above was that his sister was involved in running of Al Rashidiya camp,
    with the rank of captain. It was also open to Judge Mill to  find  that
    the appellant's oral evidence set out above in paragraph  23  was  that
    his brother-in-law was involved in running Al Rashidiya camp  and  that
    the evidence he gave, as recorded in paragraphs 24 and  25  above,  was
    not consistent regarding the brother-in-law. The judge's proposition to
    the appellant that he had given inconsistent evidence on his relatives'
    involvement with Fatah was not mistaken, therefore, and was not unfair.



29. Further, Mr Fripp's note of the judge's questions  and  the  discussion
    between him and  the  judge  as  to  the  appropriacy  of  the  judge's
    questions is  materially  consistent  with  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mill's view of what occurred, as set out in paragraph 35 of the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision.  Mr Fripp intervened, indicating that the judge
    was at risk of  descending  into  the  arena  and  cross-examining  the
    appellant. The judge did not accept that was so and indicated  that  he
    was merely  trying  to  establish  facts  that  were  material  to  the
    decision.  As  above,  that  was  a  legitimate  position   given   the
    inconsistent evidence that had been  given  by  the  appellant  on  his
    relatives. After Mr Fripp's intervention the judge  indicated  that  he
    would not ask any more  questions.  Mr  Fripp  confirmed  that  he  was
    invited by the judge to re-examine the appellant but  did  not  do  so.
    The judge acted fairly, in my view, in ceasing to ask further questions
    when Counsel for the appellant objected and specifically  offering  the
    opportunity to re-examine. It is not disputed now that the  appellant's
    oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, set out in paragraphs  23
    to 25 above,  included a reference to  a  brother-in-law  and  included
    statements that the appellant's sister  was  a  captain  in  Fatah  and
    "involved  in  the  running  of  the  camp".  The  appellant  had   the
    opportunity to clarify this evidence in re-examination but did  not  do
    so.

30. My conclusion is that the materials before me show the judge putting  a
    legitimate   concern   about   inconsistencies   in    evidence.    The
    inconsistencies concerning his relatives is discussed above. There  was
    a stark inconsistency regarding the appellant's identity card which the
    expert had found showed he was a payroll manager when  the  appellant's
    claim was that he had an entirely different role in Fatah.  These  were
    material matters which, as Judge Mill points out in paragraph 35 of his
    decision, if left unaddressed could have left him open to  a  different
    allegation of unfairness where the appellant should have been  afforded
    the opportunity to address them. If there was a real concern  that  the
    judge's questions went beyond robust clarification and  became  hostile
    such as to indicate bias, an application could have been made  for  him
    to recuse himself and the hearing adjourned. Nothing suggests that such
    an application was even contemplated. There is no  statement  from  the
    appellant (or anyone else present at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing)
    stating that the judge acted  in  a  hostile  manner.  As  set  out  in
    paragraph 26 above, Mr Fripp's indication to the judge was that he  was
    "at risk" of descending into the arena not, as argued now, that he  had
    already done so. It follows, given that  the  judge  did  not  ask  any
    further questions  after  Mr  Fripp's  intervention,  that  he  avoided
    falling into error, even if he had come close to doing so. The  judge's
    conduct  in   seeking   clarification   from   the   appellant   where,
    legitimately,  he  saw  potentially  material  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence,  refraining  from  asking  further  questions  when   Counsel
    intervened and offering re-examination suggests that he  had  a  proper
    grasp of what was fair and proper procedure and in that context, taking
    into account the matters set out above, the allegations of hostility or
    bias are not made out.

31. A new submission relating to Ground 1 was raised at the hearing  before
    me. It was suggested that the reference to a "brother-in-law" on page 3
    of 8 of the record of evidence must have been an  interpretation  error
    as the appellant did not have a brother-in-law in  Al  Rashidiya  camp.
    This concern could have been raised at the First-tier  Tribunal.  Those
    present would have heard the interpreter refer to a brother-in-law  and
    the appellant's representative could  be  expected  to  know  that  the
    appellant had not mentioned such a person  before  and  deal  with  the
    point in re-examination. If the point was missed at  the  hearing,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal clearly referred to  a  brother-in-
    law. Mr Fripp's  statement  of  truth  which  accompanied  the  grounds
    contained references to a brother-in-law. This issue  could  have  been
    raised in the grounds of appeal, therefore. There was no explanation of
    why this did not happen.   My  conclusion  was  that  this  was  a  new
    challenge, one that could have been raised earlier but was not, with no
    explanation for that omission. There was no formal application to amend
    the grounds to include it and seek permission to appeal. Further, there
    was evidence from an Arabic linguistic expert or other evidence such as
    a witness statement from the appellant providing any support  for  this
    submission other than the appellant's evidence before me  that  he  did
    not have a brother-in-law in Al Rashidiya camp. Given those matters,  I
    did not find that this submission was admissible.

32. I therefore concluded that Ground 1 does not have merit.

33. The appellant's second ground of appeal challenges the judge's approach
    to the Fatah identity card, set out in  paragraphs  38  to  44  of  the
    decision. The appellant maintains that the First-tier Tribunal  reached
    an irrational conclusion in finding that the identity  document  showed
    the appellant to be a payroll manager.

34. I did not find that this ground had  merit.  In  paragraph  42  of  the
    decision the judge sets out  that  he  was  aware  of  the  appellant's
    evidence and the submissions of his legal representative concerning his
    identity document. It remained open to the judge to place  more  weight
    on the opinion of Dr George that the ID card showed that the  appellant
    worked as a payroll manager for Fatah.  Dr  George's  report  shows  in
    paragraphs 25 to 27 on page 255 of the appellant's first bundle that he
    has extensive experience of  dealing  with  the  style  and  format  of
    documents used by  stateless  Palestinians  in  Lebanon,  has  prepared
    document authentication  reports  up  to  approximately  500  times  in
    addition to his acting as a country expert on country conditions,  that
    he is used by the Home Office National Document Fraud  Unit  to  assess
    documents.  The appellant  maintains  that  it  was  obvious  that  the
    identity card showed clearly that the references to the payroll manager
    were pre-printed and referred only to the person issuing  the  identity
    card and not to him. If this was so, it is  not  clear  to  me  why  no
    attempt was made to clarify  the  matter  with  Dr  George  or  another
    opinion obtained, there having been ample  time  to  do  so  since  the
    appeal was first heard in 2016. The judge's reasoning on  the  identity
    card in paragraph 43 does not disclose legal error.

35. The appellant's third ground of appeal objects to the judge's  approach
    to Dr George's opinion that his sources  in  Lebanon  had  provided  an
    alternative,  valid  basis  for  the  appellant  being   in   need   of
    international protection.  I did not find that this ground had merit in
    light of what is recorded in paragraph 55 of the  decision.  The  judge
    records in paragraph 55 that the appellant was asked about  whether  he
    "associated with the evidence  obtained  by  Dr  George  regarding  his
    involvement with Sawaed  and  a  conflict  with  a  Mr  Maarouf".   The
    appellant "was unequivocally clear in dissociating  himself  from  this
    background". The appellant does not  accept  the  factual  matrix  that
    underpins  Dr  George's  view  of  the  alternative  basis  of   claim,
    therefore. He says it is not correct. Where that is so, the  First-tier
    Tribunal was clearly correct to find that the appellant  could  qualify
    for protection on the alternative basis  suggested  by  Dr  George.  It
    cannot be right that an asylum-seeker  can  obtain  protection  on  the
    basis of an account which he says is not  correct  and  from  which  he
    overtly dissociates himself.

36. The grounds go on to argue that the judge  erred  in  paragraph  56  in
    finding Dr George's opinion on  the  alternative  basis  of  claim  was
    undermined by Dr George's comments that no source he relied upon  could
    be completely beyond criticism where they had to remain  anonymous  and
    it was not possible to identify whether the information  was  first  or
    second-hand or even less direct than this.  I am  astute  to  the  fact
    that this was an issue identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  in  his
    error of law decision dated 22 November 2018 and that it was one of the
    reasons which led to the decision of Judge Anstis being found  to  show
    an error on a point of  law.   It  remains  the  case  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mill did not decline to find that the  appellant  was  a
    refugee on the basis of the alternative claim put forward by Dr  George
    merely because Dr George's sources could not be said to be sufficiently
    reliable.  He did so, legitimately, and rationally, as discussed above,
    because the appellant says that the basis of claim put  forward  by  Mr
    George is not true.  Where that is so the First-tier Tribunal could not
    have allowed the appeal on the basis of the alternative basis of  claim
    raised by Dr George in his report.

37. The appellant's fourth ground of claim relates to the judge's  findings
    of whether the appellant and his family  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration on return to Lebanon, the test in  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  The judge's consideration of this
    aspect of the claim is set out in paragraphs 64 to 78 of the  decision.
    The appellant's grounds maintain that the decision deals insufficiently
    with the evidence of Dr George contained in paragraphs 60 and 61 and 69
    to 97 of his report on the conditions faced by  stateless  Palestinians
    in Lebanon and that the  judge  therefore  took  an  incorrect  to  the
    country guidance decision of MM and FH (stateless Palestinians, KK, IH,
    HE reaffirmed) Lebanon CG [2008] UKAIT 00014.  However, as  Ms  Everett
    pointed out at the hearing, a great deal of the material set out by  Dr
    George predates the decision in MM and FH.  Further, the  material  set
    out by Dr George which post-dates that decision sets  out  difficulties
    for Palestinians in Lebanon very similar to those found in MM  and  FH,
    albeit he notes there are now additional stresses in the refugee  camps
    because of Palestinians fleeing Syria. For example, paragraph 115 of MM
    and FH confirms the finding in an earlier country guidance case on  the
    high levels of  unemployment  for  Palestinians  in  Lebanon.  This  is
    consistent with the extract from a 2010 report referred to on paragraph
    82 of Dr George's report on page 271 of the bundle.  I was not taken to
    any specific comments made by  Dr  George  in  his  assessment  of  the
    difficult circumstances faced by Palestinians  in  Lebanon  or  to  any
    other materials that amounted to  "very  strong  grounds  supported  by
    cogent evidence" as required by SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 for a country guidance case  to  be
    distinguished and not followed.

38. Further, as set out in paragraph 73 of  the  decision,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was provided with country evidence  that  post-dated  Dr
    George's 2016 report by way of the Country Policy and Information  Note
    "Lebanon: Palestinians" which was published on 22 June 2018.  The judge
    indicates that the CPIN was consistent with the ratio  of  the  country
    guidance case of MM and FH and nothing in the submissions or  materials
    before me indicated otherwise.

39. Mr Fripp also questioned the reliance  on  the  findings  made  in  the
    context of a protection claim in the  "very  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration" assessment  and  the  wider  proportionality  assessment
    which Judge Mill conducted in line with paragraph 276ADE(vi) and  under
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules. It was my view that  this
    aspect of the grounds only asserted that  an  error  arises  where  the
    country guidance assessment is concerned with different legal tests  to
    those pertaining in the Article  8  ECHR  assessment  that  had  to  be
    conducted here. In what material way was the judge's  reliance  on  the
    country guidance decision of MM and FH  in  error  because  that  is  a
    protection case and not an Article 8 ECHR case requiring  consideration
    under the more recent, structured regime? The standard of  proof  in  a
    protection claim is the "lower"  standard.  That  cannot  be  a  higher
    standard than which had  to  be  applied  by  the  judge  here  to  the
    appellant's Article 8 ECHR claim. If  the  material  difference  arises
    from something other than the standard of proof, what is it?  Mr  Fripp
    did not elaborate on the generalised submission  made  in  the  written
    grounds in his oral argument. The First-tier Tribunal  clearly  applied
    the correct tests in the Article 8  ECHR  assessment.  He  specifically
    considered the position of the appellant's minor children in paragraphs
    67 to 70 of the decision. The judge considered the  particular  profile
    of the wider family in paragraphs 76 to 82.  As above,  the  judge  was
    entitled to proceed on the basis that the appellant had  relatives  who
    were connected with the Popular Committee of Al Rashidiya camp and that
    his wife's uncle constituted "a  protective  factor".   The  judge  was
    entitled to find that in the context of the  country  evidence  on  the
    difficulties faced by stateless Palestinians in Lebanon,  this  family,
    including the children, could not be  said  to  face  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration on return or would face  a  disproportionate
    breach of their Article 8 rights.

40. I therefore found that ground 4 did not have merit.

41. For all of these reasons, I found that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not disclose a material error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  19   February
    2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
