
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00159/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st October 2018                          |On 26th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [R S]
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Jagadesham (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lloyd, who in a hearing dated 6th July 2018 dismissed the  appeal
    of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied for, and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Albania,  and  was  born  on  [~]
    1970.  He has two dependent children, namely, [ES1], who  was  born  on
    [~] 1997, and is 21 years of age, and his son, [ES2], who was  born  on
    [~] 2001, and is 16 years of age.  He appealed against the decision  of
    the Respondent Secretary of State, refusing his application for  asylum
    and humanitarian protection, in a decision dated  18th  December  2017,
    pursuant to Section 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that on 21st  March  2014,  the
    Appellant's wife took her own life.  Her brother blamed  the  Appellant
    for her death.  Her father told the Appellant's father  that  they  had
    started a blood feud and that they  wanted  to  take  revenge  for  her
    death.  The Appellant also maintained that  his  wife's  nephews  would
    threaten also to kill him when he was out  working  or  out  in  public
    walking down the  street.   Indeed,  his  wife's  family  reported  the
    Appellant to the police, and there was a coroner's investigation, which
    found that the death was due to suicide.

 4. In addition to this, there is another feature of this case, namely, the
    medical health of the Appellant's son, [ES2], who is in need of a  care
    plan and there have been expert reports  from  the  CAMHS  nurse,  Lisa
    Slater, on page C of the Respondent's bundle, which states that  social
    services visited the family in June 2015 after their first asylum claim
    had been refused.  While the social worker was at the home, [ES2]  took
    a knife and pointed it at his stomach.  He did not injure himself.  The
    Appellant took the knife from him.  [ES2] was then  taken  to  the  A&E
    where he was assessed.  He was offered counselling support for a  short
    period of time (paragraph 39).  The CAMHS nurse states  that  when  she
    asked [ES2], he said he would take his own life if he had to leave  the
    UK (paragraph 40).  There is also an expert report from Antonia  Young,
    which is 60 pages long, and this makes it clear that blood feuds  still
    exist in Albania.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge refused the Appellant's claim.  Before he did  so,  he  began
    with the expert report. First, he noted that the expert states that  it
    is plausible for the Appellant and the children to fear for their lives
    due to threats from his wife's family.  The expert states  that  it  is
    only a matter of time before the Appellant is hurt and the  state  will
    not protect him.  The judge observed that, be  that  as  it  may,  "the
    Appellant said he continued to drive his lorry after threats were  made
    and he went out in public" (paragraph 77).  The Appellant was not  hurt
    or  targeted.   The  judge  observed,  "the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    continued to work and go outdoors in public as normal persuades  me  he
    was not in fear of his life from a blood feud" (paragraph 78).

 6. Second, it is said that the Appellant's in-laws  asked  the  police  to
    investigate the Appellant's wife's death  and  bring  criminal  charges
    against the Appellant.  The report at pages 224 to 228 states  that  no
    criminal proceedings were brought against the Appellant.   The  coroner
    found that the wife had committed suicide.  The  judge  observed  that,
    "this does not however sit well with a family who have enough influence
    to bribe the authorities" as had been claimed (paragraph 79).

 7. Third, the background evidence suggests that the response of the police
    to blood feuds is improving, but the Appellant himself did not approach
    the police at any time (paragraph 80).

 8. Fourth, the Appellant states that the coroner released  his  report  on
    28th August 2014, and his father-in-law came to see  the  father.   The
    father-in-law said the Appellant should leave or go into  hiding.   The
    Appellant said at the appeal hearing that threats had been made against
    him and his children.  The daughter said she was in fear of  her  life.
    Despite this fact, the Appellant left Albania and  travelled  to  Italy
    with only his son.  He left his daughter behind.   The  judge  did  not
    consider this to be credible (paragraph 81).

 9. Fifth, the Appellant states that his daughter was not threatened  after
    he left Albania as his in-laws wanted  to  harm  male  members  of  the
    family only.  He said his brothers had left Albania due to the risk  to
    their life.  The Appellant said he thought they  left  at  the  end  of
    2014.  The Appellant's mother sent a letter dated 18th July 2015.  This
    states that one brother was preparing to leave Albania.  The  Appellant
    had left ten months before but no harm had come to his brothers in  any
    blood feud.  The judge observed that, "if the  brothers  had  left  and
    felt threatened by the blood feud, I find they would have left  Albania
    shortly after the Appellant left, as they were a target in the  absence
    of the Appellant" (paragraph 82).

10. Sixth, the judge was clear that, "no harm has come to any member of the
    Appellant's family.  His parents are still in Albania" (paragraph  83).



11. Seventh, the Appellant said that he received a call from his brother-in-
    law who lives in Italy at the end of October 2014.  The  brother-in-law
    had said to the Appellant that he knew that the Appellant  himself  was
    in Italy and that they  would  find  and  kill  him.   Yet,  the  judge
    observed that, "the Appellant stayed in the same house and he  did  not
    leave Italy until 16th December 2014.  Again this is  not  the  act  of
    someone in fear of their life" (paragraph 85).

12. Finally, the background evidence suggested that it was unlikely that  a
    person would be able to establish a need for  international  protection
    as a consequence of a blood  feud  as  state  protection  is  generally
    available (paragraph 87).

13. In relation to the medical condition of the Appellant's son, [ES2], the
    judge had regard to the  consultant  psychiatrist's  report  dated  8th
    February 2016.  He observed that [ES2] had said he was visited  at  his
    maternal grandparents' house  in  April  2014  and  that  his  mother's
    relatives threatened to kill [ES2] and pushed him from the first  floor
    of the house onto some metal bars outside.  [ES2]  could  not  remember
    what happened next.  But neighbours dressed his wound.  [ES2] had scars
    of old wounds on his back.  [ES2] stated that the family  left  Albania
    two days later.  [ES2] did not tell his family about the  incident  and
    he did not want to discuss it in front of his father.

14. The family then moved to live in  the  capital  of  Italy  for  several
    months.  The judge observed that this account:

         "Contradicts what the Appellant and  his  daughters  say  happened.
         [ES2] says the family left Albania in April 2014, but the Appellant
         says they left in September 2014.  [ES2] says he and his family saw
         his uncle in Italy and they fled the same day.  The Appellant  says
         he did not see the uncle in Italy.  He only received a  phone  call
         from him.  The Appellant says they did  not  leave  Italy  for  six
         weeks after they were contacted by his mother-in-law.  Due  to  the
         inconsistencies in [ES2]'s account compared to that  given  by  his
         father and sister I place limited weight on it.   The  psychiatrist
         said it was unclear what caused the scars.  If [ES2] had deep  cuts
         to his back, I find it reasonably  likely  his  father  would  have
         noticed this" (paragraph 91).

15. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

16. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  had  made  adverse
    credibility findings without taking account of  the  evidence  and  had
    made subjective plausibility findings without giving adequate  reasons,
    together with discounting the conclusions of the expert report.   There
    was a flawed assessment of the mental health of the Appellant's younger
    child.

17. On 13th August 2018 permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.

Submissions

18. At the hearing before me on 31st October 2018, Mr Jagadesham, appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the grounds of application.

19. First, he submitted that the judge had made  findings  of  fact  almost
    exclusively on the basis of the Appellant's evidence alone  and  failed
    to consider the evidence in the round, before making findings as to the
    Appellant's credibility.  The reality was that there was  a  wealth  of
    corroborative evidence in this case.  This came  from  the  Appellant's
    daughter, [ES1], who provided detailed written and oral evidence to the
    Tribunal.  It came from the Appellant's son, [ES2], and the  disclosure
    to [ES2]'s professionals about the harm he suffered at the hands of his
    grandfather.  It also came from the Reverend Robinson who  spoke  about
    the family's evident trauma through his pastoral involvement with them.
     The judge did not address the evidence properly in these respects.  My
    attention was drawn by Mr Jagadesham, to the cases of  AK  (Failure  to
    assess witnesses' evidence) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00230, and I have  also
    taken into account the decision of Y (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA  Civ  362.
    Mr Jagadesham, emphasised that there was a serious error by  the  judge
    in not referring to the evidence of the  Appellant's  daughter,  [ES1],
    who was privy  to  the  threat  being  made  against  her  father  (see
    paragraph 22 of her witness statement).  This evidence was not referred
    to.  The mother's letter at pages 23 to 24 was not referred to  either.



20. Second, the judge materially  erred  in  repeating  phrases  like  "not
    reasonably likely" (at  paragraphs  79,  80,  84,  and  85)  in  making
    findings against the Appellant.  The judge had made findings that  were
    not based upon credibility and consistency but upon what  she  believed
    was probable or plausible.  Yet, in the case  of  HK  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1037, the Court of Appeal highlighted the special need for caution when
    assessing "improbability" in asylum claims.  In the same way, the judge
    failed to state what if any weight she placed upon  the  expert  report
    (see paragraph 77).  The judge's note that  "most  of  the  reports  or
    articles referred to by the expert are  several  years  old"  fails  to
    acknowledge the fact that there was a timeline of events in Albania and
    each section began with older events or sources but ended  with  events
    and sources from 2018 and thus was completely up to  date.   The  judge
    stated, in fact, that the attempted suicide by [ES2] in mid-July  2015,
    took place in the presence of the social worker  and  his  family,  and
    that "this is the only report of self-harm attempt", but failed to take
    into account the report of Miss Lisa Slater, which was confirmed by  Dr
    Abbas, the consultant psychiatrist, who endorsed the assessment of Miss
    Slater, that the Appellant was indeed very vulnerable and  at  risk  of
    suicide.  Indeed,  Miss  Slater  refers  to  a  clear  care  plan  (see
    paragraph 53) and even gives her own telephone number to the  Appellant
    should this be required for the assistance of  [ES2]  if  a  difficulty
    arose, which was quite unusual.

21. For his part, Mr Bates submitted  that  there  was  no  error  of  law.
    First, it was not the case that the judge did not refer to the evidence
    of the Appellant's daughter, [ES1].  When the judge is looking  at  the
    account that the Appellant's son, [ES2], was visited  at  his  maternal
    grandparents' house and that he was  threatened  and  pushed  from  the
    first floor of the house onto some metal bars, the judge observes that,
    "this account however contradicts what the Appellant and his  daughters
    say happened" (paragraph 90).  It is clear that the  judge  is  totally
    observant of the account given by the daughter.

22. Second, the judge was mindful of the fact that, in the midst of  claims
    that the Appellant was at risk of being mistreated and was going to  be
    targeted, he was actually performing a very public  role  in  terms  of
    both going out, and working driving a lorry and yet at no stage was  he
    actually ever targeted.

23. Third, it was  entirely  inconceivable,  that  the  Appellant's  wife's
    relatives would seek to engage in a blood feud against  the  Appellant,
    on account of the suicide death of their daughter, but at the same time
    be targeting the wife's own children, which is what  was  being  stated
    here.  Both [ES2] and [ES1] were said to have been at risk and this was
    simply not credible.

24. Fourth, when the Appellant went to Italy, he went to a town  where  his
    in-laws lived (see paragraph 84).  The judge observes how the Appellant
    fled Albania and travelled  to  Italy.   The  brother-in-law  lived  in
    Milan.  The Appellant himself lived on the  outskirts  of  Milan.   The
    judge observed that, "I find it  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
    Appellant would travel to a country, and to an area where a  member  of
    his in-laws lived and where he could possibly be found.   This  is  not
    the act of someone who wants to remove himself from any risk  from  his
    in-laws" (paragraph  84).   In  short,  all  these  aspects,  addressed
    specifically by the judge, only showed how much lacking in  credibility
    the claim was as presented by the Appellant.

25. Fifth, if the Appellant knew that his family would be targeted, when he
    himself was no longer in Albania, it did not  make  sense  for  why  he
    would leave his daughter behind for a couple of months, as this  simply
    puts one in the path of the very threats that the Appellant claimed  to
    have been setting out to avoid.

26. Sixth, it was suggested that if the Appellant was not then  in  Albania
    then his parents would be at risk,  but  the  fact  remained  that  the
    parents were still there and no harm had come to them  whatsoever.   As
    the judge observed, "no-one has been harmed in the  Appellant's  family
    despite his parents still living there and his  brothers  having  lived
    there until at least 2015" (paragraph 86).

27. Seventh, insofar as it is being suggested that the evidence of the  two
    children, [ES2] and [ES1], were not factored into the overall  body  of
    the evidence, this would have made no  difference  whatsoever,  in  the
    light of what has been said above.  The son, [ES2], claimed to have had
    scars, but the father  was  never  made  aware  of  them,  and  it  was
    difficult to verify how the scars actually arose,  and  the  judge  was
    rightly sceptical of this.

28. Finally, in so far as the medical condition  of,  [ES2]  the  son,  was
    concerned, Mr Bates submitted that there was nothing  in  this  either.
    If one looks at the NHS report (at page 53 of the bundle) it refers  to
    there being a possible PTSD condition for [ES2].  It states  that  this
    may need therapy.  [ES2] himself then made the decision that he did not
    want to engage in any therapy.  The  medical  professionals  for  their
    part did not press matters any further.  None  of  this  suggests  that
    [ES2] was in a particularly acute condition.  Quite the contrary is the
    case.  In the same way, it is not the case that there is a well fleshed
    out care plan in existence.  The matter  is  left  for  the  family  to
    decide (see page 55).  The family themselves do not  decide  that  they
    want to initiate and proceed with a care plan  for  [ES2].   Therefore,
    the judge's conclusions at paragraphs 91 to 92 and paragraphs 94 to  95
    were those which were entirely open to him.

29. In his reply, Mr Jagadesham submitted that the case  of  SQ  (Pakistan)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1251 and the case of AE (Algeria) [2014] EWCA  Civ  653
    are cases where it was made clear that "there can be  circumstances  in
    which the high threshold can be reached in relation to a child where it
    would not be reached in the case of an adult" (at paragraph 17) and one
    had to bear in mind here that  one  was  considering  the  position  of
    [ES2], who was simply a 16-year-old child.  The  case  of  SQ  made  it
    clear that, "what  this  case  demonstrates  is  that  in  some  cases,
    particularly but not only in relation to children, Article 8 may  raise
    issues separate from Article 3" (paragraph 26).  The  court  was  clear
    that particularly in relation  to  a  child,  Article  8  may  be  more
    protective than Article 3 (at paragraph 7).

30. This indeed, submitted Mr Jagadesham, was the position of [ES2].  Under
    Article 8 he had a better protective cover in  relation  to  his  human
    rights than under Article 3.  This had not been properly  evaluated  by
    the judge.  Both Miss Slater  and  Dr  Abbas  had  concerns  about  the
    condition of [ES2].  The judge could not  just  reject  such  evidence.
    Furthermore, the judge ignored the fact that there was  pressure  being
    put upon the family members  of  the  Appellant  so  that  they  should
    disclose the Appellant's whereabouts.

31. The general tendency was to target the menfolk.  Only  if  the  menfolk
    could not be found would the tormentors then move on to  other  members
    of the family.  Yet, the judge had repeatedly used the phrase  that  he
    did not find it reasonably likely that a particular  course  of  events
    would  have  followed.   This  was  a  distinctly  unhelpful   way   of
    approaching an asylum appeal.

32. He asked me to allow the appeal.





No Error of Law

33. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

34. First, I take the medical evidence first in relation to [ES2], the  son
    of the Appellant.  Whereas it is true that there is a report from  Lisa
    Slater, which is endorsed by Dr Abbas, a consultant  psychiatrist,  the
    fact remains that the  established  case  law  in  relation  to  expert
    reports is clear that experts do not decide  cases.   Judges  do.   The
    expert's function is to advise the judge.  The judge is fully  entitled
    to accept or reject expert opinion.  If the judge decides to reject  an
    expert's advice, he or she must provide a sound basis upon  which  this
    has been done and must then  also  explain  why  the  advice  has  been
    rejected: see M-W (A  child)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  12  (per  Wall  LJ  at
    paragraph 39).  I

35. n this case, the judge does indeed come to her own view  about  how  to
    decide the issue of medical evidence and is  clear  that  it  does  not
    point to the Appellant being at risk of harm.  The judge first sets out
    the medical evidence (at paragraphs 38 to 40).  However, there is  then
    an extended analysis of this and the judge is clear that [ES2] did  not
    harm himself in mid-July 2014, and  the  incident  took  place  in  the
    presence of a social worker, and it  is  the  only  reported  self-harm
    attempt.  Moreover,  the  psychiatrist  in  A&E,  to  which  [ES2]  was
    immediately taken "was not concerned about [ES2]'s mental state at this
    time.  This was despite the fact that [ES2] said he would kill  himself
    rather than be deported.  He was given counselling for a  short  period
    of time for low mood" (paragraph 91).

36. The judge expressly considers [ES2]'s protestation that he  would  kill
    himself if he is deported, but the judge  is  clear  that  he  did  not
    report self-harm when the first refusal letter was issued in June  2015
    and that [ES2] is not  on  any  medication  "and  none  has  ever  been
    prescribed for him".  The psychiatrist  was  not  concerned  about  his
    mental health  in  A&E  despite  his  threat  to  kill  in  June  2015"
    (paragraph 94).  These conclusions were entirely open to the  judge  in
    the manner that he reached.

37. Second, in relation to the question of there being  a  blood  feud,  on
    account of the Appellant's wife having  committed  suicide,  where  her
    relatives are now threatening  the  Appellant,  the  judge  gave  ample
    reasons for why this did not attract a  sustainable  protection  claim.
    First, the Appellant himself freely moved around his town, working as a
    lorry driver, and going out, and never once  being  attacked.   Second,
    when he did leave to go to Italy, he did  not  leave  immediately,  but
    much later, and then went and settled in  Milan,  which  was  the  very
    place where his brother-in-law lived.  And  again  no  harm  whatsoever
    came to him.  Third, there is also the issue of how it can be said that
    the children of the Appellant's wife, namely [ES1] and [ES2], were also
    themselves targeted, and the judge does not believe that this  was  the
    case, and finds the evidence in this  regard  to  be  inconsistent  and
    lacking in credibility.

38. Accordingly, in what is a  careful  and  well  compiled  determination,
    Judge Lloyd was entitled to come to the conclusions that  she  did  and
    there is no error of law.



Notice of Decision

39. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

40. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd November 2018
