
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00609/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 January 2018                        |On 5 January 2018                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     DK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Markus of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Moueety a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify DK or any of his family members. This  direction
       applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with
       this direction could give rise to Contempt of Court  proceedings.  I
       do so in order to preserve the anonymity of DK who, as will be seen,
       has an outstanding asylum claim.



    2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 31 December 2015. His  appeal  against  this
       was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Buckwell  ("the  Judge")
       following a hearing on 25 November 2016.

The grant of permission


   3. Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted permission  to  appeal  (29  June
      2017) as it is arguable that the Judge materially erred in failing to;


   1)  take  into  account  relevant  evidence   before   reaching   adverse
      credibility findings,
   2) direct himself to the consistency between the Appellant's account  and
      the background evidence that those  linked  to  peace  committees  are
      targeted, and
   3) attached determinative weight to the delay in claiming asylum.

Respondent's position

   4. It was submitted in the rule 24 notice (17 July 2017) that the Judge;
   1) gave adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant did  not  have  a
      profile that would place him at risk,
   2) gave adequate reasons for finding that the identity of  the  attackers
      had not been established,
   3) was entitled to note the lack of evidence to corroborate  the  alleged
      kidnapping, and
   4) was entitled to find that s8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment
      of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 applied and the benefit of doubt  was  not
      extended to the Appellant.


   5. It was submitted orally that the Judge noted [57] that there had  been
      attacks but [60] the Appellant's level of activity was insufficient to
      place him at risk, and [58] the documents added little weight  to  his
      case. The asylum claim was very late. The delay was at  the  heart  of
      the Judge's decision. Whilst the Judge clearly made an error of law is
      saying that [56] the Appellant  "provided  some  explanation  that  he
      believed his appeal was still in process within the Upper Tribunal but
      absolutely no evidence was put forward to support that vague  account"
      this was not material given the rest of the findings.



The Appellant's position

   6. It was submitted that the Judge materially erred in not assessing  the
      risk against the background of over a  dozen  attacks  on  members  of
      "peace committees" that were referred to and detailed in the evidence.
       There was no finding as to how involved  the  Appellant  was  in  the
      "peace committee" but the Judge did  find  that  he  was  involved  in
      "community service" as claimed.


   7. The Judge placed determinative weight on s8.


   8. The Judge's comments on the lack of documentary evidence that  he  had
      an outstanding appeal [56] were untrue as the Appellant had produced a
      Notice of Receipt  from  the  Tribunal  of  such  an  application  (12
      December 2014) and a letter from Capita. The Judge  also  ignored  the
      Appellant's explanation that he understood he  had  to  wait  for  his
      outstanding appeal to be decided before he could claim asylum.

Discussion

    9. In relation to ground 1  and  3,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge
       materially erred. There was plainly documentary evidence before  him
       of  an  outstanding  appeal  and  a  statement  from  the  Appellant
       explaining why he thought that this meant he could not claim asylum.
        It was  conceded  by  Mr  Moueety  that  the  error  regarding  the
       documentary evidence amounted to an error of law. The  Judge  placed
       great weight on this as he refers to the  delay  in  the  sur  place
       application as "particularly telling". Mr Moueety acknowledged  that
       the s8 point was at the heart of the decision. It  was  material  as
       the Judge placed great weight on this and was plainly wrong.  Whilst
       it is correct that there is no error of law just because a different
       Judge may have made a different decision, this does not mean that  a
       Judge can ignore relevant evidence or  a  relevant  explanation  and
       then find comprehensively against an Appellant on  a  point  at  the
       heart of the decision.


   10. In relation to ground 2, I am satisfied that  the  Judge  was  aware
       [57] that those "involved in the attempted peace process,  including
       Peace Committee members, have found themselves to be the victims  of
       attacks". He then limits his acceptance of risk [57] "to  those  who
       have a politically high profile". That is not  what  the  background
       evidence  that  was  before  the  Judge  points  at.  It  makes   no
       delineation on the basis of  politics  and  refers  to  members  and
       volunteers  and  activists  as  being  victims.  The  specifics  are
       detailed in the key passage index that was before the Judge  and  in
       the grounds for this application. I  am  satisfied  that  it  was  a
       material  error  of  law  for  the  Judge  to  introduce  a  profile
       delineation without any apparent evidential basis.


   11. I am satisfied that having heard from the representatives that it is
       appropriate to remit the matter de novo  as  the  errors  go  beyond
       those contained within the Presidential Guidance  for  retention  in
       the Upper Tribunal.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing,
    not before Judge Buckwell.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
4 January 2018
