
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/00588/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2017                            |On 21 July 2017            |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                  DANA HAMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr K Forrest, counsel, instructed by Maguire Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Blair promulgated on 22 February 2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1992 and is a national of Iraq. On  8
January 2016, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Blair ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 7 June  2017,  Judge  Cruthers  gave
permission to appeal stating

      1. This appeal stands dismissed by a decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Blair. Having assessed the evidence, the  Judge  concluded  that
      the appeal did not succeed on asylum  law/protection  law  principles;
      pursuant to the immigration rules, HC 395; or through the  application
      of article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (paragraphs 21
      to 23 of the decision under consideration).


      2. The grounds on which the appellant seeks permission to appeal  seem
      to have abandoned the suggestions that the appellant  is  entitled  to
      refugee  status,  that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  humanitarian
      protection and/or that the appellant could not return to Iraq  without
      a real risk of serious harm arising (for the purposes of article 3  of
      the ECHR).


      3. However, I do consider it arguable, as per the  grounds,  that  the
      Judge has  not  sufficiently  explained  the  reasoning  by  which  he
      concluded that the appellant could not  take  advantage  of  paragraph
      276ADE of the immigration rules (as regards any obstacles to return in
      the light of the appellant's circumstances) (and see  paragraph  9  of
      R(Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982, 27 July 2005)


      4. The appellant should not take  this  grant  of  permission  as  any
      indication that the appeal will ultimately be successful.

The Hearing

6.(a) Mr Forrest, counsel for the appellant, moved the  grounds  of  appeal.
He took me to [23] of the decision and told me that, there, the Judge  falls
into a material error of law because he gives no reason  why  the  appellant
cannot succeed on article 8 ECHR  grounds.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge's
rejection of the appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection  grounds  of
appeal is accepted and is not challenged, but argued that the Judge has  not
dealt with the appellant's  private  life  claim,  and  that  the  appellant
should succeed under paragraph 276  ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  immigration  rules,
because there are insurmountable obstacles to his reintegration into Iraq.

(b) Mr Forrest referred me to the  expert  report  prepared  by  Dr  George,
contained in the inventory of productions for  the  appellant  presented  to
the First-tier. He told me that Dr George's report indicates that there  are
insurmountable obstacles to reintegration.  He  told  me  that  Dr  George's
conclusion is that internal flight to IKR is not a viable  option  for  this
appellant.

(c) Mr Forrest referred me to AA(Iraq)[2017] EWCA Civ 944. He told  me  that
at [21] of his decision the Judge made no findings  about  the  availability
of documentation to the appellant. He conceded that AA(Iraq)[2017] EWCA  Civ
944 post-dates the Judge's decision by almost 5 months,  but  told  me  that
because the country guidance relied on by the Judge  has  been  amended  the
lack of findings about the availability of documentation is a fatal flaw  in
the Judge's decision. He told me that, overall. the Judge's  decision  lacks
adequate reasoning. He urged me to allow the appeal and to  remit  the  case
to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

7. (a) Mr Matthews, for the respondent, told me that he would not  expressly
concede the appeal, but  that  the  decision  issued  on  11  July  2017  in
AA(Iraq)[2017] EWCA Civ 944 created difficulty for him. He reminded me  that
the Judge  had  followed  the  correct  country  guidance  at  the  date  of
promulgation of the decision,  but  conceded  that  the  Court  of  Appeal's
decision indicates that the law has always been as it  is  set  out  in  the
Court of Appeal's decision issued on 11 July 2017.

(b) Mr Matthews reminded me that the grounds of appeal are in narrow  focus.
The appellant is a Kurd from Iraq who has lived in Baghdad. The Judge  found
that his account was a  fabrication.  The  Judge  rejected  the  appellant's
asylum and  humanitarian  protection  claims.  The  appellant's  appeal  was
dismissed on article 3 ECHR grounds. He argued that the core aspects of  the
appellant's appeal are rejected, so  that  there  cannot  be  insurmountable
obstacles to the appellant's return. He said that,  because  the  article  3
argument advanced is advanced on the same basis as the article  8  argument,
and because the article 3 appeal has been  dismissed,  then  the  article  8
appeal cannot succeed

(c) Mr Matthews referred to section 3  of  the  annex  which  gives  country
guidance in AA(Iraq)[2017] EWCA Civ 944. He agreed that there is  a  gap  in
the factual findings contained in the decision. At  [21]  of  the  decision,
the Judge adopts a neutral position so that there is no finding  on  whether
or not the appellant has, or has access to, a  CSID.  However,  he  told  me
that the Judge clearly finds the appellant  can  return  to  his  family  in
Kirkuk. He told me that if I find that the absence of findings  in  relation
to available documentation amount to a material error of law,  then  he  the
correct course is to remit this case to First-tier Tribunal Judge  Blair  to
conclude the fact-finding process.




Analysis

8. The grounds of appeal advance an argument  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds,
with specific reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), only. It is argued  that
there are insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's return  to  Iraq.  The
basis of that argument is that the appellant is at risk  on  return  because
of his imputed political opinion and his profile in his home area.

9. Paragraph 276ADE (1) of the Immigration Rules says

      The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on  the
      grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of application,
      the applicant:
           (i) does not fall for  refusal  under  any  of  the  grounds  in
           Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5.  in
           Appendix FM; and
           (ii) has made a valid application for leave  to  remain  on  the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and
           (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously  in
           the  UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
           imprisonment) and it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
           applicant to leave the UK; or
           (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and  has  spent
           at least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18  years  or  above,
           has lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's  integration  into  the
           country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the
           UK.
10. The fundamental problem with the appellant's  argument  is  that  it  is
accepted that the Judge's decision in relation to  the  appellant's  asylum,
humanitarian protection, and article 3 ECHR  claim  is  correct.  The  Judge
rejected the appellant's account.  No  challenge  is  taken  either  to  the
Judge's decision  (in  relation  to  the  appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian
protection, and article 3 ECHR claim) or  his  reasons  for  that  decision.
There cannot therefore be any foundation for the appellant's claim  to  have
a profile which would create an insurmountable obstacle to  the  appellant's
reintegration into Iraq.

11. That should be an end to the appellant's appeal, but I cannot  close  my
eyes to the decision in AA(Iraq)[2017] EWCA Civ 944. On 11  July  2017,  new
country guidance was given for Iraq. The final sentence of the case says

      This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq.

12.  Paragraphs  9  to  11  of  the  guidance  given  in   the   annexe   to
AA(Iraq)[2017] EWCA Civ 944 says

    C.     The CSID


         9. Regardless  of  the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
              necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
              obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A  CSID  is
              generally required in order for an Iraqi to  access  financial
              assistance  from  the  authorities;   employment;   education;
              housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there are no family
              or other members  likely  to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
              support, P is in  general  likely  to  face  a  real  risk  of
              destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by  the  time  any
              funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her agents to
              assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely
              that P will still have no CSID.


         10.      Where return is feasible but P does not  have  a  CSID,  P
              should as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the
              Civil Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an
              Iraqi passport (whether current or expired), if P has one.  If
              P does not have such a passport, P's ability to obtain a  CSID
              may depend on whether P knows the page and  volume  number  of
              the book holding P's information (and that of P's family). P's
              ability to persuade the officials that P is the  person  named
              on the relevant page is likely to  depend  on  whether  P  has
              family members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch
              for P.


         11.     P's ability to obtain a CSID  is  likely  to  be  severely
              hampered if P is unable to go  to  the  Civil  Status  Affairs
              Office of P's Governorate because  it  is  in  an  area  where
              Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring. As a  result  of  the
              violence,  alternative  CSA  Offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar   and
              Saluhaddin have been established in Baghdad and  Kerbala.  The
              evidence does not  demonstrate  that  the  "Central  Archive",
              which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able to provide  CSIDs
              to those in need of them. There is, however, a National Status
              Court  in  Baghdad,  to  which  P  could  apply   for   formal
              recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court
              is, however, unclear.

13. The Judge commences [21] of the decision by saying

      If  he  is  undocumented  (upon  which  I  make  no  finding  in  this
appeal)....

14. In OM(AA Wrong in Law) Zimbabwe CG 2006 UKAIT 00077  the  Tribunal  said
that a Country Guidance case stands until it is  replaced  or  found  to  be
wrong in law. It will not be appropriate to  grant  an  adjournment  on  the
grounds that a party is seeking to challenge  a  relevant  Country  Guidance
case in the higher courts.   Where  a  Country  Guidance  case  is  replaced
because of a change of country conditions or because  further  evidence  has
emerged, that will not mean that it was  an  error  of  law  to  follow  it.
However, where a Country Guidance case is found to be  legally  flawed,  the
reasons for  so  finding  will  have  existed  both  before  and  after  its
notification.  The error is effectively replicated  in  the  decision  which
followed it and so there would be an error of law in that decision too.

15. Because no finding is made about the availability of  documents  to  the
appellant, I have to find  that,  at  today's  date,  the  Judge's  decision
contains a material error of law. It is not necessary  to  set  the  Judge's
decision aside. The material error of law  can  be  rectified  by  remitting
this case to First-tier Tribunal Judge Blair to  complete  the  fact-finding
exercise. The Judge's findings are preserved. I remit this  case  to  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Blair so that the  final,  solitary,  missing  piece  of
this decision can be addressed.

16. I remit the case to First-tier Tribunal Judge Blair for findings  to  be
made addressing paragraphs 9 to 11 of the guidance given in the annex to  AA
(Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law.

18. The existing findings of fact are preserved. The appeal is remitted  the
First-tier Tribunal for the fact-finding exercise to be  completed  and  for
the appeal to be determined afresh in light of that exercise.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 20 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

