
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/00150/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                       |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On December 8, 2017                      |     On December 12, 2017         |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MR AMIN BABAKHANI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Chaudry (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeetie, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  The appellant entered  the  United
    Kingdom on July 12, 2016 and  after  he  was  apprehended  by  Cheshire
    police on July 13, 2016 he claimed asylum. The respondent  refused  his
    protection claim on December 21, 2016 under paragraphs 336 and 339F  HC
    395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on January 5, 2017 under Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  AJ  Parker  (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on February 7, 2017 and in a  decision  promulgated
    on February 21, 2017 the Judge refused his appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision on February 7, 2017. Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes  on  June
    15, 2017 who found grounds 4, 6 and 7 most arguable  but  found  little
    merit in the grounds 1, 2, 3, 5 and 8. The respondent lodged a Rule  24
    response dated July 6, 2017 in which she argues there was no  error  in
    law.

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Chaudry adopted the grounds of appeal and agreed  that  grounds  one
    and two were linked, grounds three to  seven  were  linked  and  ground
    eight stood on  its  own.  He  argued  that  as  the  appellant  was  a
    vulnerable witness the Judge  should  have  adjourned  the  case.  With
    regard to grounds three to seven he submitted  the  Judge  only  really
    considered the religious side of his claim. There was a letter from the
    Komala Party and this had been given no weight. Whilst the Judge stated
    the appellant gave the wrong number of leaders it transpired the  Judge
    was also wrong. There was evidence about the name of the  leader  which
    against suggested an error by the Judge.  The  final  ground  concerned
    [56] of the decision. The Judge stated "even given the  high  threshold
    test" when of course the test should have been the low threshold  test.
    In the circumstances he submitted there was an error in law.

 7. Mr McVeetie relied on the Rule 24 statement and submitted there was  no
    error in law. Grounds one and two had  no  merit.  There  was  no  real
    evidence that the appellant was unfit to give evidence and in fact  the
    appellant's counsel called him to give evidence and asked him questions
    about his claim. Grounds  three  to  seven  had  no  merit.  The  Judge
    listened to the evidence and did not enter the arena in the absence  of
    a representative from the respondent. The appellant had provided a full
    statement  and  his  counsel  asked  him  questions  to  clear  up  any
    ambiguities. Whilst there may have been an error about the name of  the
    leader this was perhaps understandable because there were  many  groups
    and leaders. In any event, both the Judge and the appellant were  wrong
    about the numbers so any error by  the  Judge  was  irrelevant  as  the
    appellant got the answer wrong  anyway.  Importantly,  the  appellant's
    account of how he was accepted by the Komala Party was totally at  odds
    with the country evidence. The Judge found he was not telling the truth
    and was entitled to attach no weight to the  letter  he  had  produced.
    With regard to how  he  approached  the  political  claim  Mr  McVeetie
    accepted the Judge's reasoning was brief but there was noting incorrect
    or perverse about his findings.  Finally,  with  regard  to  the  final
    ground this was clearly a typing error.

 8. Having heard submissions I reserved my decision.




    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

 9. The appellant's solicitors lodged a pre-trial form with the Tribunal on
    January 23, 2017 and on that form there was no reference to any medical
    issues or expert reports. In fact, there was no indication anywhere  on
    the form that there might be an issue. Mr Chaudry received the doctor's
    letter dated January 31, 2017. This letter  was  a  document  they  had
    requested and they in turn supplied an electronic copy of the  document
    to Counsel who represented the appellant at the hearing on February  3,
    2017. A copy of this letter was not served either on  the  Tribunal  or
    the respondent.

10. When the matter came before the Judge he was provided with  a  copy  of
    the letter and according to his decision he  considered  its  contents.
    The report was written by a trainee GP although the letter was approved
    by Dr Shah. There  was  nothing  in  that  report  that  suggested  the
    appellant was unable to give evidence. The doctor himself said as  much
    in his report. On the morning counsel asked for an adjournment to  have
    the appellant medically examined.

11. The Judge set out the exchanges at [11] of his  decision.  Due  to  the
    lack of information as to what would be achieved  with  an  adjournment
    the  Judge  refused  the  adjournment.  The  appellant's  counsel  then
    proceeded to call him to give evidence. There is nothing in the  record
    of proceedings that suggests the appellant appeared distressed. Grounds
    One and Two have no merit because the  appellant  was  called  to  give
    evidence and there is nothing about the hearing that  suggests  he  was
    unfit to give evidence. He was not cross-examined because there was  no
    Home Office representative and the only questions asked of him were put
    to him by his own counsel.

12. With regard to Ground Eight I also find no merit in  this  ground.  The
    Judge had clearly identified the correct burden and standard  of  proof
    in [6] of his decision. The error in [56] was a typo  error  which  did
    not affect the decision.

13. The remaining grounds are connected. The grounds argue  the  Judge  did
    not consider the appellant's political claim in any  detail.  How  much
    detail the Judge went into  to  an  extent  depended  on  the  evidence
    presented to  him.  Witnesses  attended  to  give  evidence  but  these
    witnesses were in connection with the religious aspect of his claim and
    not the political aspect  of  the  claim.  The  Judge  dealt  with  the
    political aspect of his claim based on the  appellant's  own  evidence,
    the respondent refusal letter and any relevant evidence.

14. It was apparent from submissions made to me that the  particular  group
    the appellant claimed to be a member of had a  number  of  leaders  and
    branches. Key to his claim was his claim he was a member of the  Komala
    Party and the Judge is criticised for not attaching any weight  to  the
    letter that was adduced. At [37] the Judge dealt with  this  aspect  of
    his claim. In submissions he became apparent the Judge may  have  erred
    over how many branches there were but as Mr McVeetie pointed  out  this
    could not be an error in law because the appellant had also  given  the
    wrong answer when questioned. Mr Chaudry made submissions over the name
    of the leader but in reality this part of his claim failed because  the
    account he gave of how he joined this  party  was  wholly  inconsistent
    with the country evidence. He claimed he was asked to join and that was
    it whereas the country evidence indicated a rigorous interview  process
    and detailed enquiries into his background before  he  was  allowed  to
    join.  This  fundamentally  undermined  the  appellant's   credibility-
    something Mr Chaudry was unable to address in his submissions. Whilst I
    accept there was no reference to the letter from the Komala Party I  am
    satisfied that document would have not altered the  Judge's  perception
    of the case. Taking the  document  in  the  round  he  would  not  have
    attached any weight to it because he was satisfied he had never been  a
    member of the party. Accordingly, grounds 3 to 7 have no merit.

    DECISION

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date     09.12.2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.


Signed                              Date     09.12.2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





