
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00438/2020 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 09 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     a f
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


This appeal has been decided without a hearing, pursuant to rule 34 of the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J
    Bartlett ("the judge"),  promulgated  on  18  November  2020.  By  that
    decision, the  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision, dated 17 December 2019, refusing his  protection
    and human rights claims.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt, born in 1965. He arrived in United
    Kingdom in 2016  and  claimed  asylum.  The  claim  was  based  on  the
    assertion that he had been previously been  arrested  by  the  Egyptian
    authorities and remained of adverse interest to them. An initial appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed in 2017 and this decision  was
    not successfully challenged. Further submissions were subsequently made
    to the respondent and these were treated as  a  fresh  claim,  with  an
    accompanying right of appeal.

 3. On appeal before the judge, the appellant relied on his original  claim
    and maintained  that  he  was  of  adverse  interest  to  the  Egyptian
    authorities. Further evidence, including court documents and the letter
    from an Egyptian lawyer, were relied on.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The judge applied the Devaseelan principles to  the  case  before  him,
    rejected the reliability of the new documentary evidence, and concluded
    that the appellant had fabricated his claim and  was  not  at  risk  on
    return to Egypt.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The grounds of appeal asserted that the  judge  had  erred  in  law  by
    effectively treating the 2017 First-tier Tribunal decision as  decisive
    of  the  appeal  before  him,  without  giving  any  or  any   adequate
    consideration to the new documentary evidence. The grounds argued  that
    the case should ultimately be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo hearing.

 6.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer
    concluded that it was arguably unfair and/or  arguably  irrational  for
    the  judge  to  have  concluded  that  because  of  the  2017   adverse
    credibility findings, the new evidence also  fell  to  be  rejected  as
    incredible.

The respondent's rule 24 response

 7. In a rule 24 response dated 4 February 2021, the  respondent  confirmed
    that she was not opposing the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
    It was accepted that the judge had erred for the reasons set out in the
    grounds of appeal and alluded to by  Judge  Plimmer  in  her  grant  of
    permission. The Upper Tribunal was invited to remit  the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.



Deciding this appeal without a hearing

 8. In the particular circumstances of this case, I have concluded that  it
    is fair and in the interests of justice to decide this appeal without a
    hearing, pursuant to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008. The appellant has sought remittal on a de  novo  basis  and
    this is the agreed course of action put forward by  the  respondent  as
    well. There can be no prejudice to either party arising from a decision
    without a hearing.

Conclusions on error of law

 9. In my judgment, the respondent's concession in  this  appeal  is  fully
    justified. I am satisfied that the appellant was not cross-examined  on
    the new documentary evidence at the hearing. That evidence was, on  its
    face, potentially highly significant to his protection claim.  Further,
    reading the judge's decision as a whole, I am satisfied that  the  2017
    First-tier Tribunal findings were effectively treated  as  decisive  of
    the assessment of the new documentary  evidence.  At  the  very  least,
    inadequate reasons were provided for rejecting all of this evidence.

10. In all the circumstances, I conclude that, for the reasons set  out  in
    the grounds of appeal and accepted by the respondent, the  judge  erred
    in law. The errors are plainly material and the judge's  decision  must
    be set aside.



Disposal

11. The only appropriate course of action is to  remit  this  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal  for  a  complete  re-hearing,  with  no  preserved
    findings of fact.

Anonymity

12.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction  and  it  is
    appropriate to maintain this.



Notice of Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

14. I exercise my discretion  under  section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

15. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.





Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  complete
         rehearing, with no preserved findings of fact;

      2. The remitted hearing shall not be conducted by First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge J Bartlett;

      3. The First-tier Tribunal will  issue  any  further  case  management
         directions it deems appropriate.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor             Date: 1 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
