
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00616/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 June 2021                      |On 12 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DDA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr M Aslam, Counsel, instructed by Aden & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is a re-making of DDA's appeal under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR. The re-
    making is required following my error of law decision  dated  11  March
    2021 which set aside the decision dated  6  April  2020  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Flynn.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to DDA as the appellant  and
    to the Secretary of State for the Home Department  as  the  respondent,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. DDA is a citizen of Somalia born in 1962.  He came to the UK on 12  May
    1998 and applied for asylum two days later.  That claim was refused  on
    27 June 2000 but he was granted limited leave to enter  until  27  June
    2004.  The appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain (ILR) on 10
    June 2004 and on the same day made a further application for asylum.

 4. The appellant's application  was  refused  on  16  February  2007,  the
    respondent finding that he was excluded  from  the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention by operation of Article 1F(a).   The  basis  of  the
    application of Article 1F(a) was that the appellant had  been  a  high-
    ranking army officer in the Siad Barre regime and failed to  show  that
    he was not directly involved in the widespread and serious human rights
    abuses committed by the regime.

 5. The appellant appealed against the decision of 16 February 2007 but his
    appeal was refused by a First-tier Tribunal panel in a decision  issued
    on 17 August 2007.  The First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  appellant
    should be excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention on the
    basis of Article 1F(a); see paragraphs 95 and 99 of the decision of  17
    August 2007. It was not accepted that he was from a minority clan.  The
    Tribunal concluded that the appellant had not shown that  he  qualified
    for leave under Article 3 or Article  8  ECHR.   The  appellant  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 12 November 2007.

 6. The appellant made further  submissions  on  13  January  2016.   In  a
    decision dated 10 January 2020 the respondent found  that  the  further
    submissions did not show that the appellant was entitled to leave under
    Articles 3 or 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).  The
    appellant appealed that decision and First-tier Tribunal Flynn  allowed
    his appeal in the decision dated 6 April 2020.

 7. The respondent appealed against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    and was granted permission by the First-tier Tribunal on 3  June  2020.
    As above, after a hearing on 22 February 2021, in a decision issued  on
    11 March 2021 I found an error of law and set aside the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

 8. The parties were in agreement that the  re-making  of  the  appeal  was
    limited to the question of whether the appellant is entitled  to  leave
    under Articles 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

 9. There was also agreement that the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on the appellant's profile are extant; see paragraphs 26 and 27 of  the
    error of law decision dated 1 March 2021.

10. The settled profile of the appellant is therefore as  follows.  He  has
    been in the UK for 23 years, having left Somalia in  1998.  He  has  no
    family or contacts there. He is from a minority clan. He would  not  be
    likely to obtain meaningful support from his clan members.  He receives
    practical support and pocket money from friends in the  UK  but  if  he
    returned to Somalia he would not have sufficient support  to  meet  his
    daily needs; see paragraphs  44  and  45  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision. He would be likely to have to live in an Internally Displaced
    Person (IDP) camp in extremely poor conditions; see paragraph 42 and 49
    of the First-tier Tribunal decision.

11. Further, the appellant has been diagnosed with chronic Hepatitis B  and
    latent tuberculosis. He also has a back injury. He has been  unable  to
    work in the UK  for  some  years  as  a  result  of  these  conditions.
    Concerning  his  diagnosis  of   chronic   Hepatitis   B   and   latent
    tuberculosis, in a letter dated 27 October 2015, Dr MacJannette of  the
    KS Medical Centre indicated that:




         "Mr A was referred to the  Gastroenterology  department  at  Ealing
         Hospital in November 2010 with blood tests having shown evidence of
         hepatitis B infection.

         Having had initial blood tests and an upper GI endoscopy  in  2013,
         he was referred on to Professor Ash, Infectious Diseases Specialist
         at Ealing Hospital, with a working diagnosis of chronic hepatitis B
         with high viral replication.

         Following on from this, Mr A has  been  reviewed  on  a  number  of
         occasions by the  Gastroenterology  service  with  blood  tests  to
         monitor his hepatitis B viral count and screen for the emergence of
         liver cancer, and ultrasound scans,  which  have  so  far  shown  a
         degree of fatty liver. He was  counselled  regarding  alcohol  when
         first assessed by the service and at the last review on  6th  July,
         he had been abstinent from alcohol. As of December 2014, his  liver
         function blood tests were normal and hepatitis B viral load 140.000-
          reflecting a reduction in his viral load.

         To date, Mr A has not been given any specific  antiviral  treatment
         for his hepatitis but is being  actively  monitored  to  gauge  the
         status of his illness.

         It is difficult to offer an accurate idea of the prognosis  of  his
         chronic hepatitis B infection. Whilst it is  likely  that  he  will
         remain well and not require any treatment, there is  a  possibility
         that the disease may become more active and that  he  may  at  some
         stage  require  antiviral  treatment  -  hence  the  importance  of
         periodic monitoring of blood tests and Gastroenterology follow  up.
         His  ultrasound  scan  did  not  show  any  evidence  of  cirrhosis
         (scarring) and this is a positive sign  as  far  as  chronic  viral
         hepatitis is concerned.

         Nevertheless he remains at a much  higher  risk  of  hepatocellular
         cancer compared to someone without the condition and it is for this
         reason that ongoing surveillance is important.

         I am unaware of what  facilities  exist  in  other  countries,  and
         specifically, Somalia, for specialist monitoring/treatment  of  his
         conditions, however I would of course urge that  if  there  is  any
         risk to a break in continuity of his monitoring, it would  be  best
         that he remains in the UK in order to pursue this."

12. In a further letter dated 4 December 2019, Dr MacJannette states:

         "i) Mr A has chronic Hepatitis B and latent tuberculosis, for which
             he had been on treatment with rifampicin  600mg  daily  as  of
             January 2019 with only  one  further  month  of  treatment  to
             complete at this time. He is under periodic  review  with  the
             Ealing Hospital infectious diseases clinic in  regard  to  his
             chronic Hepatitis B. My understanding is that his Hepatitis  B
             is a chronic infection for which he  will  require  long  term
             follow up and monitoring, potentially also  treatment,  should
             his condition deteriorate.

         ii) Continuity of follow up is of  course  extremely  important  in
             order to detect any changes at an early stage to  be  able  to
             intervene effectively. Hepatitis B infection increases risk of
             liver scarring or cirrhosis which could  significantly  impact
             quality of life and even survival,  and  can  also  ultimately
             give risk to hepatocellular carcinoma i.e. liver cancer,  with
             even more adverse consequences.

         iii) Mr A was seen last month and described sleeplessness and worry
             in relation to his asylum status. It is  likely  that  removal
             from the UK would have a detrimental impact on his mental  and
             potentially physical health  in  this  regard,  especially  in
             terms of anxiety symptoms."

13. Also, the First-tier Tribunal accepted  the  evidence  of  the  country
    expert, Professor M I Aguilar on the availability of medical  treatment
    in Somalia. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the medical treatment
    the appellant would need for the rest of his life was not available  in
    Somalia even if he could pay for it; see paragraphs 36, 45  and  47  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision. Those paragraphs also indicated  that
    the testing regime he required could only be obtained in  liaison  with
    private hospitals outside Somalia, for example, in Nairobi.  Given  his
    profile as a minority  clan  member  with  no  family  or  contacts  in
    Somalia, as someone with no financial support and who  could  not  work
    because of his medical conditions, the appellant would not be  able  to
    pay for treatment.

14. The respondent did not challenge  opinion  of  Dr  Aguilar  on  medical
    treatment or other issues addressed in his report before the First-tier
    Tribunal or before me. That was an understandable  approach  where  the
    expert's views were consistent with the country materials  on  Somalia,
    including the conclusions in the country guidance case  of  MOJ  &  Ors
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).  Relevant  to
    the circumstances of this appellant, the head note to MOJ sets out:

        vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence will
             look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,
             for assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing  a
             livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance  from
             his clan members who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is
             only likely to be forthcoming for majority  clan  members,  as
             minority clans may have little to offer.


       viii) The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has  changed.
             Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms  and
             assist with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
             protection  function  than  previously.  There  are  no   clan
             militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence,  and  no  clan  based
             discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.


         ix)  If it is accepted that a person facing a return to  Mogadishu
             after a period of absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all
             of the circumstances. These considerations will  include,  but
             are not limited to:


           . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
           . length of absence from Mogadishu;
           . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
           . access to financial resources;
                . prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                  employment or self     employment;
           . availability of remittances from abroad;
           . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
                . why his ability to fund the journey to the West no  longer
                  enables  an  appellant  to  secure  financial  support  on
                  return.


          x) Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
             explain why he would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
             opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic  boom,
             especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees
             are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been
             away.


         xi) It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms.


        xii)  The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those
             who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to
             live in the city without being subjected to an  Article  15(c)
             risk or facing a real risk of destitution. On the other  hand,
             relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan   with
             no former links to the city, no access to funds and  no  other
             form of clan, family or  social  support  is  unlikely  to  be
             realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a home  and
             some form of ongoing financial support there will  be  a  real
             risk of  having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
             accommodation within  an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
             possibility of having to live in  conditions  that  will  fall
             below acceptable humanitarian standards.

15. As indicated by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 41 and 42 of  its
    decision, the humanitarian situation in Somalia, if  anything,  appears
    to have deteriorated since MOJ.  The Human Rights Watch  "World  Report
    2020: Somalia" issued on 14 January 2020, covering 2019, indicated that
    the humanitarian crisis in the country continued with increasing, acute
    food insecurity and increased numbers  of  IDPs.   UNCHR  stated  in  a
    report  entitled  "Somalia  Humanitarian  Response  Plan;  Humanitarian
    Programme Cycle 2020", issued in January 2020, that:

         "Somalia is essentially a protection  crisis.  Armed  conflict  and
         insecurity are displacing thousands  of  people  and  human  rights
         violations are endangering civilians, forcing many  to  flee  their
         homes and exposing them to multiple risks.

         In  recent  years,  climate-related  shocks,  mainly  drought   and
         flooding, have increased in frequency and  intensity,  exacerbating
         humanitarian needs and undermining resilience at the household  and
         community levels.  In  2019,  just  months  after  we  successfully
         responded to a major drought across Somalia,  abnormal  Deyr  rains
         (October  to  December  season)   triggered   widespread   flooding
         affecting over half a million people, 370,000 of whom  were  forced
         to abandon their homes.  Before  the  floods,  300,000  people  had
         already been displaced by drought and conflict in 2019,  adding  to
         the 2.6 million internally displaced people living in  2,000  sites
         across Somalia. Collectively these shocks  left  over  six  million
         Somalis in need of humanitarian assistance and  protection  through
         December 2019 - a 36% increase compared to late 2018. Half of these
         people were in five regions: Banadir, Bay,  Lower  Shabelle,  Awdal
         and Hiraan."

    The UNHCR report goes on to  identify  Somalia  as  "one  of  the  most
    complex and protracted humanitarian crises in the world" with  "over  5
    million people in need of humanitarian assistance"  and  comments  that
    there are "an increasing number of IDPs without prospects  for  durable
    solution."

16. The degree of difficulty the appellant will  face  on  return  must  be
    assessed against that background. The  threshold  that  he  must  meet,
    however, is a very high one, as discussed in SSHD v  Said  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 442. In paragraph 15 the Court of  Appeal  set  out  the  important
    distinction  between  a   "paradigm"   Article   3   cases   concerning
    mistreatment in the country of destination which would arise  from  "an
    intentional act which constitutes  torture,  or  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment" and Article 3 medical and destitution cases:

         "Medical cases, and I would add cases where the complaint  is  that
         someone returned would be destitute on arrival, do not fall  within
         that paradigm. Laws LJ reviewed the  decisions  of  the  Strasbourg
         Court in the case of MSS, Sufi and Elmi, SHH and Tarakhel which, in
         addition to the medical exception narrowly defined in the D  and  N
         cases,  illuminate  the  limited  circumstances  in  which  it   is
         appropriate to depart from that paradigm in article 3 cases."

17. Lord Justice Burnett (as he then was) went on in paragraphs 16  and  17
    of Said to distinguish cases concerning humanitarian  conditions  which
    were the responsibility of the country of destination ("MSS cases") and
    those where the" problems on return would result from inadequate social
    provision and want of resources". In the latter cases, the "approach in
    the N case was the correct one".  That was a reference, as in paragraph
    15 of Said, to the European Court of Human Rights case of  N  v  UK  47
    EHRR 885 which set down that only  a  very  exceptional  medical  case,
    where the humanitarian grounds  against  removal  are  very  compelling
    could succeed.

18. In paragraph 18 of Said, the Court of Appeal concluded:

         "These cases demonstrate that to succeed in  resisting  removal  on
         article 3 grounds on the basis of suggested poverty or  deprivation
         on return which are not the responsibility of the receiving country
         or others in the sense described in para  282  of  Sufi  and  Elmi,
         whether or not the  feared  deprivation  is  contributed  to  by  a
         medical condition, the  person  liable  to  deportation  must  show
         circumstances which bring him within the approach of the Strasbourg
         Court in the D and N cases."

19.  This  distinction  also  underpinned  the  clarification  provided  in
    paragraphs 20 to 31 of Said on the correct interpretation  of  comments
    made in MOJ on those returning to IDP camps in Somalia,  paragraphs  31
    providing:




         "31.     I entirely accept that some of the  observations  made  in
             the course of the discussion of IDP  camps  may  be  taken  to
             suggest that if a returning Somali national can show  that  he
             is likely to end up having to  establish  himself  in  an  IDP
             camp, that would be sufficient to  engage  the  protection  of
             article 3. Yet such a stark proposition of  cause  and  effect
             would be inconsistent with the article 3 jurisprudence of  the
             Strasbourg Court and binding authority of the domestic courts.
             In my judgment the position is accurately stated in para  422.
             That  draws  a   proper   distinction   between   humanitarian
             protection and article 3 and recognises  that  the  individual
             circumstances of the person concerned must be  considered.  An
             appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person  concerned
             would face impoverished conditions of  living  on  removal  to
             Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated in Sufi  and
             Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the  N
             case. Impoverished conditions which were the direct result  of
             violent activities may be viewed differently  as  would  cases
             where the risk suggested is of direct violence itself."

20. The correct test from "the D and N cases" was applied to the  facts  of
    the applicant in Said in paragraph 19:

         "In my judgment, the circumstances of AS fall far  short  of  being
         able to satisfy that approach. The highest at which his case can be
         put is that his PTSD and depression will make it difficult for  him
         integrate back into life in Somalia and have  some  impact  on  his
         ability to work. There is no suggestion that he is  precluded  from
         working and much to support the finding that he will be able to  do
         so. It is also clear that, to the extent that it may be  necessary,
         there is every reason to suppose that  he  will  be  provided  with
         financial aid by his large and  supportive  family  in  the  United
         Kingdom, quite apart from the prospect of some assistance from  his
         clan. There is no evidence to suggest that he  will  be  unable  to
         receive the relatively commonplace medical treatment  he  currently
         enjoys if returned to Mogadishu. It is clear that this  combination
         of features is so far removed from the nature  of  exceptional  and
         compelling circumstances envisaged in the Strasbourg  cases  as  to
         make it clear that AS's deportation would not breach article  3  of
         the Convention."

21. It will be obvious from the assessment in Said that  DDA's  profile  is
    much more proximate to the "exceptional and  compelling  circumstances"
    required for there to be a  breach  of  Article  3  ECHR.  His  medical
    conditions are enduring,  serious,  potentially  life  threatening  and
    prevent him from working. He will have no meaningful financial or other
    support from the UK and  limited  assistance  from  his  minority  clan
    members. He will not be able to access the medical treatment  he  needs
    in Somalia because he cannot pay for it, even were it available in  the
    country, which it is not.

22. I was also referred  to  the  guidance  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2020] UKSC 17 on the correct approach to an  Article
    3 ECHR medical case following the decision of  the  European  Court  of
    Human Rights in Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm  AR  867.  The  Supreme
    Court said this in paragraph 22:
         "22.     Following a careful analysis of the decision in the D case
             and of its own decision in the N case, the Grand Chamber in
             the Paposhvili case expressed the view in para 182 that the
             approach hitherto adopted should be "clarified". The
             Convention is a living instrument and when, however
             appropriately, the ECtHR charts its growth, it may generate
             confusion for it to claim to be providing only clarification.
             The court proceeded as follows:


                  "183.  The Court considers that the 'other very
                  exceptional cases' within the meaning of the judgment in N
                  v The United Kingdom (para 43) which may raise an issue
                  under article 3 should be understood to refer to
                  situations involving the removal of a seriously ill person
                  in which substantial grounds have been shown for believing
                  that he or she, although not at imminent risk of dying,
                  would face a real risk, on account of the absence of
                  appropriate treatment in the receiving country or the lack
                  of access to such treatment, of being exposed to a
                  serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her
                  state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a
                  significant reduction in life expectancy. The Court points
                  out that these situations correspond to a high threshold
                  for the application of article 3 of the Convention in
                  cases concerning the removal of aliens suffering from
                  serious illness."


             This important exposition will require study in paras 27 to 31
             below; but, again, it is hard to think that it is encompassed
             by the reference in the N case to "other very exceptional
             cases" because any application of the criterion in the quoted
             passage would be likely to have led to a contrary conclusion
             in the N case itself. It is also convenient at this stage to
             address the words "although not at imminent risk of dying" in
             the first long sentence of the paragraph. As was agreed by
             counsel, the words refer to the imminent risk of death in the
             returning state. So the Grand Chamber was thereby explaining
             that, in cases of resistance to return by reference to ill-
             health, article 3 might extend to a situation other than that
             exemplified by the D case, cited in para 14 above, in which
             there was an imminent risk of death in the returning state."

23. In paragraph 34 of AM (Zimbabwe) the Supreme Court  accepted  that  the
    approach in paragraph 183 of Paposhvili went beyond mere  clarification
    of the test in N  v  UK  and  should  be  adopted.  The  Supreme  Court
    cautioned in paragraph 32, however, that the threshold remains high:

         "The threshold, set out in para 23(a) above, is for  the  applicant
         to  adduce  evidence  "capable  of  demonstrating  that  there  are
         substantial  grounds  for  believing"  that  article  3  would   be
         violated. It may make formidable intellectual demands on  decision-
         makers  who  conclude  that  the  evidence   does   not   establish
         "substantial grounds"  to  have  to  proceed  to  consider  whether
         nevertheless  it  is  "capable   of   demonstrating"   them.   But,
         irrespective of the perhaps unnecessary complexity of the test, let
         no one imagine that it represents an undemanding threshold  for  an
         applicant to cross."

24. This guidance from the higher courts on the correct approach to Article
    3 ECHR  medical  and  destitution  cases  has  to  be  applied  to  the
    particular circumstances of the appellant in this case. As before,  the
    appellant has not lived in Somalia for 23 years. He has no relatives or
    contacts there. He is from a minority  clan  and  his  clan  will  have
    little or no support to offer him. He will have no  financial  support.
    He has no prospect of securing a livelihood given his health  and  lack
    of contacts and support.  The  accepted  facts  are  that  he  will  be
    returning to a situation of destitution in Somalia, living either in an
    IDP camp or other  similarly  deprived  conditions,  described  by  the
    country expert as  "dire".  This  is  in  the  context  of   a  country
    situation of a significant and worsening humanitarian crisis.  This  is
    also a case where the  deprivation  is  contributed  to  by  a  medical
    condition for which the appellant requires life-long medical  treatment
    which he will not be able to obtain. His chronic Hepatitis B and latent
    tuberculosis places him  at  a  "much  higher  risk  of  hepatocellular
    cancer".  Ongoing  medical  treatment  is  stated  to   be   "extremely
    important" to maintain his "quality of  life  and  even  survival".  He
    cannot pay for that medical treatment as he will be destitute. Even  if
    funds  were  available,  the  medical  treatment  he  requires  is  not
    available in Somalia and would require liaison with medical  facilities
    outside of the country.

25. It is my conclusion that the appellant's  circumstances  on  return  to
    Somalia when considered in their entirety would amount to a  breach  of
    Article 3 given the degree of destitution he will  face  compounded  by
    his medical condition and medical needs which cannot be  met.  This  is
    not  because  the  extension  of  the  Article  3  medical  test   from
    Paposhvili, approved in AM Zimbabwe is necessarily sufficient  for  the
    appellant's medical condition alone to meet the Article 3 threshold  or
    solely because he will be forced to live in  an  IDP  camp  or  similar
    destitute circumstances  on  return  to  Somalia  but  because  of  the
    combination of these aspects  of  his  case  and  his  overall  profile
    assessed against the country conditions.

26. It is also my conclusion that where the appellant meets  this  elevated
    threshold, notwithstanding his inability to meet the Immigration  Rules
    on suitability grounds and his  23  year  residence  in  the  UK  being
    precarious throughout, the appellant has shown that his  removal  would
    be sufficiently disproportionate so as to amount to a breach of Article
    8 ECHR.

Decision

27. The appeal is allowed under Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR.



Signed: S Pitt                                        Date:  2 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
