
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00852/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 April 2021                      |On 21st April 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a female citizen of Iraq who was  born  in  1985.  She
    appeals to Upper Tribunal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    dated 13 November 2020. The First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  her  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 9 January 2020 which
    refused her claim for international protection.

 2. The appellant claims to fear her husband in Iraq  and  members  of  his
    family. The judge found that the appellant is not a  credible  witness.
    She rejected the appellant's claim that she fears her husband (whom she
    has remarried following a divorce). The judge found that the  appellant
    could return to Iraq without facing any real risk from her  husband  or
    his family.

 3. I find that the judge has erred in law. At [83], the judge provides her
    reasons for finding that the appellant does not fear her  husband.  She
    states that the appellant had claimed at interview that  she  'was  not
    scared of [her husband]'. I  cannot  find  anything  in  the  interview
    record which supports the  judge's  observation.  Likewise,  the  judge
    finds that the husband 'had never been physically violent' towards  the
    appellant. The finding overlooks the appellant's  clear  evidence  that
    her husband had forced her to have sex with him against her wishes. The
    judge should have considered whether that conduct constituted  violence
    towards the appellant and, if not, she should have given her reasons.

 4. Secondly, although she briefly addresses the report of  the  consultant
    forensic psychiatrist, Dr Ghosh, at [80], the judge has not  considered
    that evidence at all when reaching her findings  at  [83].  The  expert
    records the extent of the appellant's fear of her husband  and  relates
    that account to the experience of women who  'have  been  subjected  to
    prolonged abuse'. The judge was not obliged to accept  the  opinion  of
    the expert but, as her findings directly contradict that  opinion,  she
    should have given  reasons  for  rejecting  Dr  Ghosh's  evidence.  Her
    failure to do so was an error of law.

 5. As a consequence, I find that the findings  at  [83]  are  vitiated  by
    legal error. Those findings deal  with  the  core  of  the  appellant's
    account and her  claim  that  she  fears  returning  to  Iraq.  In  the
    circumstances, therefore, I set aside the decision. Given the nature of
    the error, I find that none of the findings of fact should stand. There
    will need to be a new fact-finding exercise which is  better  conducted
    in the First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal is returned for  it  to
    remake the decision.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo.

    LISTING DIRECTIONS: Manchester; Not before Judge Lang; first  available
    date; First-tier Tribunal to decide if remote or face to face;  Kurdish
    Sorani interpreter; 2 hours.


Signed                                                              Date:  9
April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

