
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/00216/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23rd May 2017                         |  On 6th June 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                              MR. JUSTICE NICOL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     PC
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R. Chapman, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The anonymity order that has previously  been  made  continues.   We
       emphasise at the outset that no report of  these  proceedings  shall
       directly or indirectly identify the appellant.


    2. The appellant appealed  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Gaskell promulgated on 18th October 2016.  For the reasons  set  out
       in the earlier decision of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Mandalia
       promulgated on 11th April 2017, he found an  error  of  law  in  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He set aside the decision of
       the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").


    3. At the conclusion of the resumed hearing  before  us,  we  announced
       that the appeal is dismissed.   We  said  that  we  would  give  the
       reasons for our decision in writing. This we now do.


    4. The error of law identified in the decision of the FtT was that  the
       Judge had  failed  to  make  a  clear  finding  as  to  whether  the
       appellant's home area is Chingozi Krall or  Harare.   A  finding  is
       necessary to properly assess the risk upon return, and if necessary,
       whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  appellant  to
       internally relocate.  Having found an error  of  law,  Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Mandalia directed that the appeal will be re-heard on
       the material that was  before  the  FtT  and  on  submissions  only,
       subject to any Rule 15(2A) application which should be made no later
       than 21 days prior to the hearing.    The appellant served  a  short
       supplementary bundle of objective evidence comprising of  40  pages.
       We have taken that evidence into account in reaching  our  decision.
       No further evidence was relied upon by the appellant.


    5. Ms Chapman submits the appellant's 'home area'  is  Chingozi  Krall.
       She submits the appellant had spent most  of  the  time  whilst  she
       lived in Zimbabwe, and prior to her arrival in the UK,  in  Chingozi
       Krall.  She was born there  in  1959,  and  lived  there  until  she
       married in 1977.  Between 1977 and 1982 the appellant had lived with
       her husband in Bulawayo, but she returned  to  Chingozi  Krall  when
       that marriage broke down in 1982.  She remained at her parents' home
       in Chingozi Krall until she remarried in 1991.  She  then  moved  to
       Harare with her husband, and she remained there for 10  years  until
       her arrival in the UK in 2001.  Ms Chapman submits Chingozi Krall is
       therefore where the appellant spent her childhood, and the formative
       years of her life.  She submits it  is  also  the  place  where  the
       appellant spent a large part of her adult life.  Ms Chapman  submits
       the appellant has no connection to Harare other  than  her  previous
       residence there.  Her husband passed away after her arrival  in  the
       UK, and the appellant's mother, sister and children are now in South
       Africa.


    6. Ms Chapman relies upon headnote [2] of the country guidance set  out
       in CM (EM Country Guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
       000591 (IAC) and submits the appellant, as a person  returning  from
       the United Kingdom after a significant absence to a  rural  area  of
       Zimbabwe, Chingozi Krall, will find it difficult  to  avoid  adverse
       attention, amounting to serious ill-treatment from ZANU-PF authority
       figures and those they control.  She  submits  it  would  be  unduly
       harsh for the appellant to relocate to Harare because of the  socio-
       economic situation there, including the catastrophic downturn in the
       economy that is described in the objective evidence relied upon.  Ms
       Chapman submits the appellant would also face difficulties in Harare
       with housing, and to access the medicines that she needs.


    7. Ms Isherwood confirmed the chronology that we have outlined  at  [5]
       above is uncontroversial.  She drew our attention to the appellant's
       evidence at paragraph [20] of her statement dated 30th August  2016.
       The appellant confirms that she met her second husband  about  eight
       years after she separated from her first husband.  They  married  on
       3rd August 1991 and had two children.  They lived  in  Harare  where
       the appellant's husband worked as a taxi driver.  Ms Isherwood  also
       drew our  attention  to  the  answers  given  by  the  appellant  to
       questions put to her during her screening interview.  The  appellant
       confirmed that her last permanent address in Zimbabwe was in Harare.
        The appellant's parents were both born in Harare, her siblings were
       born in Harare and the appellant's children of her  second  marriage
       were born in Harare.  Ms Isherwood  submits  this  demonstrates  the
       appellant's  close  and  longstanding  connection  to   Harare   and
       establishes the appellant's home area is in  fact  Harare,  and  not
       Chingozi Krall.


    8. In determining whether a person  is  entitled  to  asylum  or  other
       international protection, a person's home area must  be  established
       as a matter of  fact.   In  many  parts  of  the  developing  world,
       including Zimbabwe,  there  has  been  a  process  of  urbanisation,
       whereby people from rural areas have migrated to the cities,  for  a
       whole range of reasons including, for the purpose of  seeking  work.
       A person such as the appellant here who was born in Chingozi  Krall,
       and  lived  in  Chingozi  Krall  during  her  childhood,  and  again
       following the breakdown of her first marriage, may well look on  her
       rural place of  origin  as  her  "home  area".  The  fact  that  the
       appellant feels an attachment to Chingozi Krall, does not mean  that
       that area falls to be treated as the 'home area' for the purposes of
       determining entitlement to international protection.


    9.  Having  carefully  considered  the  evidence  before  us  and   the
       submissions made, and in particular the appellant's own evidence  of
       her most  recent  history  between  1991  and  2001,  her  place  of
       residence, and family and social connections, we have no  hesitation
       in finding that the appellant's home area is Harare.   It  is  clear
       from the appellant's own account of her parents and siblings  having
       been born in Harare that at some point in the past, the  appellant's
       forebears migrated from the countryside to  Harare.   The  appellant
       does not know the dates of birth of her parents, but her sister  was
       said to be in her 70's at the time of the screening interview in May
       2007, indicating that she was born in Harare  in  the  1940's.   The
       appellant's brother was said to be 50 years old, indicating that  he
       was born  in  Harare,  in  or  around  1957.  By  the  time  of  the
       appellant's birth in October 1959 the family were living in Chingozi
       Krall.  We find that the appellant's family therefore has historical
       connections to Harare.  More importantly however, it is  clear  that
       the appellant lived with her husband in Harare following her  second
       marriage in 1991.  The appellant's husband worked  in  Harare  as  a
       Taxi Driver and they had two children, both of  whom  were  born  in
       Harare.  The appellant had lived in Harare for the ten years between
       1991 and 2001, and  it  was  from  her  home  in  Harare,  that  the
       appellant left Zimbabwe to arrive in the UK in April 2001.


   10. Having found the appellant to be someone  who  has  for  many  years
       before leaving Zimbabwe made her home in Harare, we must assess  her
       claim to  international  protection  by  reference  to  whether  the
       appellant is at real risk of persecution in Harare.


   11. We pause at this juncture to note the relevant  findings  that  have
       been made previously.


   12. The appellant's claim for international  protection  was  previously
       considered by FtT Judge  Law  and  Mr  A.  Armitage  in  a  decision
       promulgated on 1st August 2007.  That  was  an  appeal  against  the
       respondent's decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  against  the
       appellant, following the recommendation of a Judge  at  Lewes  Crown
       Court. On 13th February 2007, the appellant had  been  convicted  of
       using a false instrument with  intent,  and  obtaining  a  pecuniary
       advantage by deception.  She had been sentenced  to  twelve  months'
       imprisonment. In response to a notice that the appellant was  liable
       to deportation, the appellant had made a claim for asylum  and  that
       claim had been refused by the respondent on 21st June 2007.  In  its
       decision promulgated on 1st August 2007, the Tribunal  made  adverse
       credibility findings against the appellant that we need not set  out
       in full here.  At paragraph  [41]  of  the  decision,  the  Tribunal
       stated:


             "We are not satisfied that the appellant has given a  truthful
             account of her and her husband's experiences in Zimbabwe.   We
             are  prepared  to  accept  that  she  and  her  husband   were
             supporters of the MDC and that she  has  obtained  an  undated
             membership card, but we note that by  her  own  admission  the
             appellant  never  went  to  any  rallies   or   demonstrations
             (paragraph 5 of her first statement). For  the  reasons  given
             above, we regard as not credible her claim  that  her  husband
             was so active for the party that he came to the  attention  of
             ZANU  PF  and  was  beaten.  We  find  that  he  was  "just  a
             supporter", as she told Mr Evans in  cross-examination.  There
             is no medical evidence to suggest that her husband's death was
             in any way caused by this alleged beating and we find that  he
             died from natural causes. We find that the most which  can  be
             said is that the appellant sympathises with the  aims  of  the
             MDC, something which  she  has  in  common  with  millions  of
             ordinary Zimbabweans, judging from election results. This is a
             profile which would not, by itself, have put her  at  risk  of
             persecution if she had remained in Zimbabwe."


   13.  The  appellant's  claim  for  international  protection  was   also
       considered by FtT Judge Pirotta in a decision  promulgated  on  25th
       August 2010.  That was an appeal against the  respondent's  decision
       of 14th June 2010  to  refuse  the  claim  for  asylum  and  make  a
       deportation order.  The respondent had undertaken  to  withdraw  her
       earlier decision to deport the appellant and to reconsider her claim
       in light of new country guidance.  FtT Judge Pirotta referred to the
       findings previously made by the Tribunal in its decision promulgated
       on 1st August 2007. She also considered the evidence given to her by
       the appellant through a Shona interpreter.  FtT Judge Pirotta noted,
       at paragraph [54] of her decision, the adverse credibility  findings
       made by the  Tribunal  previously.   She  noted  "..The  appellant's
       account was found to be inherently implausible and that at most  she
       was a sympathiser of MDC".  She went on to consider whether, on  the
       evidence before her, she could depart from those earlier findings of
       fact.  Again, we do not repeat the findings that were  made  by  FtT
       Judge Pirotta but we note that at paragraph [58]  of  her  decision,
       she states:


             "The Appellant had not advanced any  evidence  or  explanation
             which is capable of dislodging the findings  of  the  previous
             Determinations and her credibility is still in  issue.....  It
             is not credible that the Appellant would still  have  the  MDC
             card issued to her in Zimbabwe if it had been found by ZANU PF
             Youths who, for a considerable period, searched her home twice
             a week and who found and threatened her  husband.  It  is  not
             credible  that  the  Appellant  was   anything   but   a   MDC
             sympathiser.    She   did   not   attend   any   rallies    or
             demonstrations, the previous findings on her earlier  evidence
             were that her husband did not attend any  either.  It  is  not
             credible that her husband  was  as  active  as  she  asserted,
             because of these inconsistencies...."


   14. Most recently, FtT Judge Gaskell considered the  appellant's  appeal
       against a decision of the respondent dated  21st  December  2015  to
       deport the appellant and to refuse a Humanitarian  Protection  claim
       and to refuse a  Human  Rights  claim.   The  Judge  considered  the
       submission made at that  hearing,  and  repeated  before  us  by  Ms
       Chapman that the objective evidence reports show that there has been
       a catastrophic downturn in  the  Zimbabwean  economy  since  CM  was
       decided.  The Judge considered the submission that it is  reasonably
       likely that the appellant will not be able to find work  to  support
       herself.  The Judge found, at [19]:


             "I am in no doubt that the appellant faces  difficulties  upon
             her return to Zimbabwe. But, in my judgement, it is  safe  for
             her to return to Harare. (Or alternatively to  internally  re-
             locate there). She no doubt faces poverty and  a  standard  of
             living below that which is available to her even as an  asylum
             seeker in the UK; she may also suffer discrimination as a lone
             woman who is HIV-positive. But, in my judgement, she does  not
             face persecution in Harare; and, although  she  faces  poverty
             and discrimination, in my judgement, the Article  3  threshold
             is not crossed...."


   15. It is against that background that we now turn to  consider  whether
       the appellant is at real risk of persecution in Harare.   We  remind
       ourselves of  the  country  guidance  set  out  in  CM  (EM  country
       guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059  (IAC).   Having
       found that the appellant's  home  area  is  Harare,  we  reject  the
       submission made by Ms Chapman that we should assess  the  risk  upon
       return by reference  to  what  is  said  at  paragraph  [2]  of  the
       headnote. Headnote [2] is concerned with a  person  without  ZANU-PF
       connections, returning from the UK after a significant absence to  a
       rural area of Zimbabwe.  The appellant would in fact be returning to
       her home area of Harare.


   16. In CM, the Tribunal found, having considered a  wealth  of  evidence
       that as a general matter, there is  significantly  less  politically
       motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with   the   situation
       considered by the AIT in RN.   In particular, the evidence does  not
       show that, as a general matter, the return of a failed asylum seeker
       from the United Kingdom, having no significant  MDC  profile,  would
       result in that person facing a real risk of  having  to  demonstrate
       loyalty to the ZANU-PF. At headnotes [5] and [7] of the decision  in
       CM, the Tribunal states:


             "(5) A returnee to Harare will in general face no  significant
             difficulties, if going  to  a  low-density  or  medium-density
             area. Whilst  the  socio-economic  situation  in  high-density
             areas is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PT
             connections  will  not   face   significant   problems   there
             (including  a  "loyalty  test"),  unless  he  or  she  has   a
             significant MDC profile, which  might  cause  him  or  her  to
             feature on a list of those targeted for harassment,  or  would
             otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the
             adverse attention of ZANUPF, or would be reasonably likely  to
             engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to
             the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


             (7)  The issue of what is a person's home for the purposes  of
             internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of  fact  and
             is not necessarily to be determined by reference to the  place
             a person from Zimbabwe regards as his or her  rural  homeland.
             As a general matter, it is unlikely that a person with a well-
             founded fear of persecution in a major urban  centre  such  as
             Harare will have a viable internal relocation alternative to a
             rural  area  in   the   Eastern   provinces.   Relocation   to
             Matabeleland  (including   Bulawayo)   may   be   negated   by
             discrimination, where the returnee is Shona. "


   17. The appellant has been found to be a person  having  no  significant
       MDC profile.  In fact,  the  Tribunal  has  found  on  two  previous
       occasions that the most that can  be  said  is  that  the  appellant
       sympathises with the aims of the MDC.  The Tribunal in CM  confirmed
       that a returnee to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
       difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density  area.  It
       noted that whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas
       is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF connections
       will not face significant problems there, unless he  or  she  has  a
       significant MDC  profile.   The  appellant  does  not  have  such  a
       profile.


   18.  We have no reason to depart from the findings of FtT Judge  Gaskell
       that we have set out at paragraph [14]  above.   We  find  that  the
       appellant would not be exposed to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment
       contrary to Article 3on return to Harare.


   19. It follows that the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
       decision of 21st December 2015  to  deport  the  appellant,  and  to
       refuse her protection and human rights' claims is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date 6/6/2017


Mr. Justice Nicol
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


FEE AWARD


We have dismissed the appeal and there can therefore be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 6/6/2017

Mr. Justice Nicol
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
