
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/00608/2018
                                                               PA/00612/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 July 2019                            |On 14 August 2019               |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                  David [D]
                                  Sarah [D]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P Harvey instructed by Berlow Rahman
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are nationals of Kenya.  They appealed  to  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of
    respectively 8 September 2017 and 20 December 2017 refusing asylum  and
    human rights claims.

2.   As it transpires I can deal fairly shortly with the issues in the  case
    since there was agreement that the judge had erred in law.

3.   The essence of the appellants' claims is  that  they  are  at  risk  on
    return to Kenya on account of their perceived political  and  religious
    beliefs as the children of [GD] who is  as  described  in  the  judge's
    decision at paragraph 3 a high profile self-proclaimed "archbishop" who
    is currently awaiting trial in Kenya on charges of kidnapping babies.

4.   The judge dismissed the appeal, finding that the  appellants  were  not
    at real risk of serious harm on return to  Kenya  and  also  concluding
    that there were no compelling reasons for leave to be  granted  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

5.   I deal with that final point first.  It is clear from all the  decision
    letters in the case of each appellant that they were granted 30 months'
    leave  on  the  basis  that  a  decision  to  remove  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences to them and their family.   This  does
    not appear to have come to the  judge's  attention  since  he  said  at
    paragraph 33 that there were no compelling  reasons  for  leave  to  be
    granted outside the Immigration Rules.

6.   Mrs Aboni  was  able  to  inform  me  that  they  had  now  been  given
    documentation in respect of  those  periods  of  leave.   There  is  no
    question clearly of the Secretary of State seeking to renege from  what
    had been stated in the decision letters.  Accordingly, it is clear that
    the appellants are entitled to and indeed have the 30 months' period of
    leave that they were granted in the decision  letters,  in  each  case.
    There is no materiality in my view to the judge's error in that  regard
    since there is no question of that leave being sought to be taken  away
    from them.

7.   As regards the protection issues, it was common ground that  the  judge
    had erred with regard to his handling of several  pieces  of  evidence.
    The first of these is the failure to refer at all to  the  evidence  of
    the appellants' sister Rebecca who referred to ill-treatment  of  their
    father in a Kenyan prison  both  in  terms  of  the  conditions  he  is
    experiencing and the infliction of harm on him by the guards.  Evidence
    to similar effect was provided  in  a  statement  by  another  brother,
    Daniel.  Though his evidence is referred to in the judgment it does not
    cover that particular salient point.

8.   The third piece of evidence not properly considered is  that  of  Swaka
    Advocates.  The judge doubted the authenticity of  this  evidence.   It
    had been said to be attached to an email but the judge  said  that  the
    email which was attached had not been produced.  In fact Mr Harvey  was
    able to show me that indeed that  email  was  provided,  in  the  third
    inventory of productions.  The judge therefore  erred  in  that  regard
    also, and that is of materiality given the reference there also to  the
    ill-treatment/Article 3 issues concerning the appellants'  father.   In
    addition, it was argued, and I see some force to this in addition, that
    in his paragraph 22 the judge failed fully and accurately  to  set  out
    the submissions made on behalf of the appellants.  The essential  point
    being made was that although their brother [AO] had been able to go  to
    Kenya and visit their father's advocate, he did so on the basis of  the
    protection of a British passport and bearing a different surname.

9.   It is common ground that all these points are material to the issue  of
    risk on  return  to  the  appellants  on  account  of  their  perceived
    association with  and  identity  of  views  with  their  father.   This
    evidence is of clear  materiality  and  was  not  properly  if  at  all
    addressed by the judge.   Accordingly,  the  appeal  will  have  to  be
    reheard.  I agree with Mr  Harvey  that  unfortunately  the  degree  of
    rehearing that is necessary in this case is such that the  matter  will
    need to be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.

10.  I direct that the matter be reheard in Glasgow.  It appears that  there
    are funding difficulties resulting from  the  fact  that  the  Scottish
    Legal Aid Board will not fund proceedings in England.  That has  caused
    problems for the appellants in connection  with  the  hearing  here  in
    Birmingham.  Accordingly, it is important that the matter  when  it  is
    relisted is relisted for hearing in Glasgow.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 7 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




