
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00418/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 11 November 2016                  |On 21 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     D I
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Martin, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Green, dismissing his appeal against refusal of asylum.

 2. There is one ground.  Mr Martin accepted its formulation  as  specified
    by FtT Judge Brunnen in the grant of  permission,  dated  20  September
    2016:

         "... The judge arguably erred in  his  approach  to  the  issue  of
         internal relocation... necessary because the  appellant  originates
         from an area accepted to be  unsafe  for  purposes  of  article  15
         (c).... The judge failed properly to apply the finding in  AA  that
         the respondent will return to the IKR only those who originate from
         there or whose identity has been pre- cleared. The judge  proceeded
         on the basis that the respondent proposed to return  the  appellant
         to the IKR via Erbil... the respondent proposed that  course  based
         on her mistaken belief Kirkuk, where the appellant  originates,  is
         in the IKR. Although this mistake was brought to his attention, the
         judge nevertheless proceeded on the basis of return to Erbil. It is
         arguable that this was an error of law."

 3. The guidance set out in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544
    (IAC) is as follows.

         Note: References to Iraq  herein  are  to  the  territory  of  Iraq
         excluding  the  autonomous  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  ("IKR")  unless
         otherwise stated.

         A.  INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE   15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

         1.   There is at present a state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
         certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
         militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group  known  as  ISIL.
         The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called  "contested
         areas", comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk,  (aka
         Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general
         matter, there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
         civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
         there, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to serious harm  within  the  scope  of  Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

         2.   The degree of armed conflict in certain parts of the  "Baghdad
         Belts" (the urban environs around Baghdad  City)  is  also  of  the
         intensity described in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving rise to  a
         generalised Article 15(c) risk. The  parts  of  the  Baghdad  Belts
         concerned  are  those  forming  the  border  between  the   Baghdad
         Governorate and the contested areas described in paragraph 1.

         3.   The  degree  of  armed  conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
         (including  Baghdad  City)  is  not  such  as  to  give   rise   to
         indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  such   serious   harm   to
         civilians, irrespective of their individual characteristics, so  as
         to engage Article 15(c).

         4.   In accordance with the principles  set  out  in  Elgafaji  (C-
         465/07) and QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2009] EWCA Civ 620, decision-makers in Iraqi cases  should  assess
         the individual characteristics of the person claiming  humanitarian
         protection, in order to ascertain whether those characteristics are
         such as to put that person at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

         B.  DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)

         5.   Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.

         6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.

         7.   In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
         and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
         Civ 1276, an  international  protection  claim  made  by  P  cannot
         succeed by reference to any alleged risk of harm  arising  from  an
         absence of Iraqi  identification  documentation,  if  the  Tribunal
         finds that P's return is not  currently  feasible,  given  what  is
         known about the state of P's documentation.




         C. POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE

         8.   It will only be where  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the
         return of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged  risk  of
         harm arising from an absence of Iraqi identification  documentation
         will require judicial determination.

         9.   Having a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID) is one  of  the
         ways in which it is possible for an Iraqi national  in  the  United
         Kingdom to obtain a  passport  or  a  laissez  passer.   Where  the
         Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means of a  passport  or
         laissez passer, she will be expected to demonstrate to the Tribunal
         what,  if  any,  identification   documentation   led   the   Iraqi
         authorities to issue P with the passport or laissez passer  (or  to
         signal their intention to do so).

         10.  Where P is returned to Iraq on a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport or other  current
         form of Iraqi identification document.

         11.  Where P's return to Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
         feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has  a
         CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after  arrival
         in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to
         access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;  employment;
         education; housing; and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no
         family or other members likely to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
         support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
         amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P
         by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's  return  have
         been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still  have  no
         CSID.

         12.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.

         13.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala.  The evidence does not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.

         D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN  THE  IRAQI  KURDISH
         REGION)

         14.  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area  to  relocate  to  Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,  however,
         likely to be relevant:

             (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);

             (b) whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);

             (c) whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;

             (d)  whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);

             (e) whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;

             (f) whether P is from a minority community;

             (g) whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.

         16.  There is not a real risk of an  ordinary  civilian  travelling
         from  Baghdad  airport  to  the  southern  governorates,  suffering
         serious harm en route to such governorates  so  as  engage  Article
         15(c).

         E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION

         17.  The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.

         18.  The IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

         19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate  from  the  IKR  can  obtain
         entry for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission
         for a further 10 days. If K finds  employment,  K  can  remain  for
         longer, although K will need to register with the  authorities  and
         provide details of the employer. There is no evidence that the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.

         20.  Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected
         to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
         to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
         assessment of (a)the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR
         (such as to Irbil  by  air);  (b)the  likelihood  of  K's  securing
         employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
         family and friends in the IKR.

         21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home
         area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

         F. EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS

         22.  This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq

 4. Mr Martin said that the judge concluded it  would  be  safest  for  the
    appellant to be returned via Erbil, which conflicted with  AA,  a  case
    which remained sound as country guidance. The error  stemmed  from  the
    respondent's mistake at paragraph 37 of the refusal letter, which  said
    that Kirkuk is part of the IKR, and went on to say that  the  appellant
    could travel, avoiding any contested area. Kirkuk is not  in  the  IKR,
    and is a contested area. The appellant could not be removed  there.  He
    would presumably be returned to Baghdad, for onward travel.  If  return
    was feasible at all, as held by the first-tier tribunal, the appellant,
    being undocumented, could not be expected to enter the IKR,  and  would
    not have pre-clearance. He would not be  in  a  position  to  establish
    himself there. He could not obtain employment,  without  documentation.
    If not returnable to the IKR, then the appellant would be  returned  to
    Baghdad.  It should not be found that he might have the option of going
    to southern or central Iraq. His statement that he speaks no Arabic had
    not been challenged. He is a member of the Kurdish ethnic minority  and
    the Sunni religious minority. That would inhibit  his  relocation.  The
    decision should be set aside and the appeal should be  allowed  on  the
    basis of humanitarian protection or of article 3 of the ECHR.

 5. A rule 24 response by the respondent states that irrespective of  error
    in the respondent's suggestion that the appellant might be returned via
    Erbil, the judge at paragraph 15 correctly applied AA; "as he does  not
    originate from the IKR, he will be able to gain entry for 10 days as  a
    visitor and then renew his entry permission" and "if he was returned to
    Baghdad, his onward journey would have to be by air to Erbil".

 6. Mrs O'Brien relied upon that  response,  and  submitted  that  although
    there was an unfortunate error in the refusal  letter,  any  consequent
    slip by the judge was immaterial. The  judge  was  well  aware  of  the
    likely route of return, and applied AA, headnotes 14 and 15, correctly.
    The appellant had not been found to be a reliable witness. He  did  not
    fall into any of the risk categories suggested  in  AA.  There  was  no
    reason to think that he could not relocate in Baghdad, or in the IKR if
    chose. There was nothing in the  AA  findings  which  entitles  him  to
    protection.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. The refusal letter said at paragraph 37,  "You  originate  from  Kirkuk
    which is part of the IKR.  Following [AA] ... you can travel by air  to
    Erbil ... avoiding any contested area ... "

 9. The judge said at paragraph 15, "The respondent does not appear  to  be
    proposing to send the appellant to Baghdad  which  would  then  require
    further onward travel.  He would not be able to travel safely  by  land
    from Baghdad ... to the IKR ... his onward journey would have to be  by
    air to Erbil.  The safest option would be ... to travel to Erbil direct
    without first having entered via Baghdad ..."

10. Any slip by the Judge may have been  only  typographical.   He  perhaps
    meant to say, in light of  corrected  information  before  him  at  the
    hearing, "The respondent does now appear to be proposing to return  the
    appellant to Baghdad ....", which would fit better with the rest of the
    sentence and paragraph.

11. At  highest,  the  judge  erred  on  a  factual  point,  repeating  the
    respondent's error that direct travel to Erbil was feasible,  based  on
    the misconception of origins in the IKR.

12. There  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  appellant  would  qualify  for
    protection, based on return  to  Baghdad.   He  might  relocate  there;
    travel onwards by air to Erbil to relocate; or  relocate  elsewhere  in
    Iraq.

13. I have been unable to find in the judge's conclusions (other than those
    relating to direct return to Erbil), in the guidance in AA, and in  the
    submissions for the appellant, which taken together might  entitle  the
    appellant, as an ordinary Sunni  Kurd  from  Kirkuk,  to  any  form  of
    international protection.

14. I find in the submissions essentially no more than an argument  against
    internal relocation of a nature which found no favour with  the  UT  in
    AA.

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

16. An anonymity direction was made in the FtT.  There does not  appear  to
    be any particular need for one, but as the matter was not addressed  in
    the UT, I have maintained anonymity in this determination.

         [pic]

         18 November 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




