
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/00883/2017

                                                  PA/00913/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision Promulgated        |
|On 23 May 2017                        |         On 31 May 2017              |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     ZFT
                                     MTR
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr A Bandegani, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the appellants' linked appeals against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Farmer  promulgated  1.3.17,  dismissing  on  all
    grounds their appeals against the decisions of the Secretary of  State,
    dated 12.1.17, to refuse their protection claims.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 27.2.17.

 3. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    11.4.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 23.5.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. I found such error of law in the making of the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal such that the decision of  Judge  Farmer  should  be  set
    aside. I reserved my reasons, which I now summarise.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Kelly specifically  refused  to
    grant permission in respect of several of the grounds pleaded. However,
    he found it arguable that the  Tribunal  (a)  misinterpreted  both  the
    narrative of the second appellant and the findings in  respect  thereof
    contained within the report of Dr Mason, as  set  out  at  [3]  of  the
    grounds; (b) failed to have regard to material evidence, as set out  at
    [13] and [14] of the grounds; and (c) made adverse credibility findings
    that were based upon an erroneous chronology of events, as set  out  at
    [15] of the grounds.

 7. Whilst the judge's statement at [27] of  the  decision  that  Dr  Mason
    found the second appellant's  injuries  to  be  consistent  with  being
    attacked by sticks and bottles may have been  inaccurate,  it  was  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal, as the  judge  accepted  it  was
    capable of supporting the second appellant's account. However,  it  was
    the inconsistencies between the hospital records of the scars and those
    noted by Dr Mason that led the judge to conclude  that  they  were  not
    caused in the manner alleged, and at [30] to place  no  weight  on  the
    hospital notes. In the circumstances there is no merit in  this  ground
    of appeal.

 8. Neither do I find a material error of law in the judge's assessment  of
    the interest that others in Bangladesh might have in the appellants  on
    return, as pleaded at [13] and [14] of the grounds. The judge  assessed
    the evidence at [33]  of  the  decision  and  concluded  there  was  no
    (independent) evidence that the Home Minister, or  anyone  of  rank  or
    influence, had any interest in them or their marriage. The points  made
    at [13] and [14] of the grounds are no more than  a  disagreement  with
    the findings of the Tribunal.

 9. However, despite an otherwise careful and detailed  assessment  of  the
    evidence, Judge Farmer  made  a  material  error  in  relation  to  the
    chronology. Setting out  the  immigration  history  at  [5]  the  judge
    suggested that the asylum claim was made on the same date, 18.7.16, the
    appellants private life claims were refused. At [38] the judge took  as
    an adverse credibility point that the appellants only made their asylum
    claim after they failed in their private life claims, adding,  "I  find
    that had they a genuine fear for their life  they  would  have  made  a
    claim for asylum on arrival in the UK." Part of this latter point,  the
    failure to claim asylum on arrival in the UK, is certainly relevant  to
    credibility. However, the judge was wrong to suggest that the claim was
    only made after the private  life  claim  was  refused.  In  fact,  the
    private life claim was refused  by  letter  dated  8.7.16,  whilst  the
    appointment for an asylum screening interview was made on  6.7.16.  The
    screening interview of the second appellant took place on  15.7.16  and
    that of the first appellant on 18.7.16.

10. It follows that part of the credibility assessment was  founded  on  an
    erroneous assessment of the  chronology.  This  undermines  the  entire
    credibility assessment, as it is not  possible  to  separate  out  this
    issue from the overall credibility assessment.

11. Mr Nath told me that he could not counter this  ground  of  appeal  and
    thus did not resist the appeal.

12. It follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was flawed  for
    material error of law and cannot stand.

Remittal

13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.

14. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Consequential Directions

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross;

17. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

18. The ELH is 3 hours;

19. A Bengali interpreter will be required;

20. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Farmer;

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order. However, given the circumstances, I make  an
anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

