
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00110/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd September 2019                |On 12th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   mr R S
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Islam (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boylan-Kemp MBE, promulgated on 2nd May 2019, following a hearing
    at Birmingham on 11th March 2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iran, and was born on 1st January
    1987.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  7th
    December 2018, refusing his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is  that  he  has  been  smuggling
    illegal goods, including alcohol,  with  his  father  in  2010  on  the
    Iraq/Iran border, and continued to do so with a man known  as  "Hallo".
    He also transported political material relating to the KDP for Hallo on
    two occasions.  He  managed  to  do  this  successfully  on  the  first
    occasion but failed on the second  occasion  as  he  was  alerted  that
    Etilaat were looking for him and he was shot at by men in two vehicles,
    but he managed to escape to Iraq.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard  to  the  evidence  before  him,  which  consisted
    photographs and videos of the Appellant involved in the work he claimed
    to undertake (paragraph 17).  The judge held that  they  did  show  the
    Appellant  taking  part   in   illegal   activities   (paragraph   18).
    Nevertheless, the judge took the view that  limited  weight  should  be
    accorded to this evidence.  In the end,  even  though  there  was  this
    evidence, the judge  held  that  the  main  question  was  whether  the
    authorities were aware of the Appellant's illegal activities,  and  was
    not persuaded that this was so (see paragraphs 21 to 22).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  had   assessed
    credibility in a rather convoluted manner when  holding  (at  paragraph
    20) that,

         "I also find that the identified apparent  inconsistencies  in  the
         Appellant's claim that he had transported some  political  material
         for Hallo are also  insufficient  to  significantly  undermine  his
         claim on this matter per se, but  that  in  light  of  the  adverse
         credibility findings and issues identified with the  other  aspects
         of his account I am not satisfied to the lower standard of proof as
         to the credibility of this aspect of his claim  either"  (paragraph
         20).

 7. On 4th July 2019 permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it
    was arguably irrational for the judge in  sequence  to  find  that  the
    apparent inconsistencies did not undermine the Appellant's claim  in  a
    particular respect only to find for other reasons that  the  claim  was
    undermined.   Either  the  apparent  inconsistencies   undermined   the
    Appellant's claim that he had transported political  material  or  they
    did not.

 8. On 16th July 2019 a Rule 24 response  was  entered  by  the  Respondent
    where it was stated that permission should only be granted on the basis
    that the judge who decided the appeal gave  insufficient  weight  to  a
    particular aspect of the case.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 3rd September 2019 Mr Islam,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted  that  there  were  three  essential
    errors.  First, the judge had found the  photographic  evidence  to  be
    credible.  This being so, it did not make sense for the  judge  to  say
    that limited weight should be attached to it because of the  manner  in
    which it had been acquired.  Second, that the reference to  "identified
    apparent inconsistencies in the Appellant's claim"  being  such  as  to
    insufficiently undermine his claim, with the  added  statement  by  the
    judge  that,  nevertheless,  other  aspects  of  the  account  was  not
    credible, did not make sense (at paragraph 20).  Third, the  judge  had
    concluded that if the Appellant had been politically engaged by posting
    materials on his Facebook account, "he could delete or  deactivate  his
    social media account if  he  so  wished  and  that  in  any  event  the
    authorities would be unlikely to question him upon his return  as  they
    hold no interest in him" (paragraph 27).

10. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that there  was  no  contradiction  in
    what the judge had  stated  at  paragraph  20,  because  in  explaining
    herself in the manner that she had, what the judge  was  doing  was  to
    come to a view after looking at each aspect of  the  claim  beforehand.
    This  was  a  conclusion  in  the  round.   Secondly,  as  far  as  the
    photographs were concerned,  the  presence  of  the  Appellant  on  the
    Iraq/Iran border  in  the  mountains,  against  the  backdrop  of  some
    donkeys, did not necessarily mean that he  was  transporting  political
    materials.  Thirdly, as far as the Facebook account was concerned,  the
    judge's view was  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  genuine  political
    activist, and that "he has posted this information purely in an  effort
    to bolster his asylum claim as the entries provided in the evidence are
    all recent and postdate his asylum claim" (paragraph 26).

11. In reply, Mr Islam submitted that it was  wrong  on  the  basis  of  HJ
    (Iran) for the judge to require  somebody  to  give  up  his  political
    activities by deleting or deactivating their social media account.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

13. First, whilst I accept that the  judge  has  expressed  herself  rather
    inelegantly at paragraph 20, I do not consider this to  be  a  material
    error  of  law.   I  come  to  this  conclusion   notwithstanding   the
    justifiable doubts that Mr Islam has raised in relation  to  the  judge
    describing as "identified apparent inconsistencies" in  the  manner  in
    which the photographs were produced.  These justified doubts arise  for
    two  reasons.   First,  the  judge  produced  photographs  which   were
    challenged by the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  of  his  mounting
    activities.  The judge took the view that "they do show  the  Appellant
    taking part in what could  be,  but  also  what  may  not  be,  illegal
    activities in Iran.  I find the fact that they have no time or date  or
    place of reference to them to limit the weight that can be placed  upon
    them" (paragraph 18).  However, the judge did then also go  on  to  say
    (at paragraph 19) that, "I accept that the photographs may  depict  the
    Appellant engaging in illegal behaviours in Iran ..."  There is a clear
    ambiguity in the assessment of this photographic evidence.   It  cannot
    be undermined by the manner in which it was  acquired  because  if  the
    judge accepts that "they do show the Appellant  taking  part"  in  what
    could be illegal activities, then that is the finding  that  the  judge
    should make.  However, having said that, the judge was entitled to come
    to the view that "limited weight can be placed upon  them  due  to  the
    lack of time and place references ..." (paragraph 19).

14. Second, notwithstanding the ambiguities referred to above in the manner
    of the judge's assessment, the judge was  not  wrong  in  refusing  the
    appeal on the basis that, even allowing for the fact that the Appellant
    may well have been a smuggler involved in transporting  some  political
    material on two occasions, this "does not  automatically  equate  to  a
    risk upon his return to Iran as it will depend on whether  or  not  the
    authorities are aware or could become aware of his actions"  (paragraph
    21).  In this respect, the judge was not satisfied that the authorities
    were aware of his actions.  Nor,  was  the  judge  satisfied  that  the
    authorities could be aware.  It is in this regard, that the judge  also
    rejected as plausible the Appellant's political activities, taking  the
    view that "this information is purely  in  an  effort  to  bolster  his
    asylum claim" (paragraph 26).  All in all,  therefore,  although  there
    are errors in the determination in the  manner  that  the  language  is
    expressed, they do not amount to a material error of law, such that the
    determination stands to be set aside.  I do not set  the  determination
    aside.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
    an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

16. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019
