
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00062/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 May 2019                         |On 24 May 2019                      |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                   M K z q
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms E Fitzsimmons, Counsel.
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Iraq  who  made  an  application  for
    international protection. It was  refused  by  the  Respondent  and  he
    appealed. Following a hearing, and in  a  decision  promulgated  on  20
    March 2019, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  I.  Ross  dismissed  his
    appeal on all grounds.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. It was granted on  18  April
    2019 by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison,  and  her
    reasons for so doing were: -

         "1. The Appellant seeks permission in  time  to  appeal  against  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge I. Ross) promulgated  on
         20 March 2019, whereby it dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against
         the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  his  application  for
         protection.

         2. It is arguable that the Judge has  misdirected  himself  (a)  by
         finding that photographs in the Appellant's telephone were produced
         for the purpose of the appeal when it  was  upon  the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer's request during cross-examination that  he  was
         asked whether he had any pictures on  his  phone  of  him  with  Mr
         Chohan that he produced them allowing the HOPO  to  scroll  through
         them and with the Judge's permission agreed that they  be  admitted
         into evidence without asking additional questions  with  regard  to
         for example when the particular photograph of him in fellatio  with
         another man was taken to prove his sexuality;  (b)  by  failing  in
         terms of section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
         Claimants etc.) Act 2004 to give any recognition to the  fact  that
         notwithstanding the Appellant did not make a claim in either France
         or Spain he claimed asylum two days after  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom; (c) by dismissing the evidence of the letter of Mr  Chohan
         by stating that the evidence had not been tested  and  it  was  not
         credible that he was too busy to attend court without providing any
         further reasons as to why the contents of  the  document  attracted
         little weight; (d) although the Judge has set out  the  burden  and
         the standard of proof applying to human rights issues at  paragraph
         14 of his Decision & Reasons it is  arguable  that  the  Judge  has
         misdirected himself in relation to not addressing  the  Appellant's
         facts and circumstances under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
         Rules before going on  to  consider  his  facts  and  circumstances
         outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8 of ECHR  and  failing
         to apply  section  117  B  under  Part  5  A  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At today's hearing Counsel sought  to  amend  the  Appellant's  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal. There was no objection  to  this  course.
    The further ground was in relation to  the  failure  of  the  Judge  to
    consider expert evidence that was within the Appellant's  bundle.  That
    evidence is a country expert report prepared by Doctor Allen George, an
    academic with expertise on Middle Eastern countries. Mr Walker not only
    conceded that the grounds should be amended but also that in failing to
    take into account this expert evidence the Judge had materially  erred.
    He likewise conceded that the Judge materially erred  for  the  reasons
    set out in the balance of the grounds.

 5. In addition to the amended grounds, Ms Fitzsimmons also put before me a
    witness statement of Michael West of Counsel dated 10 May  2019.  Again
    there was no objection to my considering this  document.  Mr  West  was
    Counsel at the First-Tier Tribunal hearing.  He  sets  out  within  his
    witness statement the circumstances in which, during cross-examination,
    photographs were considered via the Appellant's  mobile  telephone.  He
    records that it was the Home Office Presenting  Officer  who  asked  to
    scroll through the photographs which included one of the  Appellant  in
    an "explicit sexual act" with another man, as referred to in  paragraph
    23 of Judge Ross's decision.

 6. Mr Walker produced, and handed up, a note recorded by the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer at the First-Tier  hearing  which  corroborates  the
    witness statement of Mr Michael West.

 7. I share the analysis of both representatives before me today. The Judge
    has materially erred for all the  reasons  set  out  not  only  in  the
    original grounds seeking permission to appeal,  as  identified  in  the
    above-mentioned grant, but also for the reasons set out in the  amended
    grounds for appeal. Both parties urged me to remit this  appeal  to  be
    heard de novo on the basis that none of  the  findings  can  stand  and
    further fact finding will accordingly be required. I find  this  to  be
    the appropriate way forward.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge I Ross.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                    Date: 23 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



