
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00285/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

      1. The appellant appeals with the permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mill
         dismissing his appeal against a decision of the  respondent,  dated
         20 December 2018, refusing his protection claim.

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt. He claims to have  left  Egypt
         on 17 May 2015, aged 14, and to have arrived in the United  Kingdom
         on 19 July 2017, aged 16, after spending time in Italy, Germany and
         Belgium. He entered the United Kingdom clandestinely  and  made  an
         appointment at the Asylum Screening  Unit  on  7  August  2017.  He
         claimed that his father was a member of the Muslim Brotherhood  and
         that he was killed during a demonstration  in  2012.  He  said  his
         brother, Saleh, had escaped from Egypt and  fled  to  Turkey  after
         being conscripted and  ill-treated.  The  appellant  said  he  left
         because he was to be forced to undergo military service as well.

      3. The respondent considered  that  the  appellant's  account  of  his
         father's membership of the Muslim Brotherhood and  his  death  were
         "unsubstantiated" and, ultimately, rejected  them.  The  respondent
         considered the background evidence of military service in Egypt and
         noted there were limited reports of the abuse  of  conscripts.  The
         appellant's account of his brother's  conscription  and  abuse  was
         considered "unsubstantiated"  and  also  rejected.  The  respondent
         noted that Egyptian men are required to register for the draft  and
         to be available for service between the ages  of  18  and  30.  The
         chances of being called up were about 1 in 7. It was  accepted  the
         appellant could be called up for military service. However, it  was
         not accepted the appellant would be at a real risk of ill-treatment
         if he were called up.

      4. Judge Mill heard the appeal on 11 February 2019  at  Hatton  Cross,
         when the appellant was three months short of his 18th birthday. The
         appellant was represented by a solicitor  and  gave  evidence.  The
         judge made a finding that it was not plausible that  the  appellant
         was called up for military service, as he claimed, at  the  age  of
         14.  There  was  no  objective  evidence  that  this  happens  (see
         paragraph  [27]).  The  judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  the
         appellant was sought by the authorities  because  of  his  father's
         political activities. He concluded that it was plausible  that  the
         appellant's father had been a member of the Muslim Brotherhood  but
         he rejected the claim that the  appellant  or  any  member  of  his
         family had faced problems as  a  result  (see  [38]).  Finally,  he
         considered whether the appellant might be at risk if he were called
         up and found he was not. In fact, he said he regarded the appellant
         as an "economic migrant".

      5. Permission to appeal was refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
         granted on renewal by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer.

      6. The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response.

      7. The  appellant  attended  the  hearing  unrepresented.  His  former
         solicitors have come off record and the appellant confirmed  he  no
         longer has legal representatives. He was accompanied to the hearing
         by a support worker and a social worker. He is now 18 years of age.

      8. Ms Pal argued that there are no material  errors  in  Judge  Mill's
         decision.

      9.  The  appellant  is  not  legally  qualified  and  could  not  make
         submissions  on  whether  the  decision  contains  errors  of  law.
         However, he was keen to impress on me that his former solicitor had
         misunderstood him and he had never claimed that he had been  called
         up. He had been talking about his brother. He  said  his  solicitor
         had used a Sudanese interpreter and they had  not  understood  each
         other. He did not remember so much about  the  interpreter  at  his
         Home Office interview, although he  said  they  spoke  a  different
         dialect.

     10. Having carefully considered the grounds  and  submissions,  I  find
         there is no material error of law  in  Judge  Mill's  decision.  My
         reasons are as follows.

     11. Ground  1  argues  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
         appellant's age when making his credibility findings  and  had,  in
         effect, done no more than pay lip service to the Joint Presidential
         Guidance Note No 2 of 2010. I reject that.

     12. The judge stated  the  appellant's  date  of  birth  in  the  first
         paragraph of his decision. He referred to the fact the appellant is
         a minor and that he had applied the Guidance Note at  [7].  He  was
         plainly conscious of  the  appellant's  age  because  he  expressly
         considered the plausibility of  a  14-year  old  being  called  up.
         Beginning at [20], the judge set out the Home Office's  policy  for
         assessing claims by minors and he again reminded himself  that  the
         appellant is a minor at  [22].  When  referring  to  the  fact  the
         appellant's account was "very skeletal indeed", the judge expressly
         stated he took into account the appellant's age.

     13. There is no merit at  all  in  Ground  1.  The  judge  was  plainly
         conscious of the appellant's age  both  at  the  time  the  claimed
         events took place and at the date of the hearing.

     14. Although not raised in the grounds, one part of the decision  might
         be open to some criticism as "perfunctory" to the extent the  judge
         relied on section 8  at  [40],  even  though  he  referred  to  the
         appellant's age, in the light of the decision in KA (Afghanistan) v
         SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 914. However, I do not think this was  capable
         of making a difference to the outcome. The judge had already  given
         numerous cogent reasons for making an adverse  credibility  finding
         and the section 8 matter was merely added on at the end of the list
         of reasons.

     15. Ground 6 might link to this. It argues the judge  speculated  about
         why the appellant did not  apply  for  asylum  in  Germany  without
         finding out about the appellant's knowledge of the  possibility  of
         claiming asylum there. I do not find this challenge  is  made  out.
         The judge noted the appellant was in Germany for an extended period
         and also that he had contact  with  the  authorities  there.  As  a
         minor, it can safely be assumed that  the  authorities  would  have
         given him information about his options.

     16. Ground 2 argues the judge erred by failing  to  apply  the  correct
         test in Sepet [2003] UKHL 15. I am perplexed as to how this  ground
         could have been drafted in the terms it was and how  permission  to
         argue it was granted. At [42] the judge referred to  the  case  and
         summarised the guidance given as to the circumstances  in  which  a
         requirement to undergo compulsory military  service  or  punishment
         for  failing  to  complete  military  service  will  give  rise  to
         persecution. The judge correctly summarised the test and applied it
         to the facts found. I cannot see any error in his approach.

     17. The grounds appear to argue the judge  erred  by  failing  to  have
         regard to background evidence that the Egyptian military  committed
         acts contrary to the basic rules of  human  conduct.  Reference  is
         made to Appendix A to MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG  [2013]  UKUT
         00611 (IAC), which is a list of background  reports  used  in  that
         case. It is sufficient to point out that that case was not provided
         to the judge, was not  mentioned  in  the  appellant's  solicitor's
         skeleton argument  and  not  raised  in  submissions.  The  country
         guidance provided related to Copts and the judge  did  not  err  by
         failing to consider the case, let alone for failing to look up  the
         references given in the Appendix A.

     18. Plainly, the evidence before the judge did not permit of any answer
         than the one he gave,  which  was  that  none  of  the  "scenarios"
         described  in  Sepet  applied.  The  evidence  did  not  show  that
         conscripts would be required to take part in activities of the kind
         suggested.

     19. Ground 3 challenges the judge's decision to give no weight  to  the
         letters of support provided by the appellant's mother and  brother,
         who are said to be  living  in  Turkey.  What  the  judge  did  was
         consider the  evidence  in  the  round  and  to  give  reasons  for
         rejecting it. There is no error at all in that approach.  Moreover,
         his reasons are sound ones. He said  the  timing  of  the  letters,
         after the claim had been refused,  was  surprising.  He  noted  the
         letters were typed in English  and  there  was  no  certificate  of
         translation. He found the contents of the letters "superficial". He
         found  the  contents  of  the  letters  did  not  accord  with  the
         appellant's  account.  It  is  clear  those  inconsistencies   were
         significant one, as the judge explained at [35] and [36].

     20. There is no merit in Ground 3.

     21. Ground 4 highlights a curiosity in the judge's reasoning  found  at
         the end of paragraph [36] of his decision:

             "The  Appellant's  brother  also  makes  reference  to  having
             received a letter from the Army to carry out conscription  and
             when he saw this letter he escaped. The Appellant, of  course,
             claims that his brother received that letter before  he  left.
             This  again  is  entirely  at  odds  and  conflicts  with  the
             Appellant's claim."


     22. The judge is there  discussing  the  letter  from  the  appellant's
         brother. The grounds argue the judge's approach is "irrational".  I
         agree  it  is  not  clear  from  these  two  sentences   what   the
         inconsistency amounted to. However, if this is an error, it is  not
         enough to bring down the entire edifice of the  judge's  reasoning,
         which is otherwise sound. I cannot speculate about what  the  judge
         meant to say but it is striking  that  the  account  given  in  the
         letter of the appellant's brother of escaping after  receiving  his
         call-up is wholly inconsistent with the  account  provided  by  the
         appellant that his brother escaped after being conscripted and ill-
         treated (see. For example, comment on paragraph 56 of  the  refusal
         letter in the appellant's  statement  at  page  21  of  the  appeal
         bundle).

     23. Ground 5 argues the judge erred with respect to his  assessment  of
         the risk to the appellant by association with his  father,  who  he
         found may have been a member of the Muslim Brotherhood.  The  judge
         should have applied paragraph 339K and found that past  persecution
         was a strong indicator of future risk.

     24. I agree with Ms Pal that this ground overlooks the fact  the  judge
         found as fact that there had been no repercussions for any  of  the
         appellant's family arising from the  father's  activities  and  the
         appellant had remained in Egypt for at least two  years  after  his
         father's death. The appellant was only 14 when he left the  country
         and has no political profile. I  fail  to  see  any  error  in  the
         judge's approach to future risk.

     25. The judge did not make a material error of law in any of  the  ways
         suggested in the renewed grounds.

     26. As mentioned, the appellant was concerned about the  way  his  case
         was presented by his solicitor. It is clear the judge was under the
         impression the appellant was claiming to have been called up at the
         age of 14 because he expressly rejected this  at  [27].  The  claim
         makes more sense if  the  appellant  had  been  talking  about  his
         brother. The appellant's first statement and interview  record  can
         certainly be read as meaning the appellant wished to avoid military
         service, without suggesting he had actually been called up.

     27. However, if the judge did misunderstand the claim in  that  limited
         respect, the error could not be said  to  have  been  material.  He
         carefully analysed the claim about the  appellant's  brother  being
         persecuted and rejected it for  cogent  reasons.  He  accepted  the
         appellant might be called up in the future but found he  would  not
         be persecuted if he were. Those were findings he  was  entitled  to
         make on the evidence.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and his decision dismissing the appeal on all grounds shall stand.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction which I continue.


Signed   Date 18 July 2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
