

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/00066/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields               |          Decision and Reasons        |
|                                     |Promulgated                           |
|On 10th November 2017                |            On 04th December 2017     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR.A.A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs L Brakaj of Iris Law Firm.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born in April 1980. He  made
       a claim for protection in July 2016 on the basis he was  at  risk  in
       Pakistan from his family because he is Sunni and his wife is Shia. He
       said they married in Pakistan in 2010 and when his family  discovered
       of the relationship they were hostile. He and his wife came to United
       Kingdom in June 2011. The appellant  returned  to  Pakistan  for  one
       month at the start of 2012 to see his father who was unwell. They now
       have two daughters, born in July 2011  and  July  2014  respectively.
       They are nationals of Pakistan.

    2. The respondent refused his claim. The respondent did not  accept  the
       claim was true. His claimed fear was of his family and no  Convention
       reason was engaged. The country information indicated the State would
       not persecute a Sunni Shia union.

    3. His appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Handley and  was  dismissed.
       The judge did not find the appellant credible.  He  referred  to  his
       delay in claiming asylum. He pointed out the appellant  had  returned
       to Pakistan despite his claim  to  be  in  fear.  The  appellant  had
       produced documents said to be summonses orchestrated  by  his  family
       and sent to the United Kingdom by his brothers. The  judge  concluded
       the documents could not be relied upon. He questioned how his address
       in the United Kingdom could be known and why his brothers would  warn
       him in this way. As  an  alternative,  the  judge  concluded  it  was
       reasonable for the appellant to relocate within Pakistan.

    4. At para 46 onwards the judge dealt with article 8. The judge referred
       to the effect of the decision upon the  family  unit,  including  his
       wife and their child. The judge referred to the appellant's  daughter
       being three years of age. He stated that the child's  best  interests
       were to be with  both  parents  and  that  their  family  life  could
       continue in Pakistan. It was indicated she suffered from  asthma  but
       was generally well. The judge concluded the high threshold  necessary
       to mount a claim on medical grounds was not met.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis the judge  referred  to
       only one child whereas he has two.  Permission  was  granted  on  the
       basis it was arguable the judge failed to consider the best interests
       of the elder child. Permission was not  granted  in  respect  of  the
       judge's findings as to the appellant's credibility.

    6. At hearing Mrs Brakaj pointed out that the eldest child was  now  six
       years old. The judge in referring to the youngest child, who was then
       three, said at that age she will be primarily focused on her  parents
       rather than her environment. It was submitted that  the  elder  child
       had now settled into life in the United Kingdom.  The  representative
       confirmed there were no particular features about the elder child.

    7. In response, Mrs Pettersen pointed out the limited ground upon  which
       permission had  been  granted.  She  submitted  that  the  judge  had
       anticipated the whole family going back together and the  failure  to
       mention the elder child did not make any material difference.

Consideration

    8. The focus in the appeal was upon the claim to protection. The bulk of
       the decision is concerned with this and reflects the way  the  appeal
       was  presented.  This  continues  to  be  reflected  in   the   leave
       application. It is correct that the judge consistently refers to only
       one child. However, it is my conclusion that the failure to refer  to
       the elder child and thereby consider her would have made no  material
       difference. It was confirmed there were no unique features about  the
       elder child which would have required further investigations. She was
       only two years older than her sister  and  at  the  time  of  hearing
       paragraph 117  B  (6)  was  not  met.  Had  it  applied  it  was  not
       necessarily determinative and the judge  had  concluded  that  family
       life could continue in Pakistan.

Decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Handley  dismissing  the  appeal
shall stand. No material error of law has been established


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
10th November 2017

