
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00960/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 September 2017                      |On 13 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     v m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling of Counsel instructed by A & P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Beach promulgated on 21 March 2017.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on [ ] 1987.  He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 17 June 2012 and claimed asylum.  On  20  July
    2012 his application for asylum was refused.  He appealed to  the  IAC;
    on 18 September 2012 his appeal was dismissed for reasons  set  out  in
    the  decision  of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Bryant   (reference
    AA/07352/2012).  Applications for permission  to  appeal  were  refused
    both by the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Appellant  became  'appeal  rights  exhausted'  on  8   January   2013.
    Thereafter the Appellant made further submissions  in  respect  of  his
    asylum claim, which in due course led to the  decision  of  18  January
    2017 that is the subject of the appeal herein.  The Appellant's further
    submissions in large part drew on findings that had been  made  in  the
    successful appeal of his brother heard on 3 October 2012 by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Aziz (reference AA/08153/2012).


3.   The Respondent's decision of 18 January 2017 refusing  the  Appellant's
    protection claim was appealed to the IAC. The appeal was dismissed  for
    reasons set out in the decision of Judge Beach.


4.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on 31 July 2017.  The grant  of  permission
    to appeal was limited to two grounds: one in respect of the standard of
    proof; the other in  respect  of  consideration  of  the  risk  factors
    identified in the case of GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri
    Lanka CG  [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).


5.   The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response in these proceedings  dated
    15 August 2017 which essentially asserts that the challenge brought  by
    the Appellant amounts to a disagreement with the findings of the Judge,
    and that the Judge properly considered  the  GJ  risk  factors  without
    falling into any error of law.


6.   Before turning to the substance of the challenge it is perhaps  helpful
    and  appropriate  to  have  some  further  regard  to  the  history  of
    proceedings and the manner in which  the  Appellant's  claim  has  been
    advanced.


7.   The substance  of  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  as  made  upon  his
    arrival, and in the course of his first appeal, is summarised  both  in
    the 'reasons for refusal' letter of 20 July 2012 and in the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bryant.  In substantial  part  the  Appellant
    claimed that there had been a raid on the family barber shop  in  Kandy
    in 2009 when the authorities had been looking for a former employee; at
    this time his brother 'V' was detained - the Appellant seemingly claims
    he only avoided detention because he was not present at the time of the
    raid and did not go to the premises.   However,  the  Appellant  claims
    that some two years later in 2011 -  after  having  been  studying  for
    approximately two years in Colombo during which time he travelled on  a
    number of occasions to and from Kandy - he was  arrested  and  detained
    for one year and one month.  Upon his release  arrangements  were  made
    for him to come to the United Kingdom to seek asylum.  Judge Bryant did
    not accept the credibility of the Appellant's account.   Amongst  other
    things he found "the Appellant to be vague in his account  of  his  and
    his family's involvement with the LTTE" (paragraph 58).   Judge  Bryant
    also considered that there was "a clear discrepancy  between  what  the
    Appellant says in his witness statement and what he says in his  asylum
    interview  as  to  the  reasons  for  his  father's  death",  and  also
    considered the lack of evidence from the Appellant's younger brother or
    from his uncle to undermine his credibility (paragraph 59).


8.   The Appellant had also related as part of his  history  the  fact  that
    another brother, 'J',  had  married  the  niece  of  a  person  with  a
    significant role in the LTTE.  Judge Bryant gave consideration to  this
    at paragraph 60 and concluded "On the evidence before me I do not  find
    it proved that the marriage of [J] has, or would, cause  the  Appellant
    to be of interest to the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka".   Judge  Bryant
    rejected the Appellant's account of his  own  movements  following  his
    brother's detention (paragraph 61),  and  also  in  turn  rejected  the
    Appellant's evidence in respect of his own  detention  (paragraph  62).
    At paragraph 63 Judge Bryant said this:-

         "On considering the totality of the evidence before me, I find  the
         Appellant to lack credibility to the extent that I do  not  believe
         his account of his and his family's history in Sri Lanka.  I do not
         find he proves, even to the low standard required, that his  father
         was an LTTE supporter and was tortured and subsequently died  as  a
         result of his injuries; that the Appellant's shop  was  raided  and
         that his younger  brother  was  detained  and  tortured;  that  the
         Appellant was of interest to the authorities and  that  he  was  in
         fear of the authorities when undertaking his  computing  course  in
         Colombo; that he was ever detained, tortured and released from that
         detention by his uncle by way of a bribe; and that he fled  to  the
         United Kingdom in fear of persecution in Sri Lanka.  Although there
         is some confusion in the Appellant's account as  to  precisely  who
         his brother [J] married, I do find it proved that he did marry  the
         daughter of a man who had close connections with the  hierarchy  of
         the LTTE."

     In this latter regard, however, as observed above Judge Bryant was  not
    satisfied that J's marriage had ever given,  or  would  likely  in  the
    future give, rise to any adverse interest in the Appellant on the  part
    of the authorities in Sri Lanka.


9.   It may be seen  from  the  foregoing  that  one  of  the  matters  that
    troubled  Judge  Bryant  in  reaching  his  conclusion  was  that   the
    Appellant's brother - V - who was present in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    pursuing his own asylum case, had not given evidence in support.


10.  V was in due course successful in his own appeal heard  by  Judge  Aziz
    shortly after the hearing in the Appellant's own case.


11.  Judge Aziz's Decision gives a little more detail  in  respect  of  some
    aspects of the claimed shared history.  In this regard I pause to  note
    that although some of their respective histories are common, they  have
    of course individual aspects to their cases.  Most particularly  it  is
    the Appellant's case that he  was  detained  some  considerable  period
    after his brother had been detained  -  and  indeed  some  considerable
    period after the raid on the family premises in 2009.  It is  indicated
    in Judge Aziz's decision that although the family were originally  from
    Jaffna they had moved to Kandy in 2001 where they owned a barber shop.


12.  The Appellant's brother J married the niece  of  a  significant  player
    within the LTTE in 2003. It appears that J and his wife left Sri  Lanka
    for Canada in 2005.  It is not clear in  the  accounts  of  either  the
    Appellant or V that the circumstance of J being married to the niece of
    a significant member of the  LTTE  was  an  issue  that  attracted  any
    particular attention or concern in itself.  Rather, however, it is said
    that  because  of  the  'closeness'  of  the  family  to  the  LTTE  in
    consequence of J's marriage, the  barber  shop  became  a  place  where
    members of the LTTE would visit and stay.  In particular an  individual
    called 'BK' stayed at the barber shop in the period 2004-2007;  it  was
    the supposed association with BK  that  in  due  course  triggered  the
    adverse interest of the authorities in the barber shop.


13.  In this latter regard I note that it is the Appellant's  evidence  that
    at the time of the raid he himself was in overall charge of the  barber
    shop, but it was V's misfortune to be arrested because he  was  at  the
    premises.


14.  I pause to observe - very much parenthetically given that this  is  not
    presently a fact-finding forum and I  have  received  no  evidence  and
    heard no submissions on the point - that it seems surprising to me that
    there was  no  apparent  consideration  of  this  circumstance  in  the
    decisions of any of  Judge  Aziz,  Judge  Bryant  or  Judge  Beach.  In
    circumstances where it was the Appellant's case that he was essentially
    the  proprietor  of  the  barber  shop,  I  would  have  expected  some
    exploration and consideration as to why there was seemingly no  attempt
    to detain or question the Appellant subsequent  to  the  raid.  On  his
    evidence it was not until 2011 that he had any difficulties  personally
    and directly with the authorities; and even then - on the  findings  of
    Judge Beach - this was in the nature of a round-up rather than  because
    the Appellant had been personally targeted by reason of his  connection
    to the barber shop, or by reason of family connections, or otherwise.


15.  Be that as it may, as noted  above  Judge  Aziz  reached  a  conclusion
    favourable  to  the  V  in  his  appeal.   Particularly  relevant   are
    paragraphs 106 onwards of Judge Aziz's decision.


16.  Judge Aziz found that the elder brother, J, had  married  the  daughter
    of a man who had close connections with  powerful  figures  within  the
    LTTE, and that consequently the family became involved in  helping  the
    LTTE (paragraph 106). Judge Aziz also found that the  barber  shop  had
    been raided in September 2009, and found that V had  been  detained  at
    this time for a period of two months - during which he was tortured and
    questioned about family links with the LTTE - before being released  in
    November 2009 after the payment of a bribe, whereupon arrangements were
    made for V to flee to the United Kingdom.


17.  At paragraph 107 Judge Aziz considered the risk factors  identified  in
    the case of LP (LTTE area: Tamils Colombo: risk) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2007]
    UKAIT 00076 and identified  that  of  those  risk  factors  seven  were
    present in respect of V: he was ethnically a Tamil; there was likely  a
    previous record of him being suspected as an LTTE member  or  supporter
    by reason of his detention in 2009; he had 'escaped' from custody after
    the payment of a bribe and as such his records might show that  he  had
    escaped from custody;  he  had  scarring  on  his  body;  he  would  be
    returning from London, being a centre of LTTE activity or fund raising;
    he had made an asylum claim abroad; and he had relatives in  the  LTTE.
    In those circumstances Judge Aziz was satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
    brother had established a risk within the parameters identified in LP -
    which was the applicable country guidance at that time. V's appeal  was
    allowed accordingly.


18.  As noted above, it was  in  particular  reliance  upon  the  favourable
    outcome in V's appeal that the Appellant advanced his 'fresh claim'  to
    the Respondent.


19.  In due course, therefore, Judge Beach came to consider the  Appellant's
    case in light of the favourable findings in his brother's appeal. Judge
    Beach reminded herself of  the  guidelines  set  out  in  the  case  of
    Devaseelan on the approach to be taken in second appeals.  Judge  Beach
    considered the case as presented to her: clearly on the face of it, she
    reached  different  conclusions  on  some  of  the  facts  from   those
    determined in the first instance by Judge Bryant.


20.  Judge Beach summarises the potential factors  that  might  support  the
    Appellant's claim in these terms (paragraph 59):

         "I must therefore assess the risk to the appellant.  I assess  this
         risk, taking account of the following findings which  I  have  made
         regarding the appellant:


         (a)  that his family had some LTTE connections
         (b)  that his family assisted the LTTE
         (c)  that his brother was detained,  ill-treated  and  released  on
             payment of a bribe
         (d)  that the Appellant was detained for a short  period  of  time,
             ill-treated and released (possibly on payment of a bribe)
         (e)  that the  Appellant  has  been  involved  in  some  low  level
             diaspora activity in the UK".


21.  Judge Beach took these matters forward into her evaluation  of  risk  -
    an evaluation that, unlike  V's  case,  was  not  to  be  conducted  by
    reference to the country guidance  case  of  LP,  but  with  particular
    reference  to  the  country  guidance  provided  in  GJ.   The  Judge's
    conclusions in this regard are set out over the course of paragraphs 60-
    62 in the following terms:

         "60. The detention of both the appellant and his brother took place
             a considerable time ago.  The appellant's brother was detained
             in 2009 and the appellant was detained in 2011.  There  is  no
             evidence before me that the authorities have been looking  for
             the appellant since he left  Sri  Lanka.   The  appellant  was
             detained for  a  relatively  short  period  of  time  and  was
             released from detention.  Even if he was released  on  payment
             of a bribe this does not mean that he remains of  interest  to
             the authorities.  There is no evidence before  me  to  suggest
             that  the  appellant  was  recorded  as  having  escaped  from
             detention rather than simply being  recorded  as  having  been
             released.  There has been a deterioration in the situation  in
             Sri Lanka to some extent according to the background  evidence
             and  there  is  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  Sri   Lankan
             authorities conduct  some  intelligence  regarding  those  who
             participate  in  diaspora  activity.   Nevertheless,  a  large
             number of Sri Lankans participate in such activity and  it  is
             not suggested that all of those would necessarily be  at  risk
             on return to Sri Lanka.  The fact that the  appellant's  elder
             brother is married to a relative of a high profile LTTE member
             may mean a slightly  higher  suspicion  on  the  part  of  the
             authorities but the appellant's activities have been low level
             and primarily amount to protest rather than active  activities
             in support of forming a separatist Tamil State in  Sri  Lanka.
             The judgment in UB did criticise the Respondent for failing to
             provide evidence relating to TGTE activities in the UK but  it
             also stated:


              'In truth, consideration of the risk to  the  Appellant  turns
                  not merely on him showing that he was actually a member of
                  the TGTE, but relies on his membership being  detected  on
                  arrival in Sri Lanka. There is  no  suggestion  that  this
                  Appellant is on any list of individuals of interest to the
                  authorities in Sri Lanka. The objective  findings  by  the
                  FTT are clear that any activity by the Appellant  in  this
                  country, even if observed or recorded, was low  level  and
                  not likely to carry risks. That activity itself would  not
                  demonstrate membership of the TGTE. In addition, I bear in
                  mind the very clear findings that the Appellant  lied  and
                  exaggerated in alleging mistreatment during his last visit
                  to Sri Lanka, and thus his credibility is low.'


         61.  There is insufficient evidence before  me  to  show  that  the
             appellant is an active member of the TGTE.   He  has  attended
             some events but this does not equate to  him  either  being  a
             member of TGTE or being considered to  be  of  a  particularly
             high level.  There is no evidence before me to show  that  the
             authorities are actively seeking the Appellant  or  that  they
             are aware that he has attended any  events  in  the  UK.   The
             letter from the British High Commission states that  returnees
             from the UK 'may' be questioned and 'may'  be  detained.   The
             Appellant's activities are  of  a  low  level.   His  previous
             detention and that of his brother were  now  many  years  ago.
             There is no suggestion that his elder  brother  is  active  in
             agitating for the resurgence of the LTTE.  It does not seem to
             me that the Appellant is likely to be on  any  watch  list  or
             stop list in Sri Lanka.  There is also no evidence  before  me
             to show that his low level activities would be  known  to  the
             Sri Lankan authorities.  The  evidence  does  not  state  that
             every returnee will be questioned nor that all those who admit
             some low level activities will be detained by the authorities.
              Whilst I bear in mind the lower standard of proof  in  asylum
             claims I find that there is insufficient evidence to sow  that
             there is a real risk to the Appellant  on  the  basis  of  his
             background and his low level activities in the UK.


         62.  Having considered the whole of the evidence in  the  round,  I
             find that the appellant has not discharged the burden of proof
             of having a well founded fear of  persecution  for  a  Refugee
             Convention reason and that the appellant's removal  would  not
             cause the United Kingdom to be in breach  of  its  obligations
             under the Refugee Convention."


22.  Against this background, I turn to the  Appellant's  challenge  to  the
    decision of Judge Beach. I deal first with  the  ground  of  appeal  in
    respect of the standard of proof.


23.  The ground, upon which Mr Spurling amplified during the course  of  the
    hearing, is set out at paragraph 7 of the Grounds of Appeal and pleads,
    with  reference  to  paragraph  61,  that  the  Judge  misapplied   the
    applicable standard of proof.  The written ground puts the matter  this
    way:

         "At paragraph 61 she noted that the evidence  before  her  confirms
         that returnees may be questioned and may be detained.  However  she
         noted that the evidence does not state that all returnees  will  be
         questioned and detained.  In order to establish that someone is  at
         risk on return, it is submitted that it is only necessary  to  show
         that he may be detained and not  that  everyone  is  detained.   To
         require that the evidence shows that all returnees will be detained
         is to impose the wrong standard of proof.   If  there  is  a  risk,
         there is a risk and that sufficient to establish that the Applicant
         is entitled to protection".


24.  I do not accept that that there is anything in the passages  identified
    at paragraph  61  (or  elsewhere)  that  is  indicative  of  the  Judge
    misunderstanding or misapplying the standard of proof.  It seems to  me
    the contrary is manifest.


25.  The Judge very clearly sets out the applicable burden and  standard  of
    proof at paragraph 8 of the Decision.  In my judgement when  the  Judge
    refers to the Appellant not having "discharged the burden of  proof  of
    having a well-founded fear of persecution" (paragraph 62) she is to  be
    understood to be recalling her self-direction.


26.  This matter is underscored  by  the  fact  that  in  the  body  of  the
    decision the Judge elsewhere refers to findings made  by  reference  to
    the appropriate standard of proof. For example: the Judge says "I  find
    that there is a reasonable likelihood that the Appellant's family as  a
    whole were  involved  in  assisting  the  LTTE"  (paragraph  59).   The
    reference to "reasonable likelihood" is repeated at paragraph 51.  Even
    in the paragraph that is the subject of criticism  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, paragraph 61, the Judge expressly states "I bear  in  mind  the
    lower standard of proof in asylum claims".


27.  It seems to me that in the passages alighted upon  by  the  drafter  of
    the  Grounds,  Judge  Beach  was  doing  no  more  than  recording  her
    interpretation of  the  evidential  material  -  and  was  not  thereby
    indicating anything about the standard of proof that she  was  applying
    in the case.


28.  In the course of submissions  Mr  Spurling  sought  to  highlight  that
    perhaps in this regard  the  Judge  had  misunderstood  the  supporting
    background country information, and  in  particular  my  attention  was
    directed to the citation taken from the case of UB  and  reproduced  at
    paragraph 38 of the Judge's decision in respect of a  letter  from  the
    British High Commission dated 25 July 2014.  This letter in part refers
    to information acquired by the writer from the Sri Lankan Department of
    Immigration & Emigration, and in part information from  a  spokesperson
    for the Sri Lankan Secret  Intelligence  Service.   The  following  two
    extracts  from  that  citation   are   pertinent   to   Mr   Spurling's
    observations:

         "The spokesperson  from  the  DIE  stated  that  returnees  may  be
         questioned on arrival by immigration, CID, SIS and TID"; and
         "The spokesperson from the SIS said that  people  being  'deported'
         will  always  be  questioned  about  their   overseas   activities,
         including  whether  they  have  been  involved  with  one  of   the
         prescribed organisations".


29.  It may be  thought  that  there  is  a  tension  between  the  position
    indicated by each of these spokespeople - one using the phrase "may  be
    questioned",  and  the  other  using  the  phrase   "will   always   be
    questioned".  If it is now to be argued that the Judge  has  failed  to
    resolve this ambiguity, then that is to pursue a different  point  from
    that pleaded in the Grounds. No challenge has hitherto been  raised  in
    this regard; permission to appeal was not based on  any  suggestion  of
    such an error.


30.  In any event, it seems to me that at best what might be  said  is  that
    the Judge has failed to identify, or has misunderstood,  the  potential
    ambiguity in the evidence of the letter of 25 July  2014.  However,  it
    also seems to me clear that what the Judge is saying  in  substance  is
    that the evidence does not demonstrate that everybody being returned to
    Sri Lanka is likely to be questioned, and therefore it is necessary for
    her to evaluate whether  this  particular  Appellant  might  reasonably
    likely be questioned - and that, in my  judgement,  is  precisely  what
    this Judge goes on to evaluate by reference to all of the factors  that
    the Appellant relied upon and the applicable country guidance.  As  may
    be seen in paragraph 60 there is consideration given to the Appellant's
    history of detention, there is regard to his diaspora  activities,  and
    there is reference to his family circumstances.


31.  In my judgement it is absolutely clear that the  Judge  understood  and
    applied the relevant standard of proof throughout.  Indeed, it seems to
    me that to peruse a decision for examples of passages  which  taken  in
    isolation may appear to be bald  assertions  not  obviously  consistent
    with the applicable standard of proof, and then  to  rely  merely  upon
    such passages without regard to the  approach  manifest  in  the  wider
    decision as evidence of a misunderstanding or a misapplication  of  the
    appropriate jurisprudence, is an exercise that is not to be  encouraged
    in drafters of grounds.


32.  I conclude that the Appellant has not made  out  the  first  ground  of
    challenge.


33.  The second ground of challenge is to the  effect  that  the  Judge  has
    misapplied the GJ country guidance guidelines, in particular in respect
    of the Appellant's diaspora activities.


34.  It is observed at paragraph 9 of the grounds of appeal that in  GJ  the
    Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that  in   light   of   the   sophisticated
    intelligence and monitoring  of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  it  was
    reasonably  likely  that  the  authorities  would  be   aware   of   an
    individual's attendance or  involvement  in  diaspora  activities,  and
    would be able to distinguish between those perceived to be  seeking  to
    destabilise the integrity of Sri Lanka and  those  not.   Criticism  is
    then made of Judge Beach for saying at paragraph 61 that there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant was known to the Sri Lankan authorities  in
    respect of his diaspora activities.


35.  I am not persuaded that the  challenge  herein  identifies  a  material
    error of law.   It  seems  to  me  that  in  substance  the  Judge  has
    appropriately had regard to the criteria of risk identified in  GJ  and
    reached sustainable conclusions. -  albeit  I  acknowledge  that  there
    might be something  clumsy  in  the  way  that  this  is  expressed  at
    paragraph 61.


36.  In substance the Judge has made clear findings as to the nature of  the
    Appellant's activities in the UK. In particular  at  paragraph  58  the
    Judge notes that there are no photographs  supporting  the  Appellant's
    involvement, and that although he claims to be very  much  involved  he
    had no letters of support  from  the  organisations  who  arranged  the
    events which he attended.  It was also noted that he referred to having
    attended approximately six events from December 2015, which would be  a
    little under one every two months.  The Judge concludes:

         "I find that the Appellant may well  attend  events  but  that  his
         level of involvement is relatively recent and that he does not hold
         any particular role within the diaspora other than  attending  some
         events".


37.  It may also be seen from the quotation from paragraph 60 set out  above
    that the Judge also characterised the Appellant's  actvities  as  being
    "low  level  and  primarily  amount  to  protest  rather  than   active
    activities in support of  forming  a  separatist  Tamil  State  in  Sri
    Lanka".


38.  In this context the risk categories or criteria identified  in  GJ  are
    to be recalled, in particular with reference to those  matters  in  the
    head note at paragraphs (3), (7)(a), and (8).  Those likely  to  be  at
    risk are described in these terms:-

         "Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka".


39.  It seems to me it was eminently open to the Judge to conclude that  the
    Appellant's limited and low-level actions in the  United  Kingdom  fell
    well short of indicating that he  either  had,  or  was  likely  to  be
    perceived as having, such a role.  To this extent, even  if  the  Judge
    may have misunderstood or been in error in concluding that there was no
    evidence that the authorities might have gathered intelligence on  him,
    had they gathered such intelligence it would have shown him to have the
    sort of role the Judge found him to have - and  therefore  to  indicate
    nothing of any particular risk.  It seems to me that whilst it might be
    said that there was a possible 'aggravation' by reason  of  the  family
    background, and in particular the marriage  of  the  Appellant's  older
    brother to the niece of a significant LTTE activist as long ago as 2003
     - a matter which the  Judge  accepted  "may  mean  a  slightly  higher
    suspicion on the part of the authorities" - there was  nothing  in  the
    materials before the Judge to conclude that  this  would  have  made  a
    material difference to the risk faced  by  the  Appellant  to  such  an
    extent that he was entitled to international surrogate protection.  The
    Judge took into account he circumstances of J. There  was  no  evidence
    before the Judge of continuing activism on the part of J, his wife,  or
    her family members.


40.  I find it was open to the Judge to conclude that there was  nothing  to
    portray the Appellant as somebody who might be perceived  to  have  any
    significant role in  diaspora  activities.  The  re-recitation  of  the
    Appellant's history and circumstances at paragraph 9 of the Grounds  in
    this regard - family history, familial links, past detention,  diaspora
    activity - in substance amounts to an attempt to re-argue the case  put
    to the First-tier Tribunal, notwithstanding that the  Judge  has  dealt
    adequately with all such matters.


41.  I find accordingly that there is nothing of  substance  in  the  second
    line of challenge.


42.  Ultimately it seems to me  that  the  simple  reality  is  that  whilst
    favourable findings have been made in the Appellant's brother's appeal,
    which put a different perspective on certain matters  relating  to  the
    family circumstances and the narrative of a raid in 2009 at  which  the
    Appellant's brother  was  detained,  it  did  not  assist  directly  in
    answering some of the discrete difficulties  identified  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bryant at paragraphs 61 and 62  of  his  decision.   The
    best that might have been said on the Appellant's behalf  is  that  his
    account of being detained and ill-treated needed to be re-evaluated  on
    the premise that there was a background of family support for the LTTE.
     However, in this regard Judge Beach concluded no more  than  that  the
    Appellant may have been detained for a short period of time in a round-
    up.   The  Judge  has  otherwise  evaluated  the  Appellant's  case  in
    accordance with the applicable jurisprudence taking  into  account  her
    sustainable findings both  in  respect  of  events  in  Sri  Lanka  and
    diaspora activities.


Notice of Decision

43.  The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


44.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 9 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
