
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00248/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 26 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                    C N K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

    1. The appellant appeals with the  permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  K  R  Moore
       dismissing her appeal against a decision of the respondent, dated 24
       December 2018, refusing her protection claim.


    2. The appellant is a  Kenyan  national.  She  arrived  in  the  United
       Kingdom on 17 January 2018, entering as a visitor. She  subsequently
       claimed asylum, revealing that she  is  a  lesbian.  The  respondent
       accepted the appellant  is  a  lesbian  and  also  that  she  had  a
       relationship in Kenya with a woman  called  Samantha.  However,  the
       respondent did not accept the appellant's account of her problems in
       Kenya. It was considered the appellant could return safely to Kenya.

    3. The appellant appealed. Her appeal was heard at Taylor  House  on  8
       February 2019. In a lengthy and detailed decision,  the  judge  gave
       reasons for coming to similar conclusions to  the  respondent  about
       the appellant's claim (see paragraph [37]). He found that, on return
       to Kenya, the appellant would live discreetly and avoid persecution,
       as she had done previously, and that she would live  discreetly  due
       to social pressures and because she did not wish to upset her family
       (see [48]).

    4. Permission to appeal was refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
       granted by Upper Tribunal Grubb because,

         "It is arguable on the  basis  of  the  renewed  grounds  that  the
         judge's  finding  that  she  would  avoid  persecution  by   acting
         discreetly due to social pressure and to avoid family distress  may
         not reflect the evidence and, in any event, in itself may give rise
         to a well-founded fear of  persecution  following  HJ  (Iran).  The
         point about the likelihood or  otherwise  of  prosecution  is  also
         arguable."


    5. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  It
       had been open  to  the  judge  to  find  the  appellant  would  live
       discreetly due to social pressures.

    6. I heard submissions from the representatives as to whether the judge
       made a material error of law in his  decision.  I  shall  provide  a
       brief summary of the submissions.

    7. Mr Mukherjee's first ground concerned whether  the  judge  erred  in
       finding that the appellant would act discreetly on return  to  Kenya
       and that she would do so due to societal  and  family  pressure.  He
       submitted that the appellant had made it clear that her motives were
       mixed and included a fear of persecution. The judge's finding to the
       contrary was perverse. Secondly, he argued that the judge  erred  in
       his assessment of the background evidence and expert  report,  which
       showed that openly gay people were at a real risk of persecution.

    8. Ms Pal argued the decision showed the judge had considered the claim
       holistically and he was entitled to find that  the  appellant  would
       live discreetly due to social pressures. His findings were sound and
       not perverse. The background evidence did not show openly gay people
       are at a real risk of persecution.

    9. In reply, Mr Mukherjee argued that the  judge  had  misconstrued  HJ
       (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31. Social pressures can
       still  found  a  claim  because  they  can  amount  to  a  form   of
       persecution.

   10. I reserved my decision  on  the  question  of  whether  the  judge's
       decision contains a material error of law.


   11. In HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon), Lord Rodger set out the approach  to
       be followed by tribunals, as follows:
            "82. When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a
            well-founded fear of persecution because he is gay, the tribunal
            must first ask itself whether it is satisfied  on  the  evidence
            that he is gay, or that he would be treated as gay by  potential
            persecutors in his country of nationality.
            If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied
            on the available evidence that gay people who lived openly would
            be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's   country   of
            nationality.
            If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what  the  individual
            applicant would do if he were returned to that country.
            If the applicant would  in  fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
            exposed to a real risk of  persecution,  then  he  has  a  well-
            founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the risk by
            living "discreetly".
            If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant
            would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it  must
            go on to ask itself why he would do so.
            If the tribunal concludes that the  applicant  would  choose  to
            live discreetly simply because that was  how  he  himself  would
            wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g,  not  wanting
            to distress his parents  or  embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
            application should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do
            not amount to persecution and  the  Convention  does  not  offer
            protection against them. Such a person has no well-founded  fear
            of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing to do with
            any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt  a  way  of
            life which means that he is not in fact liable to be  persecuted
            because he is gay.
            If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  a  material
            reason for the applicant living discreetly on his  return  would
            be a fear of the persecution which would follow if  he  were  to
            live openly as a gay man, then, other things  being  equal,  his
            application should be accepted. Such a person has a well-founded
            fear of persecution. To reject his  application  on  the  ground
            that he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would
            be to defeat the very  right  which  the  Convention  exists  to
            protect - his right to live freely  and  openly  as  a  gay  man
            without fear of persecution. By  admitting  him  to  asylum  and
            allowing him to live freely and openly as a gay man without fear
            of persecution, the receiving state gives effect to  that  right
            by affording the applicant a surrogate for the  protection  from
            persecution  which  his  country  of  nationality  should   have
            afforded him."


   12. Lord Walker, Lord Collins and Sir John Dyson  SCJ  were  content  to
       adopt Lord Rodger's wording of the test. Lord  Hope  used  different
       wording, as follows,


             "The test
             35. This brings me to the test that should be adopted  by  the
             fact-finding tribunals in this country. As Lord Walker  points
             out  in  para  98,  this  involves  what  is  essentially   an
             individual  and  fact-specific  inquiry.   Lord   Rodger   has
             described the approach in para 82, but I would like to set  it
             out in my own words. It is necessary to proceed in stages.
             (a) The first stage, of course, is  to  consider  whether  the
             applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of
             that orientation he will not be entitled to be  treated  as  a
             member of the particular social group. But I would regard this
             part of the test as having been satisfied if  the  applicant's
             case is that he is  at  risk  of  persecution  because  he  is
             suspected of being gay, if his past history shows that this is
             in fact the case.
             (b) The next stage is to examine a group  of  questions  which
             are directed to what his situation will  be  on  return.  This
             part of the inquiry is directed to what  will  happen  in  the
             future. The  Home  Office's  Country  of  Origin  report  will
             provide the background. There will  be  little  difficulty  in
             holding that in countries such as Iran and  Cameroon  gays  or
             persons who are believed to be gay  are  persecuted  and  that
             persecution is something that may reasonably  be  feared.  The
             question is how each applicant, looked at  individually,  will
             conduct himself if returned and how others will react to  what
             he does. Those others will include everyone with whom he  will
             come in contact, in private as well as in public. The  way  he
             conducts himself may vary from one situation to another,  with
             varying degrees of  risk.  But  he  cannot  and  must  not  be
             expected to conceal aspects of his sexual orientation which he
             is unwilling to conceal, even from those  whom  he  knows  may
             disapprove of it. If he fears persecution as a result and that
             fear is well-founded, he will be entitled  to  asylum  however
             unreasonable his refusal to resort to concealment may be.  The
             question what is reasonably tolerable  has  no  part  in  this
             inquiry.
             (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be
             able to do in the country of his nationality  everything  that
             he can do openly in the country whose protection he  seeks  is
             not the test. As I said earlier (see para 15), the  Convention
             was not directed to reforming  the  level  of  rights  in  the
             country of origin. So it would be wrong to approach the  issue
             on the  basis  that  the  purpose  of  the  Convention  is  to
             guarantee to an applicant who is  gay  that  he  can  live  as
             freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to do
             if he were not returned. It does not guarantee to everyone the
             human rights standards  that  are  applied  by  the  receiving
             country within its own territory. The focus throughout must be
             on what will happen in the country of origin.
             (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will  in
             fact conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is
             to consider why he will do so.  If  this  will  simply  be  in
             response to social pressures  or  for  cultural  or  religious
             reasons of his own choosing and  not  because  of  a  fear  of
             persecution, his claim for asylum must be rejected. But if the
             reason why he will resort to concealment is that he  genuinely
             fears that  otherwise  he  will  be  persecuted,  it  will  be
             necessary to consider whether that fear is well founded.
             (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have  a
             well-founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he  has,  the
             causative condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  2  AC  426,
             para 5 will have  been  established.  The  applicant  will  be
             entitled to asylum."

   13. It was common ground that the appellant  was  a  lesbian.  The  next
       question to answer was whether  a  person  who  lived  openly  as  a
       lesbian in Kenya would face a real risk of persecution.


   14. The judge considered the background evidence  in  detail  and  noted
       some materials suggesting Kenya was a more tolerant place than,  for
       example, neighbouring Uganda. However, he also  noted  that  the  US
       State Department  report  noted  that  violence  and  discrimination
       against LGBT  individuals  was  widespread  and  that  victims  were
       extremely reluctant to report abuse due to fear  of  violence.  Many
       LGBT victims believe the police were just  as  likely  to  persecute
       them as to protect them. A 2015 report stated there  had  been  "few
       prosecutions ... in recent years".

   15. The judge also noted the contents of the expert report of  Professor
       Mario Aguilar. He was critical of parts of it finding it "general in
       nature", but he noted the overall opinion that the  appellant  would
       be at a real risk of persecution if she returned to Kenya.

   16. At paragraph [39] the judge set out the test from HJ (Iran) but  did
       not, as far as I can see,  answer  question  (ii)  definitively.  He
       referred to  the  appellant's  fear  of  the  authorities  as  being
       speculative but I take that to be referring to the rejection of  the
       claim that the appellant was  at  risk  following  exposure  by  her
       cousin, who  had  inadvertently  witnessed  the  appellant  and  her
       partner, Samantha, engaging in intimate acts.

   17. The judge went on to examine the detail of the  evidence  so  as  to
       determine whether the appellant would live openly or  discreetly  on
       return and, if the latter, why. He found  the  appellant  had  lived
       discreetly before coming to the United Kingdom and he  made  adverse
       credibility findings with respect to her claims to fear  her  family
       and the authorities. He found the appellant would live discreetly as
       she had before.  He  found  the  reason  the  appellant  would  live
       discreetly on return was through choice. In essence, she  would  not
       be forced to conceal her sexual orientation.

   18. Mr Mukherjee's principal challenge to the judge's  decision  focused
       on the finding about why the appellant would live discreetly but  he
       acknowledged that this argument could only lead to a material  error
       if a woman who lived openly as a lesbian would face a real  risk  of
       persecution. As noted, on my reading of the decision, the judge  did
       not make a definitive finding on that issue.

   19. Mr Mukherjee argued the judge's finding  that  the  appellant  would
       live  discreetly  due  to  social  pressures  did  not  reflect  the
       evidence, a  point  which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  found  was
       arguable. Mr  Mukherjee  accepted  this  amounted  to  a  perversity
       challenge in respect of  the  judge's  finding  on  the  reason  the
       appellant would be discreet.

   20. I have read the  interview  record  and  I  accept  there  are  many
       references in it to the appellant stating she would live  discreetly
       due to fear of being ill-treated. See, for  example,  questions  30,
       49, 108 and 152. The judge appears to have acknowledged this in  the
       first half of [42]  of  his  decision,  where  he  quotes  from  the
       appellant's answers to questions 151 and 152 of  the  interview.  Mr
       Mukherjee also showed me parts of the appellant's witness  statement
       dealing with this.

   21. It is necessary to analyse the judge's decision in greater detail.

   22. In the second half of [42] the judge  considers  the  oral  evidence
       given by the appellant on this point at the hearing.  He  noted  the
       appellant said she would  live  in  an  open  way,  which  he  found
       contradicted what the appellant  had  said  at  her  interview.  Her
       representative put this contradiction to her and the appellant  said
       she had been confused when the question was first put to her and she
       thought she was being asked about how she would live in  the  United
       Kingdom.

   23. Leaving that point, the judge went on in  [43]  to  state  that  the
       appellant had given inconsistent evidence about whether  her  family
       had been told that she was a lesbian and, in the second half of that
       paragraph, he  concluded  the  appellant's  account  of  her  family
       disowning her because her cousin had informed them what she had seen
       was speculative. It was, he concluded,  also  speculation  that  the
       appellant's family would contact the police.

   24. At the end of [44], he concluded as follows:

         "However, if the appellant was in genuine fear of  her  family,  or
         indeed  from  the  authorities,  according  to  the  appellant  she
         continued working whilst at her friend's house,  in  that  she  was
         working remotely on her laptop. The fact that the appellant  during
         this period  continued  working,  and  therefore  would  have  been
         contactable by family or the authorities is not consistent with the
         appellant's claim that she would  have  been  in  danger  from  the
         authorities or family members, and due to such fear caused  her  to
         flee the country."

   25. The judge rejected the appellant's claim to have been in  hiding  at
       her friend's house before leaving Kenya. He drew matters together at
       [48] as follows:


         "I am not satisfied the appellant lived  openly  as  a  lesbian  in
         Kenya before she came to the United Kingdom. I am satisfied that if
         this appellant was to return to Kenya she would live discreetly and
         avoid persecution, and in so finding I must  ask  myself,  why  she
         would do this. I am satisfied having considered  all  the  evidence
         before me that she would choose to live discreetly, because that is
         what she had done before, and that was what she would  continue  to
         do due to society and social pressures, and due to  the  fact  that
         she did not wish to anger or distress her  family.  In  so  finding
         such social pressures and reasons for wanting to live discreetly do
         not amount to persecution, and that this appellant does not have  a
         well-founded fear of persecution in that, the appellant has  chosen
         to adopt such a way of life, and thereby is not in fact  liable  to
         be persecuted due  to  her  sexuality,  and  due  to  her  being  a
         lesbian."


   26. The judge then referred again to the background evidence and  expert
       report and, in relation to the latter, found  the  expert's  opinion
       that intimate acts between females was forbidden by Kenyan law to be
       unsupported  by  either  the  terms  of  the  Penal  Code  or  other
       documentary  evidence.  He  saw  no  reason  for   the   appellant's
       activities in LGBT groups to create a risk for  her  on  return.  At
       [51] he reiterated his overall conclusion:


         "Some of my negative credibility findings  fundamentally  undermine
         this appellant's claim, though I accept that she is a  lesbian  and
         she had a lesbian relationship in Kenya  prior  to  coming  to  the
         United Kingdom. However, I am satisfied that  the  appellant  lived
         discreetly as a lesbian prior to coming to the United Kingdom,  and
         that the problems and fear that she has from her family,  and  from
         the authorities, are speculative and not supported by credible  and
         reliable evidence."


   27. As said, the principal challenge to  the  decision  centred  on  the
       judge's failure to have regard to parts of the evidence in which the
       appellant  insisted  she  would  live  discreetly  due  to  fear  of
       persecution. However, it seems to me that,  in  order  to  show  the
       decision is vitiated by legal error, Mr Mukherjee must show that the
       judge's finding that the appellant was not credible about  her  past
       experiences and the inference  he  drew  from  that  about  why  the
       appellant would behave discreetly on return was erroneous. It is not
       enough simply to show the judge overlooked parts of the evidence  or
       that he failed to give adequate weight to some  parts.  He  did  not
       believe parts of the account.

   28. If the claim were as straightforward as arguing that the judge could
       not rationally have arrived at the conclusion he  reached  regarding
       the appellant's intentions on return, I think it would  have  strong
       prospects of success. As noted, there  are  numerous  parts  of  the
       evidence in which the appellant said she feared her family  and  the
       authorities. The Supreme Court made it clear that cases  like  these
       are highly fact-specific. In discussing the position of an applicant
       who would  behave  discreetly  to  avoid  persecution,  Lord  Rodger
       considered the mixed motives which such  a  person  might  have.  At
       [62], he said,

         "Having examined the relevant evidence, the Secretary of  State  or
         the tribunal may conclude, however, that the  applicant  would  act
         discreetly partly to avoid upsetting his parents, partly  to  avoid
         trouble with his friends and colleagues, and partly due to a  well-
         founded fear of being persecuted by the state authorities. In other
         words the need to avoid  the  threat  of  persecution  would  be  a
         material reason, among a number of complementary reasons,  why  the
         applicant would act discreetly. Would the existence of these  other
         reasons make a crucial difference? In my view it would not.  A  Jew
         would not  lose  the  protection  of  the  Convention  because,  in
         addition to suffering state persecution, he might also  be  subject
         to casual, social anti-semitism. Similarly, a gay man who  was  not
         only persecuted by the state, but also  made  the  butt  of  casual
         jokes at work, would not lose the protection of the Convention.  It
         follows that the question can be further refined: is  an  applicant
         to be regarded as a refugee  for  purposes  of  the  Convention  in
         circumstances where the reality is that, if he were returned to his
         country of nationality,  in  addition  to  any  other  reasons  for
         behaving discreetly, he would have to behave discreetly in order to
         avoid persecution because of being gay?"


   29. My analysis above shows that the judge did consider the  appellant's
       claims but rejected them for the reasons he gave. I see no error  in
       his account of or his understanding of the evidence.  He  considered
       the background evidence, including the evidence showing the risks to
       LGBT people, albeit he did not reach a definitive conclusion on Lord
       Rodger's second question. He considered the expert report  and  gave
       sustainable reasons for discounting the weight to be given to it. He
       did not resolve the question of whether the appellant's inconsistent
       answer in examination-in-chief was  a  matter  contributing  to  his
       adverse credibility finding or not but I do  not  consider  that  is
       sufficient to show legal error.


   30. In my judgement, the judge was entitled to make the findings he made
       on the evidence and it follows that  he  was  entitled  to  draw  an
       adverse inference and disbelieve the  appellant's  statements  about
       why she would behave discreetly on return  to  Kenya.  Other  judges
       might have come to a  different  conclusion  and  believe  that  the
       appellant would behave discreetly  out  of  a  mix  of  motivations.
       However, that does  not  show  this  judge  erred  in  coming  to  a
       different conclusion. He saw and heard the appellant give evidence.


   31. Mr Mukherjee argued that the appellant's activities with LGBT groups
       in the United Kingdom should have been taken as an indicator of  how
       the appellant would choose to conduct herself on return to Kenya. As
       a general proposition, I  can  see  some  force  in  that  argument,
       although I also note  that  the  judge  was  fully  aware  of  those
       activities, which he described as "sur place  activities"  in  [50].
       However, I do not consider this gets Mr Mukherjee around the problem
       of the judge's adverse credibility finding. The judge  believed  the
       appellant would behave discreetly but he did not believe  her  about
       her motivation for that being connected to a fear of persecution.

   32. Although I accept Mr Mukherjee was not  putting  the  argument  this
       way, I note that, in paragraph 35(c) of his judgment in  HJ  (Iran),
       Lord Hope set out the limits of the Convention's protection in  this
       respect.

   33. At [50] of his decision, the judge mentioned that he was aware  that
       the Kenyan High Court was shortly to deliver its judgment in a  case
       challenging the constitutionality of sections of  the  Kenyan  Penal
       Code which are construed as criminalising same-sex  acts.  He  noted
       the outcome of the Indian Supreme Court case, which challenged  very
       similar legislation applicable in India. Mr  Mukherjee  informed  me
       that, unlike the Indian Supreme Court, the  Kenyan  High  Court  had
       upheld the provisions as legal.

   34. There was clearly no error in the judge's  reference  to  the  case,
       which had not then been decided. He referred to it  because  he  was
       provided with a press release about it. Mr Mukherjee  suggested  the
       judge's mention of the Indian case was an indicator that he  thought
       the Kenyan case would go the same way, thereby reaffirming parts  of
       the background evidence which suggested there was a movement towards
       greater acceptance of LGBT people  in  Kenya,  which  the  appellant
       disputes. He told me that, should the  case  go  further,  he  would
       advise his instructing solicitors  to  obtain  evidence  showing  an
       escalation in violence towards the LGBT community.

   35. I do not consider that it is a fair reading of [50] to say the judge
       took an unduly optimistic view of the Kenyan case. A  press  release
       is unlikely to have provided sufficient detail to show  how,  if  at
       all, the case might  affect  the  appellant's  safety,  particulalry
       given the lack of clarity about whether the sections  of  the  Penal
       Code in question apply to women at all (see [24] and [49]).

   36. It follows from the fact that I cannot see any error of law  in  the
       judge's approach  to  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  reasons  for
       behaving discreetly on return to Kenya, there is no need to consider
       the second question concerning the judge's consideration of the risk
       of persecution arising from living openly.

   37. There is  no  error  in  the  judge's  decision  and  therefore  the
       appellant's appeal must be dismissed.



NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and his decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

    The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is continued.


Signed                                  Date 22 July 2019

[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom


