
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00797/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26th September 2017                |On 02nd October 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                    [M S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Megha, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Adio dismissing his appeal on the basis of his application for  asylum,
    or humanitarian protection or protection of his human rights.

 2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne.  The grounds upon which permission was  granted  may  be
    summarised as follows:

         "In an otherwise careful and focused decision  and  reasons  it  is
         nonetheless  at  least  arguable  that  the  judge  has  failed  to
         adequately consider the Appellant's appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR
         outside the Immigration Rules.  It is at least  arguable  that  the
         judge failed to conduct  an  adequate  proportionality  assessment.
         This arguable error of law having been identified, all  the  issues
         raised in the grounds are arguable."

 3. I was provided with a Rule 24 reply  from  the  Respondent  before  the
    hearing commenced, which the  Appellant's  representative  also  had  a
    chance to read.

    Error of Law

 4. At the close of the  hearing  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give.  I do find that there was an error of
    law in the determination such that it should be set aside.  My  reasons
    for so finding are as follows.

 5. In relation to the first complaint, that the judge failed  to  consider
    the press cards and letters of reference adequately, which gave support
    to the contention that the Appellant was a journalist in Nepal, looking
    at the determination in its relevant part from paragraphs 18 to 25,  it
    is clear that the judge has noted the evidence of pres  articles  which
    were present in the Appellant's bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at pages 99 to 111 which were not given weight by the First-tier Judge,
    largely because the original Nepalese articles were not produced in the
    bundle alongside the  certified  translations  and  thus  were  not  in
    accordance with the Practice Directions for  producing  evidence  in  a
    foreign language.

 6. However, aside from that the judge's determination does not reveal that
    the press identification of the Appellant from pages 65 to 68  nor  the
    character references for the Appellant from pages 85 to 99  were  taken
    into consideration by the judge before reaching his conclusion that the
    Appellant was not a journalist.  As such I do find that  there  was  an
    error of law given that it is feasible that these documents could  have
    given rise to  a  different  finding  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to whether the Appellant was, or was not, a journalist.  I put
    it no higher than that.

 7. I do pause to note that  I  enquired  with  the  Appellant's  solicitor
    whether any investigations had  been  made  to  corroborate  the  press
    identifications that were present in the Appellant's  bundle,  such  as
    with the issuing bodies or whether there  was  any  evidence  from  the
    various authors or the referees at pages 85 to 99  which  consisted  of
    various journalistic bodies confirming the Appellant  as  a  journalist
    (although none of those references commented on  his  asylum  claim  at
    all), however, I was told that such evidence had  not  been  sought  or
    acquired.  As shall become  clear,  the  appeal  is  to  be  ultimately
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  consequently,  if  such  evidence
    does arise it of course should be taken  into  consideration  alongside
    the other documentation that the Tribunal has yet to consider, but I do
    not understand for my part why such  investigations  have  not  already
    been made.

 8. In relation to the second issue raised in the grounds, namely that  the
    judge failed to note the Appellant's answer at question 3 of the Asylum
    Interview Record that he was arrested both in 2004 and 2009, I  do  not
    see any force in this argument which would give rise to an error  given
    that the judge noted subsequent answers to questions at paragraph 21 of
    his determination, namely question 37, which do give rise to a conflict
    between questions 3 and 37 which requires a  resolution,  at  a  future
    date I imagine.

 9. In relation to the  objective  evidence  in  the  form  of  an  article
    concerning the situation of the Nepalese  press,  there  is  not  great
    force in this argument, however, it does add to the  cumulative  effect
    of the first complaint raised regarding the press documentation  if  it
    is established on further hearing that  the  Appellant  is  in  fact  a
    journalist when taking all of the evidence into consideration.

10. In relation to the fourth issue raised,  namely  the  consideration  of
    paragraph 276ADE and the lack  of  consideration  of  very  significant
    obstacles, whilst I do note that the judge has considered some of those
    factors in part at paragraph 25 I  was  told  that  there  was  further
    evidence that the judge should have considered, namely the  Appellant's
    lawful leave to remain from his entry in 2009 until 25 August 2015  for
    some seven years, and that his studying for a  masters  degree  in  the
    past and that his application for asylum was  made  shortly  after  his
    application for further leave to  remain  as  a  student  was  refused.
    These are indeed omissions which the First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
    considered whilst considering paragraph 276ADE and again  add  somewhat
    modestly to the cumulative materiality of error in the determination.

11. The Appellant's representative mentioned that the Appellant's wife  was
    expecting a child and was pregnant.  However, I indicated that that was
    a matter that was not before me as I was only hearing the error of  law
    application. Again, this is a  matter  which  can  be  the  subject  of
    further evidence when the appeal is remitted.

12. Finally, in relation to the fifth complaint, the  Appellant  complained
    that the five stage approach and proportionality assessment  adumbrated
    in Razgar had not been applied by the First-tier Tribunal.  In my  view
    that is a complaint that is correct in its  observation.   However,  it
    does not appear  that  there  would  have  been  much  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules on this  particular  occasion  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should have considered.  I did raise with the parties my  view
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  noting  that  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances to consider Article 8 outside the  Immigration
    Rules and it was agreed that this was an erroneous statement  in  light
    of the recent Supreme Court authorities handed down in February of this
    year, however, nothing turned on this error given that  there  was  not
    much more that should have been considered outside of the  Rules  other
    than that explored above at paragraph 10.

13. Thus, taking all of these matters as a whole, in  my  view  the  first,
    third and fourth complaints do  raise  sufficient  merit  such  that  a
    material error of law is identifiable in  the  determination  with  the
    result that it should be set aside.  I should indicate I  have  reached
    this decision after some pause, however ultimately I  have  decided  to
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

14. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby  set  aside  and  the
    matter is remitted  to  be  heard  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
    differently constituted bench.

16. No anonymity direction was requested and I do not see that  one  should
    be made at present.








Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

