
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00510/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd March 2021                   |On 26 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Ahmad, instructed by Hanson Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"), and as
this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless
and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, AM is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies amongst others to all
parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of
court proceedings.

   1. The hearing of the appeal before me on 23rd March 2021 took the form
      of a remote hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.
      The appellant joined the hearing from the offices of his solicitors.
      The representatives were able to see and hear me and each other
      throughout the hearing.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre.
      I was addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as I
      would have been if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I
      am satisfied: that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as
      there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is justified
      as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the
      interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding objective
      to proceed with a remote hearing because of the present need to take
      precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was
      satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with
      fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of
      the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated
      costs and resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was
      satisfied that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


The background


   2. The appellant is a national of Iraq. He arrived in the United Kingdom
      in January 2016 and claimed asylum. His claim was refused by the
      respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 24th June 2016. The
      appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Housego for reasons set out in a decision promulgated
      on 16th January 2017.  Because it is relevant to the appellant's claim
      for international protection, it is useful to begin by referring to
      the claim made by the appellant in 2017. The appellant's claim is
      summarised at paragraphs [27] to [30] of the decision of Judge
      Housego:


         "27. The account of the appellant contained in his asylum interview
         and witness statement, correcting the asylum interview, is as
         follows.  His brother is a fighter in the Peshmerga.  His brother
         has posted many images on Facebook of him with ISIS fighters he has
         killed and posted jokes at their expense. Facebook ultimately took
         down his page. The appellant reposted one of those images on 15
         July 2015 [A:11].  Before his brother's Facebook page was taken
         down his brother received threats, through Facebook, from ISIS. He,
         the appellant, was also at risk from ISIS, both because his brother
         was a Peshmerga fighter, and because of this one post. His risk
         came either or both from people coming into Kirkuk from ISIS held
         areas, and ISIS sympathisers within Kirkuk.


         28.  The appellant is also generally at risk in Kirkuk from ISIS
         activity.  It was generally a dangerous place in which to live.


         29.  The appellant was also at risk from the Barzani and Talibani
         families. These were hugely influential and powerful families.
         Since 2010 he had been posting entries on Facebook critical of
         them. They had a way of dealing with political opponents which
         involved disappearance and death.


         30.  In mid-2015 he had been in the market when there had been a
         demonstration against the death of a journalist some two years
         before. This journalist had, he said, been killed by the Barzani.
         The authorities arrived and suppressed the demonstration.
         Sympathisers to the Barzani told the authorities of his name, and
         so he was at risk from the Barzani or their agents. He was also at
         risk from the Talibani family, another influential family...."


   3. The appellant gave evidence at the hearing of his appeal before Judge
      Housego. The findings and conclusions of Judge Housego are set out at
      paragraphs [91] to [105] of his decision.  Judge Housego found the
      appellant's evidence was not credible or plausible in any respect.  He
      noted the oral evidence given was marred by persistent evasion of the
      question asked.  At paragraph [97] he said:


         "The appellant comes from Kirkuk.  That is now a safe place
         notwithstanding one large incident in the recent past.... even if
         the appellant (whose parents and 2 siblings remain in Kirkuk)
         considered it dangerous he could go to Erbil. His evidence was that
         he washed cars and then sold fruit in the market. He could find
         work in Erbil. He has no difficulty at all in relocation within the
         KRG."


   4. In further submissions made by the appellant in October 2019, the
      appellant maintained that he would be at risk upon return to Iraq, and
      in particular, claimed that he is unable to return to Iraq due to his
      imputed political opinion and is sur place activities on social media
      during his time in the UK.  His claim was refused by the respondent
      for reasons set out in a decision dated 27th December 2019.  The
      appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Dixon for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on
      15th October 2020.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dixon


   5. At paragraph [2] of his decision, Judge Dixon summarised the claim now
      made by the appellant.  The appellant gave evidence at the hearing of
      his appeal as set out in paragraphs [10] to [16] of the decision. The
      findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [30] to [47] of the
      decision.


   6. Like Judge Housego before, Judge Dixon also found the appellant not to
      be a credible witness.  Judge Dixon again had the opportunity of
      hearing the appellant give evidence, and to observe his evidence being
      tested in cross-examination. He rejected the appellant's claim that he
      has taken extensive and ongoing efforts to contact his family via
      Facebook. He found the appellant is in contact with his family or a is
      able to be in contact with them, and that is the real reason why the
      appellant did not furnish evidence regarding his efforts to trace his
      family.  Judge Dixon found there to be a significant discrepancy in
      the appellant's evidence regarding the appellant's CSID.  He also
      rejected the appellant's claim made in oral evidence of a threat made
      towards him in 2016 or 2017 from the Barzani and Talibani family.
      Judge Dixon noted the appellant is from Kirkuk, a formerly contested
      area, and in light of the most recent country guidance as set out in
      SMO & Others (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT
      00400 (IAC), he found the appellant does not face a risk of suffering
      serious harm if returned there.


   7. At paragraph [45] of his decision, Judge Dixon considered whether the
      appellant would be at risk upon return arising from his sur place
      activities and in particular posts made on a Facebook account. He was
      not persuaded, even to the lower standard, at [45(a)], that the posts
      relate to the appellant.  He went on to find, at [45(b)] that in any
      event, the Facebook posts do not assist the appellant. He noted there
      is no evidence of anything adverse going the appellant's way as a
      result of the Facebook posts and no evidence of his being monitored or
      of the posts bringing him to the attention of anyone in any way. Judge
      Dixon noted the appellant has no profile and the likelihood is that,
      at most, the posts would be regarded as somebody making broadly
      political statements on social media.


   8. Notwithstanding the finding that the appellant would not be at risk
      upon return to Kirkuk, Judge Dixon found that the appellant could in
      any event, internally relocate. He noted the appellant is a young, fit
      and healthy male who has shown considerable fortitude in travelling to
      the United Kingdom. He found the appellant has the support of his
      family and was able to find work in the past.  At paragraph [47],
      Judge Dixon concluded:


         "The appellant has advanced nothing which changes the findings of
         Judge Housego.  Indeed, as pointed out above, his credibility has
         been further damaged by his own evidence. His assertions of being
         without family to whom he could turn are hollow and incredible. I
         find that the appellant could obtain documentation if he has
         forgotten the necessary details: he has the support of family
         available to him to assist with regards to this."


The appeal before me


   9. The appellant advances six grounds of appeal.  Permission to appeal
      was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf on 26th November 2020.




Ground 1:     The IJ is assuming a fact


  10. The appellant claims Judge Dixon erred in rejecting the appellant's
      claim that he has only recently become aware of the Red Cross, by
      erroneously focusing upon the length of time the appellant has been in
      the UK and the history in this case.  The appellant's evidence was
      that he has been to the Red Cross, and although Judge Dixon noted
      there is no requirement for an asylum seeker to corroborate his
      account, Judge Dixon found, at [35], that the appellant has not
      provided any evidence of his having contacted the Red Cross.


  11. At paragraph [10] of his decision, Judge Dixon noted the appellant's
      evidence in chief that he has attended the Red Cross.  At paragraph
      [11], Judge Dixon refers to the appellant's evidence in cross-
      examination that he had contacted the British Red Cross before the
      lockdown. The appellant confirmed that that was the first time that he
      had contacted the Red Cross and claimed that he did not have
      information about that organisation and had only been informed of them
      recently.


  12. The assessment of credibility may involve an assessment of the
      plausibility or the apparent reasonableness or truthfulness of what
      has been said. The assessment can involve a judgement as to the
      likelihood of something having happened based on evidence and or
      inferences. In my judgment, Judge Dixon was entitled to draw on his
      common sense and his ability, as a practical and informed person, to
      identify what is or is not plausible, as long as the reasons withstand
      scrutiny.  Judge Dixon noted, at [34], that there is no requirement
      for corroboration in asylum claims, but if evidence is relevant and
      available, it should be produced.  In TK (Burundi), the Court of
      Appeal noted there is a lower standard in asylum claims, but if there
      is no good reason why the evidence that should be available is not
      produced, the judge is entitled to take that into account in the
      assessment of the credibility of the account.


  13. It was in my judgement undoubtedly open to Judge Dixon to conclude
      that the appellant's claim that he has only recently become aware of
      the Red Cross lacks credibility, and to reject his claim that he was
      not aware of that organisation previously for the reasons given in his
      decision.  The first ground of appeal lacks merit and I reject it.


Ground 2; The IJ erred in law


  14. The appellant claims Judge Dixon's finding that the appellant has not
      taken steps to locate his family in Iraq is without any evidential
      foundation, and the appellant's evidence was that he had contacted the
      Red Cross. He claims it was not open to Judge Dixon to reject the
      appellant's claim simply because of the other adverse credibility
      findings made against the appellant.  The appellant accepts that
      previous adverse credibility findings justify caution, but, he claims,
      they do not create a presumption that future evidence by the same
      witness will be rejected as incredible.


  15. This ground too, lacks any merit.  Judge Dixon refers to the
      appellant's evidence in chief regarding the steps he claims to have
      taken to establish contact with his family at paragraph [10] of the
      decision. The appellant's evidence was probed in cross-examination as
      set out in paragraph [11] of the decision.  Paragraphs [33] to [36] of
      the decision must be read together.  Contrary to what is said in the
      grounds of appeal Judge Dixon considered the appellant's evidence that
      he has taken steps to contact his family both via Facebook and by
      contacting the Red Cross.  The reasons set out by Judge Dixon for
      rejecting the appellant's claims are adequately set out in paragraphs
      [33] and [35] in particular.  Having considered the evidence before
      the Tribunal it was open to Judge Dixon to find that the appellant has
      not taken steps to contact his family for the reasons set out in his
      decision, taken together with the adverse credibility findings
      previously made by Judge Housego.  The reasons given by Judge Dixon in
      his decision for rejecting the appellant's claim are rooted in the
      evidence that was before the Tribunal.   It was open to Judge Dixon to
      find that the appellant is in contact with his family or is able to be
      in contact with them and that this is the real reason why he has not
      furnished evidence of the steps taken to trace his family.


Ground 3: The IJ is second guessing what someone would have done


  16. The appellant claims that at paragraph [37] of his decision, in
      referring to a significant discrepancy regarding the identity
      documents available to the appellant, Judge Dixon erroneously assumed
      that during interview, it is likely that the interviewer would have
      asked the appellant about identity documents beyond his passport,
      given the crucial importance of identity documents in Iraq.


  17. This ground is misconceived.  At paragraphs [15] and [16] of his
      decision, Judge Dixon recorded the answers given by the appellant to
      questions quite properly put by the judge regarding the
      inconsistencies in the evidence before the Tribunal regarding the
      appellant's CSID.  At paragraph [37], Judge Dixon was plainly
      considering the explanation given by the appellant in his oral
      evidence that he was asked about his passport when interviewed, and
      that he had not been referring to his CSID card.  Judge Dixon rejected
      that explanation and noted the interview record is clear and it is
      likely that the interviewer would have asked him about identity beyond
      his passport.  It is undoubtedly correct that the interview record is
      clear.


  18. The appellant is plainly aware of the difference between his passport
      and a CSID.  In his screening interview (Q.1.7), the appellant was
      asked whether he has any evidence to confirm his identity. He said
      that his ID Cards are in Iraq, and that he held a passport.  He was
      then asked (Q.1.8) where his passport is, and he explained that he had
      travelled to Turkey with his passport but lost it in Turkey.  In the
      subsequent asylum interview completed on 6th June 2016, the appellant
      was asked (Q.3) about documents that would be available if he were
      able to get in contact with his family.  He again said that he had
      lost his passport but also went on to refer to his 'Civil Status Card'
      and said that he could not promise if his family have it or not.  In
      answer to (Q.64 to 74) the appellant said that he used his passport to
      travel to Turkey and that his passport was taken off him in Turkey by
      an agent.  I note that this is at odds with his previous claim that he
      lost his passport in Turkey. In any event, at (Q.74), the interviewer
      asked; "You say you had an Iraqi passport, did you have any other ID
      cards?". The appellant answered; "I had Civil State ID Card.
      Unfortunately I lost that".  It is clear that Judge Dixon did not make
      an assumption that the interviewer would have asked him about identity
      beyond his passport.  The interview record demonstrates that the
      appellant was asked whether he had any other ID cards.  It is
      unfortunate that the author of the grounds failed to consider the
      interview record before advancing a wholly and meritorious ground.


Ground 4:  The IJ fails to make a finding


  19. The appellant claims Judge Dixon failed to provide any reasons for
      rejecting the appellant's account that he received threats from the
      Barzani and Talibani family in 2016 - 2017.  There is no merit to this
      ground at all.  The appellant's claim that he would be at risk upon
      return to Iraq from the Barzani family and the Talibani family was
      previously rejected by Judge Housego.  At paragraph [13], Judge Dixon
      recorded the appellant's evidence that the last time he had received
      threats from the families was in 2016 or 2017.  Given the very limited
      nature of the evidence before Judge Dixon it was undoubtedly open to
      him to describe the evidence as "wafer thin", and to find that there
      have been no such threats for the reasons set out at paragraph [40].


Ground 5:   The IJ failed to apply the CG case and consider internal
relocation correctly


  20. The appellant claims Judge Dixon failed to apply the relevant country
      guidance and adequately address whether the appellant can internally
      relocate.  The appellant claims Judge Dixon did not address where it
      is that the appellant can relocate to. Furthermore, the appellant
      claims Judge Dixon does not make a finding as to how the appellant can
      obtain a CSID card.


  21. In section C of the headnotes in the country guidance decision in  SMO
      & Others, the Upper Tribunal considered the need for a CSID or INID to
      enable  an  individual  to  live  and  travel  within   Iraq   without
      encountering treatment or conditions which are contrary to  Article  3
      ECHR.   The Tribunal noted that notwithstanding the phased  transition
      to the INID within Iraq, replacement CSIDs  remain  available  through
      Iraqi Consular facilities.  Whether an  individual  will  be  able  to
      obtain a replacement CSID whilst in the UK depends  on  the  documents
      available and, critically, the availability of  the  volume  and  page
      reference of the entry in  the  Family  Book  in  Iraq,  which  system
      continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity process.


  22. At paragraphs [44] and [45] of his decision Judge Dixon referred to
      the country guidance set out in SMO & Others.  He noted the appellant
      is from Kirkuk and found the appellant does not face a risk of
      suffering serious harm if returned there.  It was undoubtedly open to
      him to reach that conclusion on the basis of the evidence before the
      Tribunal, including the background material and the findings made.
      Judge Dixon found, at [36], that the appellant is in contact with his
      family, or is able to be in contact with them. He found, at [47], that
      the appellant could obtain the relevant documentation and if he has
      forgotten the necessary details, and he has the support of family
      available to him to assist with regards to this.


  23. In view of the finding made by judge Dixon that the appellant can
      safely return to Kirkuk, the question of internal relocation did not
      arise.  However, Judge Dixon found the appellant can relocate even if
      there were a real risk in Kirkuk.  Although I accept Judge Dixon does
      not expressly refer to internal relocation to Erbil or the IKR, that
      in my judgement is immaterial.  At paragraph [42] of the respondent's
      decision dated 9th January 2020, the respondent said that upon
      obtaining a Laissez Passer or a new Iraqi passport the appellant would
      be able to return to Iraq from the UK. The respondent said that the
      appellant would be able to take a flight from the UK to Baghdad and
      then take an internal flight to Kirkuk to live with his family.  At
      paragraph [43], the respondent said that alternatively, the appellant
      could arrange for a family member to meet him at Baghdad airport and
      he could make the journey from Baghdad to Kirkuk by land.  As the
      appellant would have the relevant documentation, he should not face
      any difficulties passing through the numerous checkpoints along the
      way.  Judge Housego had previously stated that the appellant can
      internally relocate to Erbil.  It is my judgement clear that Judge
      Dixon had internal relocation to the IKR in mind.  It follows that in
      my judgment there is no merit to this ground of appeal.


Ground 6; The IJ fails to give the benefit of the doubt


  24. Finally, the appellant claims Judge Dixon erroneously fails to give
      the appellant the benefit of the doubt when considering whether the
      Facebook posts/pages relied upon by the appellant, related to the
      appellant's Facebook account, having acknowledged the merits of the
      submissions made by the appellant's counsel.  The appellant claims
      that in any event the appellant's name features at the bottom of each
      of the Facebook pages, and that establishes the extracts from the
      Facebook pages related to a Facebook account in the name of the
      appellant.


  25. Judge Dixon refers to the appellant's evidence regarding his Facebook
      account(s) at paragraphs [10] to [12] of his decision.  The
      appellant's evidence in the end appears to have been that he has had
      two Facebook accounts.  The first one had been reported and had been
      closed.  He said that he has another account on Facebook where he is
      expressing his attitudes towards the regime.  At paragraph [12] of the
      decision, Judge Dixon records the appellant's evidence in cross-
      examination regarding the lack of translations and his evidence to
      support his claim of the Facebook account being monitored.


  26. In my judgement the difficulty with the appellant's claim in this
      respect is that at paragraph [45(b)] of his decision Judge Dixon found
      that in any event, the appellant's reliance upon the Facebook posts do
      not assist him.  Thus, although Judge Dixon was not persuaded that the
      posts related to the appellant, he did nevertheless consider whether
      the appellant's sur place activities would put at risk upon return.
      The appellant does not challenge the findings made by Judge Dixon at
      paragraph [45(b)] of the decision that there is no evidence of
      anything adverse coming the appellant's way as a result of the
      Facebook posts and no evidence of his being monitored or of the posts
      bringing the appellant to the attention of anyone in any other way.
      The appellant does not challenge the finding that he has no profile,
      and the likelihood is that, at most, the posts would be regarded as
      someone making broadly political statements on social media.  Judge
      Dixon accepted the analysis set out in the respondent's decision that
      the Facebook activity, even if accepted, would not in itself place the
      appellant at risk. Even if the Facebook posts are from a Facebook
      account in the name of the appellant the appellant had not established
      that such posts have come to the attention of the Kurdish political
      parties, and even if they did, there is no real risk of him being
      targeted directly as a result on the evidence presented.


  27. In my judgement, the decision of Judge Dixon should not be read by
      reference to specific paragraphs alone, but by reading the decision as
      a whole. The judge was required to consider whether the appellant was
      a credible witness before reaching an overall decision. He did so and
      in my judgment it was open to the judge to reject the claims made by
      the appellant after carrying out a careful analysis of the evidence
      which included consideration of the findings previously made, the
      screening and asylum interviews, and the evidence of the appellant
      himself.


  28. In my judgement Judge Dixon carried out a careful consideration of the
      evidence in the round and reached overall conclusions that were open
      to him. The grounds amount to nothing more than a disagreement with
      the findings and conclusions reached and I am satisfied that there is
      no material error of law in the way the grounds assert.


  29. It follows that I am satisfied that Judge Dixon did not make an error
      on a point of law and the decision of the FtT stands. The appeal is
      dismissed.





Notice of Decision


  30. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Dixon promulgated on 15th October 2020 stands.






      V. Mandalia


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia                   12th April 2021







