
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00426/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|(remote hearing)                   |                                   |
|On 2 February 2021                 |On 23 February 2021                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     AMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Badar, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant entered the UK in February 2016 and claimed asylum.  His
      application was refused in August  2016  and  his  subsequent  appeal,
      which was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Raikes  ("the
      previous judge"), was dismissed in March 2017.

   2. In September 2017 the appellant made further submissions.  These  were
      refused. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. His appeal
      (before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Howard) was allowed, but this
      decision was set aside, with no findings preserved,  and  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.  The  appeal  came  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Moffatt ("the judge"). In a  decision
      promulgated on 2 April 2020,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
      appellant is now appealing against that decision.

Background

   3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 15 December 1978. He  is  a
      Sunni Muslim from Mosul, Ninewa Province in Iraq.

   4. He claims to face a risk from ISIL (Daesh) and from family members who
      support Daesh.  He  claims  that  he  was  attacked  after  expressing
      negative opinions about Daesh. He also claims to be at  risk  from  an
      army officer, to whom he rented accommodation, who threatened to  kill
      him for revealing details about him to Daesh.

   5. With respect to family and contacts in Iraq, the appellant claims that
      he has not had contact with anyone in Iraq since  he  left  Mosul.  He
      claims that his father left Iraq over 10 years ago and  lives  in  the
      UAE, but that he has not had contact with his father for a long  time.
      He claims to be in contact with his brother who also lives in the  UAE
      and left Iraq over 10 years ago. He claims that his  brother  has  not
      been in contact with family in Iraq for a long time.

   6. The appellant claims that he does not have any identification or other
      Iraqi documentation (including his CSID) and that he is  not  able  to
      obtain a replacement CSID. He claims that in January 2019 he attempted
      to obtain documentation from the Iraqi embassy in the UK but was  told
      that they could not assist him without proof of his nationality.

   7. The previous judge (in his decision promulgated in March  2017)  found
      the appellant's evidence to not be credible. At paragraph  19  of  his
      decision, the previous judge described  the  appellant's  evidence  as
      containing   "inconsistencies,    contradictions    and    implausible
      statements". Amongst other things, the previous  judge  did  not  find
      credible  the  appellant's  evidence   about   the   whereabouts   and
      availability of his identity documents (paragraph 20) or his  lack  of
      contact with family  (paragraph  21).  The  judge  accepted  that  the
      appellant could not return to Mosul due to the indiscriminate violence
      in the area but found that he could  relocate  internally.  The  judge
      acknowledged that, at that  time,  returning  the  appellant  was  not
      feasible because of  lack  of  documentation  but  observed  that  his
      protection claim could not succeed on this basis, as explained  in  HF
      (Iraq) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
      Civ 1276.

   8. The respondent's decision  refusing  the  appellant's  protection  and
      human rights claim is dated 6 December 2018.  In  this  decision,  the
      respondent rejected the appellant's claim, finding, inter  alia,  that
      he could return to Mosul or  relocate  to  Baghdad.  With  respect  to
      obtaining a CSID, the respondent stated:

           "It is considered that you have not demonstrated that you do not
           have any family in Iraq who could  assist  you  in  obtaining  a
           CSID. You have failed to demonstrate  that  you  are  unable  to
           obtain a CSID therefore it is considered  reasonable  to  expect
           you to obtain a CSID and return to Iraq..."

   9. The respondent also rejected the appellant's claim that returning  him
      to Iraq would be contrary to article 8 ECHR.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

  10. The judge stated that the respondent did not argue that the  appellant
      could be  returned  to  Mosul  and  that  the  issue  before  him  was
      relocation to Baghdad.

  11. The judge directed himself to follow SMO, KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);
      identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).

  12. The judge accepted that the appellant is not presently  in  possession
      of his CSID but found that with the  assistance  of  family  he  could
      obtain a replacement. At paragraph 89 the judge stated that:

           "[W]hilst the appellant does not have the physical documentation
           [a CSID] in his possession, he does have  the  means  to  obtain
           information such as the book number of his family  records  from
           either his brother or father..."

  13. The judge did not find credible the appellant's claim  that  he  would
      not have the assistance  of  his  family  to  obtain  the  information
      necessary for a replacement CSID. At paragraph 84 he stated:

           "[The previous judge] was  very  sceptical  of  the  appellant's
           evidence about not being able to obtain his  identity  documents
           but  took  a  pragmatic  approach  that,  at  the  time  of  his
           determination, the documents were not in his possession. I share
           [the previous judge's] scepticism. I found that the  appellant's
           evidence about not being able  to  obtain  the  details  of  the
           family registration to be unconvincing. Even on his own evidence
           at the hearing before me, the appellant stated that he has  been
           in touch with his brother in the  United  Arab  Emirates  albeit
           states that this has not been the case for the last  12  months.
           The appellant's father lives in the UAE and is in touch with the
           appellant's brother. I do  not  accept  that  the  appellant  is
           unable to contact his father and his brother. I  take  the  view
           that the appellant is more unwilling than unable to do so as, to
           do so, would facilitate his return to Iraq given  the  narrative
           around his asylum claim has been found not to be credible.  With
           the relevant details, the appellant would be able  to  obtain  a
           CSID in the UK [paragraph 383 of SMO]"


  14. The judge also did not accept that the appellant's  removal  would  be
      contrary to article 8 ECHR.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

  15. The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  relate  solely  to  the  judge's
      assessment of the appellant's lack of identity documentation.

  16. The first  ground  of  appeal  argues  that  the  judge's  finding  at
      paragraph  84  of  the  decision  was  inadequately  reasoned.  It  is
      submitted that the judge failed to explain what he meant by  "relevant
      details" in the last sentence of  paragraph  84  and  how  this  would
      enable the appellant to obtain a CSID in the UK.

  17. This ground also argue that the country guidance  case  law  does  not
      indicate that an Iraqi will be successful in obtaining a CSID  in  the
      UK but only that they might be and that if they are  reissued  with  a
      CSID it would be accepted in Iraq.

  18. It is also argued that it is not "self-evident" that  the  appellant's
      father, who is in a third  country,  would  be  able  to  provide  the
      necessary information for documentation from abroad.

  19. The second  ground  of  appeal  argues  that  the  relevant  date  for
      assessing risk is the date of the hearing, and therefore that  because
      at that date of the hearing the appellant did  not  have  a  CSID,  he
      would be at risk in Iraq even if theoretically he could obtain  a  new
      one in the future.

  20. It is also argued that that the  judge  erred  by  assuming  that  the
      claimant ought to take action to avoid  a  risk  (in  this  case,  the
      action is to obtain a CSID and  the  risk  is  treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3 ECHR for those without  a  CSID).  The  grounds  argue  that
      expecting the appellant to take steps to avoid risk is contrary to the
      principles in RT (Zimbabwe) & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department [2012] UKSC 38. The grounds state that there  is  no  "self
      help" or "avoiding" principle in refugee law and rely on paragraph  74
      of RT and Secretary of State for the Home Department v MSM (Somalia) &
      Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 715. It is argued that if the  appellant  chooses
      not to take "avoiding action" even where such action is  available  to
      him, he is entitled to international protection because  there  is  no
      self-help duty. The grounds also  maintain  that  if  the  appellant's
      reasons for taking avoiding action would be  in part out  of  fear  of
      persecution then he is entitled to international protection.

  21. Mr Badar relied upon,  and  reiterated,  the  arguments  made  in  the
      grounds of appeal. He highlighted  the  submission  that  the  judge's
      finding in paragraph 84 of the decision that the  appellant  would  be
      able to obtain "relevant details" to obtain a replacement CSID was not
      supported by reasons. He submitted that the judge  had  not  explained
      what these "relevant  details"  consist  of   or  how  they  could  be
      obtained.

  22. Ms Cunha argued that although the reasoning in paragraph 84  is  brief
      (and might even be problematic) the judge took, and  was  entitled  to
      take, as his starting point the findings of the previous  judge  about
      the appellant's contact with family.  She  also  argued  that  it  was
      necessary to consider the decision as a whole, from which  it  becomes
      clear that the judge made sustainable findings about  the  appellant's
      credibility. She argued that given the finding that the  appellant  is
      (or could be) in contact with his father, it follows that he was in  a
      position to obtain a replacement CSID as his father could provide  him
      with necessary details. She also argued that  the  improving  security
      situation in Mosul means that it is realistic that the appellant could
      travel there from Baghdad to obtain his CSID.

Analysis

  23. It was common ground before the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant
      does not have a CSID or an INID  (the  new  biometric  card  replacing
      CSIDs) and that without one of these documents there is  a  real  risk
      that he will encounter treatment or conditions which are  contrary  to
      Article 3 ECHR.

  24. The issue for the judge to resolve was whether the appellant  will  be
      able to obtain a replacement CSID (or, alternatively, an INID)  either
      whilst still in the UK or shortly after arriving in Baghdad (which  is
      the city to which he would  be  transported  by  the  respondent  when
      returned to Iraq).

  25. There are four ways a person in the appellant's position could
      potentially obtain a replacement CSID (or INID).

  26. The first is that the appellant could travel himself from Baghdad
      (which is the city to which he would be returned by the respondent) to
      Mosul and apply for an INID or CSID at the civil status affairs office
      in the locality where his family is registered. The view expressed in
      SMO, however, is that a returnee will not be able to travel internally
      without a CSID or INID: see paras. 378-381. Ms Cunha argued that
      because of the improving security situation in Mosul and strong
      transport links between Mosul and Baghdad (as recognised in para. 51
      of SMO) the appellant could travel to Mosul from Baghdad to obtain a
      CSID or INID. That may or may not be the case, but it is not an
      argument that supports the conclusion reached by the judge because the
      judge did not find that the appellant would be able to obtain a CSID
      or INID himself in Mosul.

  27. The second alternative is that the appellant could obtain a CSID or
      INID in Baghdad. However, SMO makes plain at paras. 386 - 387 that
      this is not viable. The judge, correctly, did not suggest that this
      was an option.

  28. The third alternative is that a proxy  could  obtain  a  CSID  on  the
      appellant's behalf in Mosul. The viability  of  this  option  depends,
      inter alia, on CSIDs not having been entirely replaced by INIDs in the
      appellant's local registry (an INID  cannot  be  obtained  by  proxy),
      knowledge of the family's volume  and  page  reference  in  the  civil
      register, whether the local registry office has been destroyed in  the
      conflict with Daesh, and the availability of  certain  documents  (the
      extent of which might be reduced where the volume and  page  reference
      in the family volume is known). See para. 390 of SMO, relying upon and
      following para 25 of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq  CG
      UKUT 00212 (IAC). Para. 25 of AAH states the following in  respect  of
      documents:-

           Dr Fatah states to his knowledge  the  documents  that  must  be
           produced in order to apply for a CSID within Iraq are:


                     i) Application form
                    ii) Birth certificate
                   iii) A 'housing card' or a letter from the local  council
                        confirming the applicant's residence
                    iv) (In the IKR) a recommendation from the mukhtar
                     v) PDS card
                    vi) Two photographs of the applicant  (or  in  the  IKR,
                        four)

  29. The judge did not make a finding on whether the appellant could obtain
      a CSID through a proxy in Mosul and the decision does not address all
      of the considerations material to the assessment that would be
      necessary to reach a conclusion on this. The decision therefore cannot
      be defended on the basis that the appellant could obtain a CSID by
      proxy.

  30. The fourth way in which a CSID could potentially be obtained by the
      appellant - and the only one that was addressed by the judge (see the
      last sentence of paragraph 84 of the decision) is that the appellant
      could obtain a CSID from within the UK.

  31. This is clearly a viable option in some circumstances, as set out in
      SMO and earlier country guidance cases. The relevant guidance in SMO
      is as follows:

  32. Para. 11 of the headnote to SMO states:

           Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID  within  Iraq,
           replacement  CSIDs  remain  available  through  Iraqi   Consular
           facilities.  Whether an individual will  be  able  to  obtain  a
           replacement CSID whilst in  the  UK  depends  on  the  documents
           available and, critically, the availability of  the  volume  and
           page reference of the entry in the Family Book  in  Iraq,  which
           system continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity  process.
           Given the importance of that information,  most  Iraqi  citizens
           will recall it. That  information  may  also  be  obtained  from
           family members, although it is  necessary  to  consider  whether
           such relatives are on the father's or the mother's side  because
           the registration system is patrilineal.

  33. Para. 383 of SMO states:

           We have not been asked to revisit the extant country guidance on
           the way in which an individual might obtain a  replacement  CSID
           from within the UK, for which see [173]-[177] of AA  (Iraq)  and
           [26] of AAH (Iraq).  We  add  only  this:  whilst  the  INID  is
           clearly replacing the CSID in Iraq, consulates do not  have  the
           electronic terminals necessary to issue the INID and continue to
           issue the CSID instead, as confirmed in a  Canadian  Immigration
           and Refugee Board  report  which  is  quoted  at  5.6.9  of  the
           respondent's   CPIN   entitled   Internal   Relocation,    civil
           documentation  and  returns,  dated  February  2019.   An  Iraqi
           national in the UK would be able to apply for a CSID in the  way
           explained in AA (Iraq) and, if one was successfully obtained, we
           find that it would be acceptable evidence  of  the  individual's
           identity throughout Iraq.

  34. Paras. 173 - 177 of AA state:

           Obtaining a CSID whilst in the UK


           173.  As regards those who have an expired or current Iraqi
           passport but no CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first report
           that a CSID may be obtained through the "Consular section of the
           Iraqi Embassy in London", which will send a request for a
           replacement or renewed CSID to the General Directorate for
           Travel and Nationality - Directorate of Civil Status. A request
           for a replacement CSID must be accompanied, inter alia, by "any
           form of official document in support of the applicant's
           identity" and the application form must be signed by "the head
           of the family, or the legal guardian or representative to verify
           the truth of its contents." He also added that an applicant must
           also authorise a person in Iraq to act as his representative in
           order for that person to "follow up on the progress of the
           application.


           174.  However, Dr Fatah continued by explaining that if an
           individual has lost his CSID and does not know the relevant page
           and book number for it,  then the Iraq Embassy in London will
           not be able to obtain one on his behalf. Instead, he or she will
           have to attend the appropriate local office of family
           registration in Iraq or give a relative, friend or lawyer power
           of attorney to obtain his or her CSID. The process of a giving
           power of attorney to a lawyer in Iraq to act "as a proxy" is
           commonplace and Dr Fatah had done this himself. He also
           explained that the power of attorney could be obtained through
           the Iraq Embassy.


           175.  Dr Fatah gave further evidence to the effect that having a
           marriage certificate may be useful as it would contain data
           found in the family records. It is, however, not possible to use
           a "health card" in order to obtain a CSID because there is no
           primary health care or GP system in Iraq, but instead patients
           attended hospital when they needed to do so and no central
           records are held.


           176.  There is a consensus between Dr Fatah's evidence and the
           following more general evidence provided by UNHCR-Iraq in April
           2015 on the issue of obtaining CSID's from abroad.


           "In principle, a failed asylum seeker, or indeed any Iraqi
           citizen abroad, can acquire Iraqi documents through Iraqi
           embassies and consulates. There is a special authorization
           granted to these bodies to provide documents for Iraqi abroad on
           the condition that the beneficiaries should have any available
           documents in order to prove their nationality."


           177.  In summary, we conclude that it is possible for  an  Iraqi
           national living in the UK to obtain a CSID through the  consular
           section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able
           to produce a current or expired passport  and/or  the  book  and
           page number for their family registration details.  For  persons
           without such a passport,  or  who  are  unable  to  produce  the
           relevant family registration details, a power of attorney can be
           provided to someone in Iraq who  can  thereafter  undertake  the
           process of obtaining the CSID for such  person  from  the  Civil
           Status Affairs Office in their  home  governorate.  For  reasons
           identified in the section that follows  below,  at  the  present
           time the process of obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely  to  be
           severely hampered if the person wishing to obtain  the  CSID  is
           from an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring.

  35. Para. 26 of AAH states:


          If applying through  a  consulate  abroad  the  requirements  are
          different. Having contacted the consulate in London, and  checked
          on the website of the Iraqi embassy in Sweden,  Dr  Fatah  states
          that the authorities will require the applicant to first  make  a
          statement explaining why he needs a CSID and attach this  to  his
          application form, which must countersigned by  the  head  of  the
          applicant's family and stamped by the consulate  or  embassy;  he
          must then produce his Iraqi passport and proof of status  in  the
          country where he  is  applying,  the  name  of  a  representative
          (proxy) in Iraq, an additional form completed by the head of  the
          applicant's family verifying that the contents of his application
          form were true, four colour copies of  his  INC,  and  10  colour
          photographs.    Crucially the applicant must be able  to  produce
          something which  can  establish  the  location  of  his  family's
          details in the civil register. This should be a CSID, an  INC  or
          birth  certificate.  If  none  of  these  are  available  to  the
          applicant he must supply the identity documents of  his  parents.
          This evidence again accords with that of Landinfo (December 2017)
          who conclude that it can be difficult to  obtain  replacement  ID
          documents from an embassy abroad for the individual who is unable
          to verify his or her identity.

  36. In paragraph 84 of the decision, the judge referred to  paragraph  383
      of SMO and stated that "with the relevant details" the appellant  will
      be able to obtain a CSID in the UK. The appellant argues  that  it  is
      unclear what is meant by "relevant details" and how this  will  enable
      the appellant to obtain a CSID in the UK.  I  disagree.  Although  the
      judge's reasoning is very brief, it is plain  from  the  reference  to
      paragraph 383 of SMO that the "relevant details" referred  to  by  the
      judge are the volume and page reference of the  entry  in  the  Family
      Book in Iraq. The point made by the judge in para. 84 (and  para.  89)
      is that the appellant could obtain from his father (or brother) in the
      UAE the volume and page reference of the entry in the Family  Book  in
      Iraq. It was entirely consistent with SMO (and the analysis in AA  and
      AAH referred to therein) to find that,  with  the  assistance  of  his
      father (who in addition to providing the volume and page reference for
      the Family Book could supply his identity documents in order to verify
      the appellant's identity), the appellant would be able to provide  the
      Iraqi embassy in the UK  with  the  information  needed  to  obtain  a
      replacement CSID. The appellant therefore  cannot  succeed  under  the
      first ground of appeal.

  37. I now turn to the second ground of appeal. It is well established that
      a returnee should not be put in a position  where  he  would  have  to
      hide, change, or renounce his belief, identity or way of life. Indeed,
      he should not even be put in a position where he would need to pretend
      to hold a belief he does not have (RT (Zimbabwe) & Ors v Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 38) or change profession  to
      avoid persecution (Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  MSM
      (Somalia) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 715). See also WA  (Pakistan)  v  The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 302.

  38. There is no merit to the appellant's argument  that  these  principles
      apply  to  his  choice  to  not  take  steps  necessary  to  obtain  a
      replacement CSID. It was never part of the appellant's case  that  not
      having a CSID is an integral part of his identity or that taking steps
      to obtain a CSID conflicts with his beliefs. His case was simply  that
      he is unable to obtain a replacement CSID. Therefore, RT and the other
      cases referred  to  in  para.  37  above  have  no  relevance  to  his
      circumstances. What is relevant  to  the  appellant  choosing  to  not
      obtain a replacement CSID is what was said by Elias LJ in  paras.  103
      -104 of HF (Iraq) & Ors v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [2013] EWCA Civ 1276 about such conduct subverting the true purpose of
      asylum law:
           [The Secretary of State's representative] contends that as a
           general proposition an asylum claim ought not to succeed where
           the risk on return arises only because of the refusal by the
           asylum seeker to co-operate. He should not be able to secure the
           benefit of humanitarian protection where he could be returned
           safely and is at risk of serious ill treatment solely because of
           his own conduct - a fortiori where, as with the refusal to co-
           operate, that conduct is criminal - and where he can up to the
           very moment of return eliminate the risk by co-operation.
           I accept that submission. The claim for humanitarian relief in
           such circumstances is wholly unprincipled and subverts the true
           purpose of asylum law. Whether in those circumstances the
           appellants could properly be sent back to Iraq (assuming that
           Iraq would take an undocumented person) is no doubt problematic;
           but even if that would infringe their human rights, it does not
           follow in my view that they should then be entitled to claim
           humanitarian status with all the benefits which that confers.
  39. The appellant also argues, as part of the  second  ground  of  appeal,
      that the judge erred by not assessing the risk he would face  in  Iraq
      based on the facts at the date of the hearing. It  is  submitted  that
      because at the date of the hearing the appellant did not have  a  CSID
      it follows that he would be at risk.  This  argument  is  misconceived
      because a person who is able to obtain a  replacement  CSID  within  a
      reasonable period of time and without the process of doing so exposing
      him to conditions breaching article  3  is  in  essentially  the  same
      position as a person in possession of a CSID.

Notice of decision

  40. The grounds of appeal do not identify an error of law.

  41. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 5 February 2021             |

