
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00536/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th October 2020                 |On 30th October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     ER
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DIRECTIONS AND REASONS (R)

IT IS DIRECTED THAT:


      i) The directions of Upper Tribunal Judge Coker set out in her 'error
         of law' decision promulgated on 13th February 2020 that the appeal
         will be re-heard in the Upper Tribunal, on submissions only, are
         set aside.


     ii) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de
         novo with no findings preserved.


    iii) The parties shall be notified of a hearing date before the First-
         tier Tribunal in due course.  The Tribunal shall arrange an
         Albanian interpreter.


REASONS


 1. The hearing before me on 27th October 2020 took the form of a remote
    hearing using Skype for Business. Neither party objected.  The
    appellant joined the hearing remotely from the offices of his
    solicitors.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. The hearing
    was publicly listed, and I was addressed by the representatives in
    exactly the same way as I would have been, if the parties had attended
    the hearing together.


 2. The appellant is a national of Albania.  He claimed asylum on 8th
    September 2015. The claim was refused by the respondent for reasons set
    out in a decision dated 9th January 2019.  The respondent accepted the
    appellant is an Albanian national but rejected his account of events.
    The respondent concluded, inter alia, there are inconsistencies in the
    appellant's account of events and his account is undermined by other
    records obtained from the Albanian authorities.  The appellant's appeal
    against that decision was dismissed for reasons set out in a decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moffatt promulgated on 24th October 2019.


 3. The appellant was granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge O'Brien on 4th December 2019.  Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
    concluded that Judge Moffatt erred in law in reaching her findings on
    the credibility of the appellant's account for reasons set out in her
    decision promulgated on 13th February 2020.  The decision of Judge
    Moffatt was therefore set aside with no findings preserved.  As to the
    future conduct of the appeal she stated:


         "18. The evidence given in this appeal before the First-tier
         Tribunal  was not disputed and the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
         record of the evidence, insofar as it was in the decision, is not
         disputed save for some assertions that there was a misunderstanding
         by the Judge.  This is not a case that merits a re-hearing before a
         First-tier Tribunal judge.  The appellant has given his evidence
         and the appeal can proceed on the basis of submissions.  It does
         not appear that an application to file further evidence has been
         made by either party."


 4. In readiness for the hearing before me, the parties have both filed
    written submissions. The respondent maintains that the appellant is not
    credible and the Tribunal should reject his attempts to distance
    himself from the serious discrepancies in his account, by relying upon
    medical evidence.  The appellant maintains that any inconsistencies in
    the appellant's account do not go to the heart of the claim and the
    account relied upon by the appellant is a plausible one.  In any event,
    the account is supported by medical evidence.  The appellant has also
    made an application to adduce further evidence in the form of a report
    from Dr Pranveer Singh, a Consultant Psychiatrist.  The report confirms
    the appellant is suffering from a Depressive Episode of moderate
    severity and the current position is that he has residual symptoms of
    PTSD rather than the acute presentation.


 5. Mr Lams confirmed that this is not an appeal in which the medical
    evidence establishes that the appellant is unable to give evidence.
    The appellant gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal previously
    and is quite prepared to give evidence now.  The parties both
    acknowledge that the re-hearing of this appeal is to take place without
    any findings preserved.  They acknowledge it will be difficult for the
    Tribunal to reach an informed view as to the credibility of the
    appellant without having any opportunity to hear the evidence of the
    appellant and the opportunity to observe his evidence challenged in
    cross examination, as it would in the conventional way.


 6. Having had the opportunity of considering the written submissions
    helpfully made by the parties, it would in my judgement the
    inappropriate, and potentially procedurally unfair, for me to determine
    the appeal without providing the appellant an opportunity to give
    evidence, and, without giving the respondent an opportunity to
    challenge the appellant's evidence in the usual way, before reaching a
    decision as to the appellant's credibility, and make findings against
    which the assessment of the risk upon return is to be considered.  The
    assessment of a claim for asylum such as this is always a highly fact
    sensitive task.  It is not in the interests of justice for me to simply
    make my findings on the basis of a reading of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge's record of the evidence insofar as it is recorded in the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and upon hearing submissions made
    by the parties representatives.  Furthermore, there is now further
    medical evidence relied upon by the appellant.


 7. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moffatt is tainted by a
    material error of law and has been set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Coker.  The appeal is to be re-heard with no findings preserved.
    Having now had the opportunity of considering the submissions made by
    the parties and the further evidence relied upon by the appellant, I
    accept the submission made by both Mr Lams and Mrs Aboni that the most
    appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh, and for the direction made by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker that no oral evidence will be called, to be set
    aside. I have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back
    to the FtT for hearing afresh, having considered paragraph 7.2 of the
    Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  The
    nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be
    extensive. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing in due course.




Signed   V. Mandalia   Date: 27th October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




