
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00496/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th June 2019                            |On 1st July 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Siriwardena (Counsel) instructed by Marsh and
                    Partners Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT



    Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1. Anonymity having previously been ordered in the First-tier Tribunal and
    there being no application to remove the order, I see no reason  to  do
    so and the order remains in place.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
    court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any
    member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Respondent appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver
    promulgated on 12th April 2019 whereby he allowed  the  appeal  against
    the decision  to  refuse  to  grant  asylum  or  ancillary  protection.
    Permission to appeal was granted at the First-tier  Tribunal  by  Judge
    Saffer on 10th May 2019 on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  not  given  adequate  reasons  for  the
    findings made.

 3. Turning to the Grounds of Appeal the first point is that evidence which
    was not put before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  sufficient  to  show
    determinatively that the Appellant had misled or lied to  the  Tribunal
    and had fabricated evidence.  There had been no application under  Rule
    32 to adduce additional evidence in support of the argument  concerning
    error and the evidence referred to was not attached to the application.
     Mr Tarlow invited me to receive the evidence today but when I  pressed
    him as to whether there is a proper submission that he could make as to
    why I should do that he was unable to add or make  such  a  submission.
    In those circumstances I declined to admit the evidence.

 4. The next  point  in  the  grounds  relates  to  the  treatment  of  the
    Appellant's assertion that he had  lost  his  eye  in  the  context  of
    detention and ill-treatment when he returned to Sri Lanka from  the  UK
    in 2011.  The Appellant's case had been  previously  considered  by  an
    Immigration Judge, Judge Pedro, and on this particular point the  judge
    found that the Appellant had failed to establish, as he  had  asserted,
    that he had his eye before he travelled to Sri Lanka and lost it during
    the visit.  Judge Pedro pointed out that the Appellant was  in  receipt
    of medical treatment in the UK  through  his  GP  and  that  there  was
    reasonably available evidence which he could have  brought  forward  to
    support that contention if it were true.

 5. A fair and complete reading of the decision shows that rather than,  as
    Mr Tarlow submitted before me, Judge  Oliver  leaving  that  matter  as
    unresolved, the judge has found that the Appellant has still failed  to
    establish the point.  In the context of Judge Oliver's decision, I note
    that  he  says  Judge  Pedro's  decision  cannot  be  faulted  on   the
    information then available before going on to note (paragraph 40)  that
    before him there is still no evidence from the appellant's  GP  at  the
    time to show  that  he  had  no  eye  injury  before  his  visit.   The
    indication is clear that the judge is not moving away from that earlier
    finding.

 6. In respect of the grounds criticising Judge Oliver's treatment  of  the
    diagnosis of post-traumatic  stress  disorder,  which  is  set  out  at
    paragraphs 6 to 10, the complaint is made that Dr Lawrence, about whose
    expertise there has  been  no  question,  did  not  make  a  definitive
    causative finding and that that was something that severely  undermined
    the Appellant's case and which  Judge  Oliver  failed  to  factor  into
    account.  At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow criticised  Dr  Lawrence's
    report and diagnosis of post-traumatic stress  disorder  on  the  basis
    that the report appears to have simply relied on an uncritical adoption
    of the Appellant's account.

 7. Judge Oliver found  at  paragraph  40  that  there  was  strong  expert
    evidence submitted of  the  Appellant's  severe  depression  and  post-
    traumatic stress disorder and at paragraph 42 remarks that Dr Lawrence,
    taking into account his expertise and his expressly  recognising  as  a
    necessity the checking of an Appellant's account against more objective
    criteria than his historical account,  clearly  shows  that  the  judge
    appreciated the need to be satisfied that the expert evidence  was  not
    flawed by an uncritical reliance on the Appellant's  account.   In  the
    submissions that I have heard today I have been taken to Dr  Lawrence's
    report which is of some 53 pages and appears in the Appellant's  bundle
    starting at page 111.  There are many instances where  the  doctor  has
    shown  full  competence  of  the  need   to   check   objectively   the
    symptomatology being reported by the Appellant and has cross-referenced
    to other information  that  has  been  before  him  and  explained  the
    conclusion he has  reached  as  to  why  the  Appellant  has  not  been
    simulating the various symptoms  that  he  has  been  describing.   The
    report is not individualised by  paragraph  numbers  but  the  relevant
    parts are at 128 and 129.  Judge Oliver had a proper basis  upon  which
    to  conclude  that  the  report  was  strong  evidence.  I  reject  the
    submission that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that  the  expert
    evidence is reliable and capable of supporting the Appellant's  account
    of ill-treatment is flawed and unsustainable.

 8. The fact that the judge accepted that the Appellant had  been  detained
    is clear from a fair reading of paragraph 44  when  he  refers  to  the
    Appellant having been in detention.

 9. The next grounds challenge the reliance that Judge Oliver placed on the
    documentation received from Sri Lanka from a lawyer.  The criticism  is
    that the judge failed to take account  of  the  Respondent's  assertion
    that the Sri Lankan lawyer's credentials could not be verified.  I find
    no merit in this ground.  The judge's decision makes plain right at the
    very beginning of his consideration that at the start  of  the  hearing
    the  Appellant's  representative  was  critical  of  the   Respondent's
    treatment of that documentation and that at the hearing  the  challenge
    that the lawyer was not a member of the Sri Lankan bar was dealt  with,
    and it was established on the evidence that he  was.   In  that  regard
    Judge Oliver also placed reliance on the judicial review proceedings in
    which the  very  documents  referred  to  were  relied  upon  as  being
    sufficient to amount to a new claim, and at paragraphs 11 to  18  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins has set out with clarity that  the  Respondent's
    treatment of those documents was in essence cursory and  the  reliance,
    reiterated in these grounds, on the fact that the  Appellant  had  been
    found to lack  credibility,  including  in  terms  of  producing  false
    documents previously, was an insufficient basis upon  which  to  reject
    the new documents that had arrived because they  were  court  documents
    which had been authenticated.  It appears that despite  that  reasoning
    made available to the respondent in July 2018, by the  time  this  case
    came in front of Judge Oliver on 12th April 2019, the  objections  were
    in essence the same.

10. I am satisfied that the judge's  conclusion  that  the  Respondent  had
    failed  to  show  that  the  documents  were  false   as   alleged   is
    unassailable.  The point is particularly  significant  because  a  fair
    reading of this decision shows that it was the existence of the  arrest
    warrants, not the fact that the Appellant had lost his  eye,  that  led
    Judge Oliver to conclude that the Appellant was on a stop list and that
    in that context would be at risk on return.  On the face of the  as  to
    the reliability of those court  documents  the  judge's  conclusion  in
    respect of risk on return is soundly made out and reasoned.

11. The grounds at paragraph 16 make brief  reference  of  complaints  made
    against the documentation, namely that one was  produced  a  few  weeks
    after the Appellant's asylum appeal was dismissed on 8th January  2013,
    and that there is a delay in the production of another document between
    the date of complaint and  the  date  of  signature,  but  neither  are
    matters which significantly impinge upon the judge's conclusions as  to
    the veracity of the documents in light of the weight that the judge has
    placed on the authenticated provenance of the documents.   Plainly  the
    question of provenance outweighs the points referred  to  at  paragraph
    16.

12. The final grounds amount to an  assertion  that  the  Appellant  simply
    never  had  the  profile  which  would  make  him  of  interest.   Both
    criticisms fall away in light of the finding that he is the subject  of
    an arrest warrant and that he would be on a stop list.

Decision

13. I find no error of law and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowing the Appellant's appeal stands.

Signed [pic]           Date 27 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



