
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00087/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2017                            |On 13 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                     TJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and background

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  [  ]  1987.   The
    appellant came to the UK in March 2014.  The appellant  applied  for  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) partner visa to come to the UK.  This was  issued
    on 12 February 2014 and valid until 27 June 2016.  The appellant claims
    to have been married in 2009  to  [KMI],  or  [IMK],  and  they  had  a
    daughter together  called  [TT]  born  on  [  ]  2011.   The  appellant
    travelled to the UK with her daughter.  However, the  appellant  claims
    to have become estranged from her husband, who left in April 2016.

2.   On 27 June 2016 the day before the appellant's visa was due to  expire,
    she claimed asylum on the basis that she claimed to fear her husband, a
    non-state agent, if she were returned to Bangladesh.

3.   The respondent considered the  application  under  the  United  Nations
    Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 1951 (Refugee Convention)
    but concluded that the appellant whilst not a member  of  a  particular
    social group within the meaning of the Refugee Convention  -  i.e.  she
    did not have an immutable characteristic. Whilst it was  accepted  that
    women in Bangladesh constituted a  particular  social  group,  this  by
    itself, did not mean appellant would face persecution on her return  to
    Bangladesh.  In order to bring herself within  the  Refugee  Convention
    the appellant had to demonstrate that she was a  person  with  a  well-
    founded fear of being persecuted but the respondent did not accept this
    was the case.  The  appellant  was  also  considered  for  humanitarian
    protection, but  it  was  found  that  she  had  not  given  consistent
    information about her background.  Her permanent address in  Bangladesh
    was the address of her parents, where she had been able to live  safely
    for a number of years.   It  was  by  no  means  established  that  the
    appellant would be kidnapped  by  her  in-laws,  as  she  had  claimed.
    Accordingly, the respondent did not accept that the appellant would  be
    at risk of serious harm if she were returned to Bangladesh.

4.    Finally,  the  respondent  considered  sufficiency  of  protection  in
    Bangladesh and considered the appellant had failed to demonstrate  that
    the authorities there would be unable or unwilling to offer protection.
     There is evidence of domestic violence and human rights abuses arising
    in the domestic setting.  The respondent also  noted  the  presence  of
    corruption in Bangladesh.  Police officers often failed to collect  the
    necessary evidence and there was not always a  degree  of  respect  for
    women's rights that would be expected by a  modern  country.   Domestic
    violence, such as the appellant claimed  to  have  experienced  at  the
    hands of her husband, was not combated in the same way as it  would  be
    in a modern  Western  country.   Nevertheless,  having  regard  to  the
    presence of shelters available to women  within  Bangladesh,  the  fact
    that the appellant had adequate protection from her own family and  the
    fact  that  the  state  overall  took  reasonable  steps   to   prevent
    persecution or  serious  harm  to  individuals  such  as  her,  it  was
    concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  qualify   for   humanitarian
    protection or protection under the European Convention on Human  Rights
    (ECHR).  Specifically,  Article  2  was  not  engaged  because  it  was
    considered on the evidence the appellant had not demonstrated that  her
    death was likely to occur and there was no real risk  of  ill-treatment
    falling within Article 3 of that Convention.  Article 8 was  considered
    by the respondent who found inadequate information to suggest that  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship in the UK  and  her
    child ([TT]) could travel back to Bangladesh with the  appellant.   The
    appellant had not made out the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and specifically Appendix FM.  She  did  not  qualify  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) which was designed to  protect  a  private  life  formed
    whilst in the UK.  Finally, there were no exceptional circumstances for
    granting discretionary leave.


The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

5.   The appellant appealed the respondent's refusal by notice of appeal  to
    the FTT dated 6 March 2017.  The grounds of appeal observe the  child's
    schooling in the UK and state that it would not be in  accordance  with
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  to
    remove the appellant and her child to Bangladesh where she  would  lose
    "her mother's care".  Their best interests lay in remaining in the  UK.
    The respondent was also criticised for failing to identify  significant
    parts of the appellant's claim that did in  fact  engage  international
    instruments designed to protect her.  The  respondent  had  been  over-
    dismissive of the appellant's credibility, having regard to  Section  8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act  2004  (2004
    Act) in that the  appellant  had  submitted  a  late  claim.  This  was
    behaviour that the respondent was entitled to take into  account  under
    Section 8 (4). The appellant claimed that this was because the attitude
    of her "in-laws" had come to her attention relatively recently. It  was
    alleged that the respondent had not  considered  all  the  evidence  in
    reaching her decision.

6.   The appeal against  that  decision  came  before  Judge  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Howard (the  Immigration  Judge)  who  dismissed  the  appeal,
    explaining that in his view the most "egregious" activities she accuses
    her in-laws of did not take place.  She had been able to live safely at
    Chittagong with her parents.  The threats towards mother and child have
    been  exaggerated  and  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  failed.    The
    Immigration Judge rejected the "factual matrix" on which the  case  was
    based, finding that the appellant was not a refugee but  needed  to  be
    returned to Bangladesh at the earliest opportunity.  In any event,  the
    respondent considered that the appellant  had  an  adequate  degree  of
    state  protection  in  Bangladesh,   noting   a   number   of   reports
    internationally available  which  suggested  that  shelters  and  other
    accommodation is available for women  who  wish  to  seek  refuge  from
    vicious husbands.  The  respondent  gave  consideration  to  Article  8
    dealing with it in a number of paragraphs but did not consider it to be
    an unreasonable response to require the  appellant  and  her  child  to
    return to Bangladesh.

7.   The appeal against the respondent's decision came  for  hearing  before
    Judge of First-tier Tribunal Ian Howard (the  Immigration  Judge).   He
    considered that the appellant had indeed married her  husband  in  2009
    and due to abuse had moved out.  He noted that the appellant's  parents
    still lived in Chittagong, that she had had a  happy  marriage  at  one
    time and that the parties' split had been acrimonious with her  husband
    walking out in April 2016.  He said that the evidence  showed,  to  the
    lower standard of proof that applied, that the egregious activities  of
    her husband would not put her at risk if she continued to live  at  her
    parents' house.  The threats allegedly made towards  mother  and  child
    were not accepted and they were contradicted by  other  evidence.   The
    appellant made her asylum claim on the day that  leave  expired,  which
    was opportunistic and undermined the credibility of her  account.   The
    appellant submitted a number of documents from Bangladesh but  none  of
    them  could  be  verified  and  they  contained  contradictions.    The
    Immigration Judge rejected the factual matrix advanced by the appellant
    and decided to dismiss the claim on all grounds.  He made  a  direction
    for anonymity, however.  Having dismissed the claim,  he  made  no  fee
    award.

8.   The appellant was given permission to appeal by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Reeds on 5 September 2017 because  she  thought  the  appellant,  as  a
    single  woman  returning  to  Bangladesh  was  arguably  a   vulnerable
    individual.  Furthermore,  judge  reads  That   considered   that   the
    Immigration Judge may not have given adequate reasons for rejecting the
    documents submitted in support of the appellant's case. Judge Reeds did
    not give permission to appeal the Immigration Judge' s  decision  under
    article 8.

9.   The respondent provided a rule 24 response to say that the  Immigration
    Judge had reached reasoned  findings  for  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal and the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  merely  amounted  to  a
    disagreement with the FTT's conclusions.


The Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal

10.  The appellant appeared through her Counsel Mr  Symes.   The  respondent
    was represented by Mr Mills a Presenting Officer.  Mr Symes argued that
    [IMK]'s marriage to the appellant  had  been  against  the  appellant's
    parents-in-laws' wishes.  She accepted, however, that she had lived  in
    Dhaka.  It had also been accepted that the appellant had later lived in
    Chittagong.  However, the appellant and her daughter had  come  to  the
    UK.  Her father-in-law was a police officer and  the  country  evidence
    indicated that it is perfectly normal for such persons to have a  great
    deal of power in Bangladesh.  The respondent was aware of this, as  she
    accepted it at paragraph 59 of the  refusal  dated  22  December  2016.
    However, the respondent does also point out there  that  the  appellant
    had provided no information as to her father  in-law'  s  rank  in  the
    police service or the extent of the influence that he might be expected
    to exert. Mr Symes submitted that the Immigration Judge  had  not  been
    justified in rejecting the appellant's account on the basis that it was
    not credible.  The account that her father-in-law was  a  powerful  man
    with the Awami League had been consistent with what the  appellant  had
    told the respondent.

11.  Turning to ground 2 of the grounds of  appeal,  this  states  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasoning   for
    rejecting the various documents emanating from the authorities.   These
    were referred to at paragraph 29  et  seq.  of  the  decision.   It  is
    pointed out by Mr Symes that paragraph 29 contains a summary  dismissal
    of  the  documents  produced,  stating  that  there  were  "fundamental
    contradictions  at  the  heart  of  this  claim"  which  justified   in
    concluding  that  their  provenance  or  content  was  unreliable.  The
    Immigration Judge therefore rejected  those  documents  "purporting  to
    originate from the authorities in Bangladesh".  Mr  Symes  pointed  out
    that there were no contradictions "at the heart of this claim".   There
    was no reason for rejecting the reliability of the documents submitted.
      It  was  inaccurate  to  describe  them  as  "originating  from   the
    authorities" as the Immigration  Judge  had  in  paragraph  29  of  his
    decision. In fact, the documents included  abusive  messages  emanating
    from the appellant's father-in-law. By way of example, I  was  referred
    to page 10 of the bundle of documents used at the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which contained  a  text  message.   It  was  from  the  father-in-law.
    Paragraph 29 does not identify which documents the Immigration Judge is
    referring to.  He should have given anxious scrutiny to this matter and
    looked at all the documents in the case.

12.  Moving to ground 3, Mr Symes submitted that the appellant was indeed  a
    vulnerable person, being a divorced woman with a young child.  Mr Symes
    took me to paragraph 27 of the decision,  where  the  appellant  simply
    refers to the fact that it  is  "by  no  means  certain  that  he  (her
    husband) is back in Bangladesh, but I proceed on the basis he is".   It
    was submitted that the Immigration Judge came to no  reasoned  decision
    as to the real risks to the appellant on return to Bangladesh.  She was
    a lady who had been the victim of domestic  violence.   Permission  was
    given on this ground.

13.  It was also argued that the Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to  engage
    with the requirement of paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules.   That
    paragraph states that:


          "The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  the  subject  of
         persecution or serious harm, or direct threats of such  persecution
         or such harm will be  regarded  as  a  serious  indication  of  the
         person's well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or  a  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm unless there are  good  reason  to  consider
         such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

14.  Finally, Mr Symes urged me to  revisit  ground  5  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal even though permission to appeal on this  ground  was  expressly
    refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds.  He said that it  was  incorrect
    to state, as the Immigration Judge did in paragraph 32 of his decision,
    that Article 8 had not been raised.  It was the  subject  matter  of  a
    detailed skeleton argument/additional grounds. In  any  event,  Section
    120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  required  an
    appellant to state any additional grounds for his application if he has
    made a protection claim or human rights' claim or has applied to  enter
    the UK where he has been served with a notice requiring him to set  out
    his grounds for so doing.   This,  Mr  Symes  contended,  is  what  had
    occurred as in response to the  "One-Stop  Notice"  the  appellant  had
    specifically referred to Article 8 of the ECHR.  It was submitted  that
    the country guidance evidence was relevant and that the  appellant  had
    settled into the UK with her child in the UK education system.  I  note
    that the respondent considered whether  there  were  any  circumstances
    that would mean the appellant's removal from the UK would place the  UK
    state in breach of its obligations to respect family and  private  life
    under Article 8 of the ECHR in paragraphs 83 et  seq.  of  the  refusal
    letter.  However, the respondent concluded that the appellant  did  not
    qualify under the Immigration Rules and that there were no  exceptional
    circumstances for granting leave to remain outside the Rules.   It  was
    therefore inaccurate for the Immigration Judge to describe the  Article
    8 claim as "not advanced".

15.  The respondent, represented by Mr Mills, submitted that ground  1  (the
    Immigration Judge being wrong to find the  account  embellished  and/or
    failing to appreciate the importance of the appellant's father-in-law's
    police  background)  was  incorrect.  There   were   two   inconsistent
    statements made by the appellant: that the in-laws wanted to  terminate
    the life of the  appellant's  child  prior  to  his  birth  and  wanted
    "nothing to do with that child" and the contrary  statement  that  they
    wanted to "abduct" that baby after it had been born.  It was  submitted
    that the Immigration Judge had been entitled to conclude  as  he  there
    was no adequate explanation  for  these  contradictions  are.   It  was
    pointed out that the Immigration  Judge  simply  did  not  believe  the
    appellant's case and the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  simply  an
    attempt to  re-litigate  matters.   The  background  evidence  did  not
    entirely support the appellant's case.  It was  not  enough  simply  to
    show that the appellant's father-in-law was a policeman.

16.  In relation  to  ground  2,  the  Immigration  Judge  had  set  out  in
    paragraph 29 that he did not accept the credibility  of  the  documents
    produced.  It may not be correct to describe them as contradictory  but
    whatever words the Immigration Judge  used  he  did  not  accept  those
    documents were credible and should be given weight.   This  was  within
    his discretion having regard to the principles on which such  documents
    are routinely considered in the FTT (see  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439, IAT 19 February 2002).  It was submitted that there was  nothing
    in the grounds which justified the criticism of the  Immigration  Judge
    in relation to this finding. The Immigration Judge had been entitled to
    make an adverse finding in relation to these documents, therefore.

17.  Turning to ground 3 of the grounds, Mr  Mills  stated  that  there  had
    been a separation between the appellant and her husband not a  divorce.
    The Immigration Judge had said that he was aware of the "experiences of
    divorcees, single parents and other vulnerable women in Bangladesh"  in
    paragraph 30 of his decision.  However, he did  not  accept  that  this
    appellant would be at risk due to her separation from her husband.  She
    had loving and supportive parents  and  came  from  a  stable  home  in
    Chittagong.  It was not  accepted  that  she  was  vulnerable,  as  she
    claimed, or that her husband or his family would pursue her or threaten
    her.  If she was the subject of adverse attention  by  her  in-laws  or
    their families, she would be protected by her own family.

18.  In relation to ground 4 (which states that the FTT did not  make  clear
    findings on central aspects of  the  claim  including  threats  by  the
    parents-in-law) it was submitted that the Immigration Judge  had  fully
    dealt with the potential threats in-laws, but he explained in paragraph
    25 of his decision why the appellant would not  be  at  risk  from  the
    parents-in-law.  Because he did not accept the past alleged persecution
    the case did not fall within paragraph 339K of the  Immigration  Rules.
    In this regard I was referred to paragraph 25  of  the  decision  which
    appears to contain clear findings in relation to  this  aspect  of  the
    case.

19.  Mr Mills argued that if the appellant wished continued  to  pursue  any
    claim under Article 8 of the ECHR the correct procedure would have been
    to challenge the refusal  of  permission  to  appeal  by  applying  for
    judicial review of the decision.

20.  Mr Mills acknowledged that if  fundamental  credibility  findings  were
    not allowed to stand then it may be necessary to remit  the  matter  to
    the FTT for a fresh decision.

21.  I reserved my decision as to whether or not there was a material  error
    of law and if so what steps should be taken to address that.


Discussion

22.  The burden rests on the appellant to show that the decision of the  FTT
    contained a material  error  of  law  which  would  justify  the  Upper
    Tribunal interfering with that decision within the terms of Section  12
    of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

23.  The Immigration Judge did not accept  the  appellant's  case  that  her
    parents-in-law had been guilty of "the most  egregious  activities"  of
    which she accused them.  The Immigration Judge was satisfied  that  the
    appellant and her husband had a relationship and  had  married  against
    their wishes but pointed out in his decision that they had been able to
    live contentedly together in Dhaka, where the appellant had worked as a
    nurse.  Many  of  their  difficulties  as  a  couple  flowed  from  the
    appellant getting pregnant with a girl, born in  2011.   It  seems  the
    appellant's husband  returned  to  his  family,  although  it  was  not
    accepted by the respondent that the appellant's husband had necessarily
    left the UK.  In common with several aspects of the appellant's  claim,
    little detail was supplied to enable  the  other  party  to  check  its
    authenticity.  The Immigration Judge found the appellant's case  to  be
    "worryingly inconsistent" (see paragraph 24).  He did not  accept  that
    all the actions alleged had even taken place.  Having regard to the low
    standard  of  proof  which  applied,  he  nevertheless  concluded   the
    appellant had not satisfied the Tribunal  that  the  threats  had  been
    uttered.  The Immigration Judge noted a number of contradictions as  he
    saw them but in  reality,  they  may  have  been  better  described  as
    inconsistencies  and  matters  going  to  the  issue  of   credibility.
    Crucially, in my view, the Immigration Judge did not  accept  that  the
    appellant needed protection from her  in-laws  given  that  she  had  a
    supportive family at Chittagong, with whom she had lived in  the  past.
    This central finding is not essentially attacked in this appeal.

24.  The Immigration Judge had to demonstrate in his decision  that  he  has
    sufficient grasp of the issues to have considered the appellant's  case
    fully.  He had to show how he reached the he reached.  In my view,  the
    Immigration Judge did that. He can be criticised for not  dealing  more
    fully in his decision with the documents that were filed.  But,  it  is
    clear that he reached his decision having considered but  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence.  Whereas more detail could have been  given,  and
    perhaps should have been given, he does not appear  to  have  erred  in
    law.  The Immigration Judge did not accept the  appellant's  father-in-
    law was a  corrupt  policeman  and  he  was  entitled  to  reject  that
    evidence.  Following the principles in Tanveer Ahmed,  the  Immigration
    Judge did not have to accept documents at face value, and did not do so
    here.

25.  The appellant is an educated  individual  who  would  be  returning  to
    Bangladesh with a good command of English.  However, I acknowledge that
    she would have a young child and that  life  for  single  separated  or
    divorced mothers is difficult.  It is right that the Immigration  Judge
    should not have said, as he did, that the case under Article 8 had  not
    been pursued.  I find nothing in the notes of evidence  to  suggest  it
    was formally abandoned and indeed it had been raised in response to the
    One-Stop Notice and in a separate  written  submission.   Nevertheless,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds did not give permission on this point on the
    grounds that it was not advanced with any vigour before the FTT. I find
    that it would not appear to be contrary to the child's best interest to
    return to Bangladesh with the appellant. The mother and child only came
    to the UK in 2014 and therefore fall far short of the  requirements  in
    family life  provisions  contained  in  the  Immigration  Rules,  which
    provide a benchmark.  It would have been open to challenge the  refusal
    of permission, as Mr Mills submitted.  However,  in  the  circumstances
    outlined I would consider that the Article  8  argument  to  have  very
    little prospect of  success  and  even  if  the  article  8  claim  was
    mistakenly overlooked by the Immigration Judge it would not have made a
    material difference the outcome of the appeal  were  it  to  have  been
    fully considered by him.  The respondent was and is entitled to  insist
    on strict immigration controls and ensure that the appellant  satisfied
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules in full  before  entertaining
    any application under article 8 of the ECHR.


Conclusion

26.  The Immigration Judge was entitled  to  reject  this  incredible  claim
    which was advanced extremely late, only one day before the  appellant's
    leave expired.  The Immigration Judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that
    there was a safe place for the appellant to live in Bangladesh,  either
    with her parents or, given that it contains an area of more than 55,000
    square miles, in another part of that country.   For  these  reasons  I
    have concluded that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was one  it
    was entitled to come to on the evidence it heard.


Notice of Decision

27.  The appeal against  the  decision  of  the  FTT  is  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

28.  I continue the anonymity direction made by the FTT as follows.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 9 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 9 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

