
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/00640/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 27th September 2018                   |On 15th November 2018     |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                   ALI [S]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Braganza, Counsel (instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS







      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  on  7   August   2018   against   the
           determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge S Gillespie  who  had
           dismissed the Appellant's protection appeal.  The  decision  and
           reasons was promulgated on 5 July 2018.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, whose date of  birth
           was disputed.   He had claimed asylum on the basis of  his  fear
           of the consequences of his Christian conversion. Judge Gillespie
           found that the Appellant had not proved his conversion and could
           be returned safely to Kabul where he had family.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted because it  was  held  arguable
           that the judge should have treated the Appellant as a child  and
           had also failed to take into account the  Appellant's  PTSD  and
           cognitive problems.


      4.    At the hearing  Mr  Kandola  for  the  Respondent  informed  the
           tribunal  that  the  Respondent  was  not  able  to  defend  the
           determination.  It was not however possible to  proceed  to  the
           rehearing which was necessary in consequence  because  the  Home
           Office file was missing.


      5.    The substance of Ms Braganza's  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
           Appellant was set out  in  her  skeleton  argument.   The  judge
           should have treated the Appellant as a  vulnerable  witness  and
           followed the Tribunal's Practice Direction on Child,  Vulnerable
           Adult and Sensitive Witnesses.  The judge had cross-examined the
           Appellant.  The medical evidence concerning  the  Appellant  had
           not been factored into the judge's credibility assessment.


      6.    In the  light  of  the  Respondent's  concession,  the  tribunal
           accordingly finds that there were the  material  errors  of  law
           identified by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett. Unfortunately,
           the judge failed to examine the evidence on  the  correct  basis
           that the Appellant was vulnerable for several  possible  reasons
           and might still be a child.  Moreover and in  any  event,  there
           was  significant  medical  evidence   which   although   briefly
           mentioned by the judge was not discussed nor considered for  its
           potential  impact  on  the  Appellant's   testimony.   This   is
           particularly unfortunate given the Tribunal's Guidance and other
           assistance available to judges such as the Equal Treatment Bench
           Book,  to  which  all  judges  should  refer  when  faced   with
           vulnerable witnesses.


      7.    The key and relevant authority of AM (Afghanistan)  [2017]  EWCA
           Civ 112 was not mentioned by the  judge.   Perhaps  it  was  not
           cited to him by either side. There is no mention of the decision
           in the judge's record of  proceedings  and  no  mention  of  any
           request for reasonable adjustments, surprisingly.  There  is  no
           record of any objection to cross-examination on the  Appellant's
           behalf.  It may well  be  that  the  judge  was  not  given  the
           assistance which was so obviously  desirable  in  this  type  of
           appeal.


      8.    In fairness to the judge, he was not assisted by the  jumble  of
           bundles which was submitted on the Appellant's behalf, some  800
           pages, in three separate  bundles,  as  well  as  various  loose
           papers.  The country background evidence copied  at  length  was
           excessive on any view, largely undigested and  hardy  needed  at
           all  given  the  bespoke  country  expert's  report  which   was
           submitted.  If there was an essential reading list, the tribunal
           was unable to find it.   It is to be hoped  that  all  of  these
           problems  will  be  corrected  before  the  rehearing.   It   is
           recommended that  a  single,  concise  bundle  is  prepared  and
           submitted promptly.


      9.    The tribunal was informed that it is not intended  to  call  the
           Appellant at the rehearing,  so  that  appeal  will  be  way  of
           submissions.  As indicated above, however,  that  rehearing  was
           not possible in the Upper Tribunal today.  It was not reasonable
           to expect the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  to  prepare  an
           appeal of this nature at  short  notice,  especially  given  the
           length and state of the Appellant's bundles.


      10.   The onwards  appeal  is  allowed.   The  original  decision  and
           reasons is set aside.  An early date for the rehearing should be
           found if at all possible, given the delays to which this  appeal
           has been subject.
















      DECISION


      The appeal is allowed


      The making of the previous decision involved the making of a  material
      error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.


      The appeal is to be  reheard  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      except First-tier Tribunal Judge S Gillespie.



      Signed                                  Dated 27 September 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




