
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00670/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th May 2019                     |On 11th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                   W B M F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss L Kerry, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin  promulgated
    on 14th March 2019.  The Appellant in  the  case  is  a  Sinhalese  Sri
    Lankan lady who had made a protection  claim  on  the  basis  that  the
    authorities were targeting her because  she  had  given  assistance  to
    Tamils.  The First-tier Tribunal made adverse credibility findings on a
    number of bases.  Some was due to inconsistencies and  conflictions  in
    the evidence,  some  was  on  the  basis  of  criticisms  of  documents
    concerning LLRC and the judge also did not attach weight  to  documents
    submitted by the Appellant, it was claimed, from  Colombo  Magistrates'
    Court.  The judge said at paragraph 30 of the Decision that none of the
    documents purporting to have been issued by  the  Colombo  Magistrates'
    Court were certified but only appeared  to  have  a  rubber  stamp  and
    several of them did not include any official Magistrates Court heading.
     In that the judge made a factual error because the documents have been
    certified and do contain the requisite headings.  It is argued that had
    the judge not made that mistake she may have found those  documents  to
    be reliable which would have had an effect on the  overall  credibility
    of the appellant's claims because, if reliable, those documents support
    what she says.

 2. Another issue is at paragraphs 32 and 33  of  the  Decision  where  the
    judge deals with the LLRC but there is an important document  contained
    at page 36 of the Appellant's bundle which the judge does not deal with
    and that is a letter about the Appellant from the LLRC to a priest.

 3. Consideration was given as to whether the matter could  be  simply  re-
    decided factoring in the documents to the findings made by Judge Colvin
    but given the failure to deal with other pieces  of  evidence  and  the
    fact that the overall findings are tainted by the error of fact, it  is
    appropriate the case be overturned in its entirety and remitted to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full  rehearing  on  all   issues.    The
    appropriate hearing centre is Taylor House.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed[pic]                             Date 3 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
