
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00479/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 September 2016                      |On 14 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                   A N M N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Housego, who in a determination promulgated on 28  July
    2016 dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born  on  21  September
    1993.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on a student visa on
    22 August 2011.  The visa was valid to 6 January 2013.   The  appellant
    claims to have left the United Kingdom on 2 January 2013  returning  to
    Sri Lanka.  On 27 July 2015 the appellant made an appointment with  the
    Home Office Asylum Unit.  On 6 August 2015 the appellant made  a  claim
    for asylum.  On 21 December 2015 the respondent refused the appellant's
    application.

 4. The respondent did not accept that the  appellant  had  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution on return to Sri Lanka and did not accept that  the
    appellant had returned to Sri Lanka in 2013 as claimed.  On this  basis
    the respondent did not accept that the appellant had been detained  and
    tortured in Sri Lanka in 2014.  It was not accepted by  the  respondent
    that the Sri Lankan authorities have any  interest  in  the  appellant.
    The respondent also gave consideration as to whether or not the removal
    of the  appellant  would  breach  Articles  2  or  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights or whether the  appellant  was  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection. The  respondent  did  not  consider  that  the
    appellant qualified for humanitarian protection or that there would  be
    any risk of a breach of Articles 2 or 3 if he were to  be  returned  to
    Sri Lanka.  The respondent considered  whether  or  not  the  appellant
    ought to be granted leave to remain on the basis of Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  The respondent considered that the appellant did not satisfy the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, in particular paragraph  276ADE,
    because  the  appellant  would  not  face  any  significant   obstacles
    reintegrating into life in Sri Lanka.

 5.  The  respondent  considered  whether  there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances that would warrant a grant of leave to remain outside  of
    the Immigration Rules under Article 8 and considered that there were no
    exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  appellant  did
    not return to Sri Lanka on 2 January 2013  as  claimed.   The  Tribunal
    found therefore that the scars on his back were not caused  by  torture
    in Sri Lanka.   With  regard  to  sur  place  activity  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found that the appellant took up activities for the TGTE  only
    when it became clear that it would assist his  claim  for  asylum.  The
    Tribunal found that  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  an  activist  and
    therefore likely to be at risk on return to  Sri  Lanka  could  not  be
    given significant weight.  The Tribunal found that the Article 3  claim
    based on medical need could not succeed.  The Tribunal found that there
    was no medical evidence of PTSD and that the appeal should not  succeed
    on the basis of the third appellant in GJ given the clear remit  of  GS
    (India).

 7. The Tribunal found that there was no evidence to support a claim  under
    Article 8 based on medical reasons and that the appellant has not shown
    that there would be a paucity of treatment in any event in Sri Lanka.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the Upper Tribunal.  On 23  August  2016  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Murray granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

Summary of Submissions

 9. The grounds of appeal in essence concern the fairness  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal and also the reliability of the findings
    made by the judge as a consequence of a failure to adjourn. There is  a
    general assertion that the judge was not legally entitled to reach  the
    findings that he did in paragraph at paragraph 99-109. This is  a  bare
    assertion with no detail. No further details were given orally  at  the
    hearing before me. It is asserted that the judge erred  by  failing  to
    accede to an application by Counsel for an  adjournment  on  the  basis
    that the appellant did not understand the court interpreter fully.   It
    is also asserted that the  judge  failed  to  permit  Counsel  for  the
    appellant to posit  questions  pertaining  to  the  appellant's  mental
    health.

10. It is submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  enquiries  of  the
    interpreter as to whether there were problems  with  interpretation  or
    with communication  with  the  appellant.   The  appellant  raised  his
    concerns after the lunch recess.  It is asserted  that  the  judge  has
    instead sought the views of the respondent and  has  adopted  the  view
    that the appellant did not have  interpretation  difficulties  but  has
    irrationally failed to consult the interpreter.

11. It is submitted that the appellant ought to have been  able  to  adduce
    oral evidence with regard to his mental health and what  medication  he
    was taking.  It is asserted that Counsel  for  the  appellant  did  not
    intend to invite the First-tier Tribunal to make a  clinical  diagnosis
    of the appellant's mental health but wanted to lead evidence as to  the
    appellant's mental demeanour and as to what if  any  medication  and/or
    treatment that the appellant had endured.  It  is  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law by failing  to  permit  the
    appellant to discharge the burden  of  proof  in  this  manner.  It  is
    submitted that the  judge's  view  was  based  upon  an  irrational  or
    perverse view that permitting such evidence to be given would place the
    judge in a position whereby he would be invited to make  a  finding  of
    PTSD.

12. It is submitted that the judge's finding in relation to the appellant's
    evidence and the recording of the evidence must be called into question
    because  it  was  abundantly  clear  that  the  court  interpreter  had
    misinterpreted questions and answers.  It is submitted that  it  is  of
    concern that the interpreter was  not  consulted  when  questions  were
    raised regarding his competency  in  interpreting  in  this  particular
    case. It is submitted that had the judge asked the interpreter if there
    were any difficulties this matter could have been resolved.

13. It is asserted that the judge's findings are arguably unsustainable  as
    a result of this error of law.  As the judge's approach to the evidence
    was based upon a recording of the evidence, the accuracy of  which  was
    disputed by the appellant and Counsel, the evidence considered  by  the
    judge was based upon an incorrect depiction of the evidence due to  the
    interpreter's error in interpreting questions and answers correctly.

14. In oral submissions Mr Mannan submitted that the  judge  had  documents
    with regard to medical scarring and a letter from  Surrey  and  Borders
    Partnership which clearly  indicated  that  the  appellant  had  raised
    issues with regard to suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder.  Mr
    Mannan also submitted that this letter specifically mentions  that  the
    appellant had recorded experiencing suicidal thoughts.

15. Mr Mannan submitted that, as the case essentially concerned credibility
    of the appellant,  as  recorded  in  paragraph  37  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision, and given that PTSD had been raised both in  terms
    of the document in support of the appeal and at the hearing, the  judge
    ought to have adjourned the matter for a medical report to be obtained.
     He submitted that credibility was essential in relation to whether  or
    not the appellant had returned to Sri Lanka in 2013.  He submitted that
    if the appellant was suffering from PTSD then that  might  explain  why
    there had been inconsistencies in the evidence.  He submitted that  the
    judge  had  relied  on  inconsistencies  to  form  the  view  that  the
    appellant's account was not credible.  He submitted that  there  was  a
    report that supported the appellant's account of the events in relation
    to the scarring on the appellant's back.

16. He submitted that the length of time that  had  elapsed  was  not  very
    significant in terms of the appellant obtaining  medical  evidence  and
    given what was at stake in this appeal the judge should have  erred  on
    the side of caution and granted an adjournment.

17. With regard to the failure of the judge  to  adjourn  as  a  result  of
    problems with interpretation he submitted that given credibility was at
    issue here it was vital that the interpreter was able to understand the
    appellant's responses correctly.

18. Mr Tufan submitted that the Home Office Presenting Officer  present  at
    the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  set  out  in  the
    notes that the issue with regard to interpretation was  raised  at  the
    submission stage.  He submitted that there is no merit in  this  ground
    of appeal.  He submitted  that  the  appellant  has  not  set  out  any
    particular error that is apparent from the judge's  decision  and  that
    this therefore was mere speculation.  He submitted that  the  Secretary
    of State had put the appellant on notice in paragraph 34 of the Reasons
    for Refusal Letter that the fact that there was no  evidence  that  the
    appellant had left the country was in issue and that the  Secretary  of
    State did not believe that the appellant had left the United Kingdom.

19. He referred to paragraphs 98, 99 and 100 of the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and submitted that there was no appeal against the findings of
    the judge.  He submitted that there was no reliable evidence  that  the
    appellant had left the United  Kingdom  -  that  evidence  was  readily
    available.  He submitted that  the  appellant's  cousin  did  not  give
    evidence despite the appellant being on notice  and  that  this  was  a
    matter that was in issue.  He submitted that given  that  there  is  no
    appeal against the finding of the judge that the  appellant  had  never
    left the United Kingdom the appeal cannot succeed because  the  torture
    could not have taken place.

20. He also submitted that the appellant had had sufficient time to produce
    evidence and  obtain  reports  and  that  matters  cannot  be  held  up
    indefinitely.

Discussion

The first adjournment request

21. When considering a request for an adjournment the Tribunal must  always
    yield to a party's right to a fair hearing.  As was set out in the case
    of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) at paragraph
    8:

         "In determining applications for adjournments, judges will also  be
         guided by focusing on the overarching criterion established in  the
         overriding objective which is that of fairness."

22. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with the requirements in  detail.  I  set
    out in full the  relevant  paragraphs.  At  paragraph  34  headed  "The
    hearing  -  preliminary  point"  the  Tribunal  considered  the   first
    adjournment request as follows:

         "34. Counsel for the appellant asked for an  adjournment.   He  had
             been instructed at only 11:03pm last  night.   He  received  a
             hard copy of the bundle only this morning [and it  was  handed
             in at the Tribunal and to the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
             shortly  before  the  start  of   the   hearing].    He   felt
             professionally embarrassed, because he had not  been  able  to
             prepare  the  case  properly.   There  was  (understandly)  no
             skeleton argument and he had not been able to prepare a bundle
             of authorities.  In addition, he was concerned at  the  mental
             health of the appellant.  In the country guidance case  of  GJ
             and others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
             UKUT 00319 (IAC) the third appellant had succeeded  on  mental
             health grounds, on  the  basis  that  there  was  no  adequate
             treatment available in Sri Lanka.  That may well be  the  case
             with this appellant.  The scarring report  prepared  yesterday
             by Dr Lingam indicated that there may well be PTSD, but it was
             not confirmed (document A1:7 and 17).  There was in the bundle
             details  of  his  medication.   Counsel  was  concerned  about
             whether the witness should be treated as a vulnerable witness.
              There were issues about  the  Diaspora  activities.   It  was
             often the case that people traumatised still continued to take
             part in such activities, so this was  not  contradictory.   It
             was trite law that while such adjournments were  annoying  and
             inefficient, and that the Home Office and the Tribunal  should
             not have to deal with these matters, the overriding  necessity
             was for a fair hearing.  If there was blame, then it  was  not
             on the appellant by reason of medical problems.  It would  not
             be fair  to  carry  on  and  would  cause  problems  both  the
             appellant and for Counsel.

         35.  The Home Office Presenting Officer asked me for the history of
             the matter.  I stated that the file showed that  on  04  March
             2016 notice was sent to Vasuki  Solicitors  of  a  pre-hearing
             review listed for 22 June 2016 which  also  gave  the  hearing
             date of Wednesday 06 July 2016.  An application had been  made
             on 04 July 2016 for an  adjournment  on  the  basis  that  the
             client attended the office on 02 July  2016  stating  that  he
             thought the hearing was 22 July 2016, by mistake.  That letter
             asserted that the appellant suffered mental health issues  and
             had scarring due to torture.  Reports needed to  be  obtained,
             and  they  were  unable  to  carry  on   without   psychiatric
             assessment.  They requested  an  adjournment  of  four  weeks.
             That letter also stated that the respondent's bundle  had  not
             been served.  That application was refused on the  basis  that
             there had already been a  fair  opportunity  to  prepare  this
             appeal.

         36.  The Home Office Presenting Officer  confirmed  that  the  Home
             Office bundle had not been served, and handed  it  to  Counsel
             for the appellant, who did not object to its late delivery.

         37.  I observed that the appeal appeared to  turn  on  credibility,
             for the Home Office view was that the appellant had never left
             the UK, and the entire story was therefore  fabricated.   This
             was indeed the Home Office viewpoint.   I  observed  that  the
             issues then appeared to be whether the existence of PTSD would
             itself be a  matter  relevant  to  credibility,  and  secondly
             whether someone with PTSD would be able to give a good account
             of himself in evidence.  The third point raised by Counsel was
             that there would need to be  evidence  about  whether  or  not
             there was adequate treatment available in Sri Lanka, so as  to
             mount an Article 3 basis  of  appeal  within  GS  (India),  EO
             (Ghana), GM (India), PL (Jamaica), BA (Ghana)  &  KK  (DRC)  v
             SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40, as envisaged by the  third  appellant
             in GJ.  Counsel stated that the leading case  on  adjournments
             strongly indicated that fairness was the guide.   It  was  not
             possible to have a fair hearing, while that might be someone's
             fault, if the appellant had PTSD it would not be his.

         38.  I perused the papers during a short adjournment.   The  letter
             requesting an adjournment included a letter dated 13  November
             2015 from Surrey and Borders NHS Partnership stating that  the
             appellant had been assessed and wished to address symptoms  of
             PTSD, and that  he  had  been  offered  cognitive  behavioural
             therapy.  It also stated that there was a generalised  anxiety
             disorder assessment of 15.  That appointment resulted from  an
             initial assessment, evidenced by letter of 04  November  2015.
             A Tamil interpreter was present at the assessment.  While  the
             letters had been sent to Home  Office  there  was  no  express
             mention of PTSD forming part of the appeal.  The statement  of
             evidence provided under Section 120 did not mention PTSD.

         39.  I have considered the case of Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)
             [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  In answer to  a  question  from  me,
             Counsel agreed that the case itself had  no  unusual  features
             for a Sri Lankan asylum case.  Counsel told  me  that  he  was
             experienced in  such  cases.   The  absence  of  a  bundle  of
             authorities is not a  serious  disadvantage,  nor  a  skeleton
             argument.  If the appellant's story is accepted as correct, to
             the lower standard  of  proof,  then  he  will  succeed.   The
             question is whether I can give him a  fair  hearing  in  order
             establish that.  The appellant has been represented throughout
             by solicitors experienced in this work.  He has been exploring
             treatment for PTSD  since  November,  now  eight  months  ago.
             There is now a scarring report so he is not  disadvantaged  by
             the absence of that, as I now have it.  I am not  prepared  to
             make my own enquiries as to the medication being taken by  the
             appellant, and there is no medical evidence as to what that is
             for.

         40.  It is very late in the day for the appellant now to  say  that
             he seeks to base his appeal upon PTSD.  It is not  pleaded  in
             the papers.  It is not appropriate to adjourn this application
             by reason of inefficiencies of the solicitor, if that  be  the
             case.  There is nothing from the solicitor to indicate that it
             was their fault.  It may equally have been the case  that  the
             appellant had simply failed to mention it to them before  now.
             In the circumstances it would not be  appropriate  for  me  to
             adjourn the case.  Counsel for the appellant did not  seek  an
             adjournment on the basis of  the  late  arrival  of  the  Home
             Office bundle, and in any even the  contents  of  that  bundle
             consist of the appeal documentation and the  interview  notes,
             all of which will  have  been  with  the  solicitors  for  the
             appellant (and case reports of cases with  which  Counsel  was
             familiar)."

23. The judge set out in commendable detail all  the  issues  pertinent  to
    this case that are relevant in respect of ensuring the appellant had  a
    fair hearing when considering a request for adjournment. He  has  taken
    into account the factors identified by counsel and the case of Nwaigwe.
    The judge considered that although counsel was instructed very late  he
    was experienced in this type of case and that the case had  no  unusual
    features. The main issue in relation to the first  adjournment  request
    was that counsel was concerned about the appellant's mental health  and
    wished to obtain a medical report. Having identified  that  the  appeal
    appeared to turn  on  credibility  the  judge  clearly  identified  the
    relevance and importance of the claim to be suffering from PTSD to  the
    fairness of the hearing in this case, 'I observed that the issues  then
    appeared to be whether the existence of PTSD would itself be  a  matter
    relevant to credibility, and secondly whether someone with  PTSD  would
    be able to give a good account of himself in evidence.'

24. The judge took time to consider the issues and the  background  to  the
    adjournment request. He noted letters from Surrey and  Borders  NHS  in
    November 2015 stating the appellant wished to address symptoms of  PTSD
    and that there was a generalised anxiety disorder assessment, that  the
    letters had been sent to Home Office but there was no  express  mention
    of PTSD forming part of the appeal and the SEF did not mention PTSD. He
    set out, 'He has been exploring treatment for PTSD since November,  now
    eight months ago.  I am not prepared to make my own enquiries as to the
    medication being taken by  the  appellant,  and  there  is  no  medical
    evidence as to what that is for. It is very late in  the  day  for  the
    appellant now to say that he seeks to base his appeal upon PTSD.  It is
    not pleaded in the  papers...In  the  circumstances  it  would  not  be
    appropriate for me to adjourn the case.'

25. The judge did take into consideration the  possibility  that  PTSD  may
    have affected the credibility of the  appellant.  The  judge  commenced
    consideration of the appellant's claim by considering  whether  or  not
    the appellant had in fact returned to Sri Lanka in 2013, an  issue  put
    in dispute by the respondent in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter.  I
    consider that it is helpful to set out in full the relevant paragraphs:

          "98.    The primary claim - the appellant has provided a photocopy
             of a page of a passport with a stamp of 02 January 2013, which
             he said that his mother had sent to him through  photographing
             it on a mobile phone and sending that via a  relative  to  his
             cousin's  mobile  phone.   It  could,  as  the   Home   Office
             Presenting Officer observed, be of any passport.  The passport
             is in the control of his mother, he says, but no  attempt  has
             been made to send over the original or  have  a  notarised  or
             certified copy sent.  I was not even shown the  text  message,
             email or WhatsApp message by which it was said to be  sent  to
             the cousin's phone.  Tanveer Ahmed v  SSHD  (Pakistan)  [2002]
             UKAIT 00439 and  TK  (Burundi)  v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  40
             considered together mean I give this evidence  little  weight.
             In coming to this conclusion I have fully considered Counsel's
             careful submissions on the point.

         99.  The uncle is said to have secured the release of the appellant
             but not of his father, the  brother  of  the  uncle.   Counsel
             posited that there may not have been enough money, but that is
             mere speculation, as not even the appellant  said  that.   The
             absence of any enquiry  by  the  appellant  of  the  uncle  is
             remarkable as is the absence of any indication of  the  amount
             of the bribe paid, and this is, said the appellant, a  wealthy
             family.  No reason is advanced as to why the uncle  might  not
             be forthcoming to the appellant  about  the  bribe,  or  about
             attempts to secure the release of the father, the  brother  of
             the appellant's uncle.   There  was  no  suggestion  that  the
             father and uncle of the appellant had in any way fallen out.

         100. The appellant stated that his cousin has been  supporting  the
             appellant in the UK, and it was  the  cousin  who  bought  the
             appellant a Sri Lankan Airlines ticket for  his  trip  to  Sri
             Lanka arriving on 02 January 2013.  He lives with the  cousin,
             yet there is no evidence from the cousin and no  attempt  made
             to obtain proof of booking of  the  flight,  or  even  a  bank
             statement showing a payment  to  Sri  Lankan  Airlines.   This
             would have been readily obtainable  (and  at  the  very  least
             unsuccessful efforts to obtain  that  information  would  have
             been of assistance to the appellant).  There is no  suggestion
             that the cousin's abilities are impaired in any way,  and  the
             appellant did not say that the cousin  was  in  any  way  less
             supportive  of  the  appellant  (and  they  continue  to  live
             together).   The  absence  of  the  ticketing  information  is
             squarely within TK (Burundi).  The points leaps loud and clear
             from the refusal letter, and the failure to address it save at
             the last minute, and in a way that is  not  convincing,  while
             not following up a simple route to get corroborative  evidence
             from  the  airline  means  that  the  evidence  thus  far   is
             unconvincing (and I bear firmly in mind the lower standard  of
             proof -  that  the  appellant  must  prove  only  that  it  is
             reasonably likely).

         101. The absence of any Tamil Diaspora activity at all prior to the
             asserted return to Sri Lanka is not  convincing,  particularly
             the reason given for that - that he was  hiding  (though  from
             what and why was not explained) -  even  taking  into  account
             that he became more involved in  Tamil  activities  after  his
             asserted experiences in Sri Lanka in 2013.  The evidence in re-
             examination  that  the   appellant's   assertion   in   cross-
             examination that he had given a statement to be used  for  the
             Tamil cause turned out, in re-examination, to be no more  than
             an unspecified conversation with someone in the TGTE  when  he
             joined it.  The evidence of the  appellant  that  he  had  not
             joined the TGTE before 02  January  2013  because  he  was  in
             hiding was a contradiction of his assertion that  he  was  not
             then at risk.

         102. The scarring evidence of  Professor  Lingam  has  also  to  be
             considered before a conclusion can be reached.  The  scars  on
             the back of the appellant are covered in the report which uses
             the word 'diagnostic' and so there is certainly in the opinion
             of the expert that the scars on the back of the appellant were
             caused by hot metal rods.  He opines as to their age, which is
             consistent  with  the  account  of  the  appellant,  but  also
             (scarring age being inexact)  with  self-infliction  by  proxy
             (the location of the scars making self-infliction impossible).
              It is the case of the appellant that his family are rich,  so
             there is no reason for him to take  such  a  dreadful  action.
             However, there is no evidence that they are rich,  other  than
             the assertion of the appellant.  Self-infliction by proxy is a
             known event, covered in the Protocols.

         103. The appellant did not mention torture with hot metal  rods  in
             his earlier witness statement of August 2015.  He gave a  list
             of other things done to him, none of which  left  scars.   The
             absence is explained by his Counsel as a feature of PTSD,  and
             the fact that repeated recollection will elicit more and  more
             detail.  First, the appellant  has  not  established  (to  the
             lower standard) that he has  PTSD,  and  secondly,  (and  even
             though the scars will not be visible to the appellant)  it  is
             hardly a detail to be tortured by being burned  by  hot  metal
             rods so that scars such as those  of  the  appellant  are  the
             result.  It would seem to be at the top end of anyone's  list.
             This affects his credibility adversely,  though  I  have  also
             considered as a pointer the other  way  the  evidence  of  the
             appellant in the hearing that the chilli powder  continued  to
             affect his  right  eye,  that  evidence  being  given  without
             hesitation.  He may indeed have a problem with his right  eye,
             but the question then would be  of  causation.   There  is  no
             medical evidence of any problem with eyesight,  and  so  I  am
             unable to make any finding of fact in that regard.

         104. Bearing in mind the possibly fatal,  and  certainly  horrific,
             consequences of return for the appellant  if  his  account  is
             reasonably likely to be true, then he would take all steps  he
             could to ensure that the appalling event  of  return  did  not
             occur.  He suffers, he says, from PTSD, but even if true, that
             does not render  him  incapable  of  action:  he  is  able  to
             participate in his activities for  the  TGTE,  and  he  has  a
             cousin concerned for him, and solicitors acting for  him  ever
             since the appeal was lodged eight months ago.

         105. On weighing  all  the  evidence  carefully  I  find  that  the
             appellant did not return to Sri Lanka on 02 January 2013,  and
             that the scars on his back were not caused by torture  in  Sri
             Lanka, and that he has not established, to the lower standard,
             that he was tortured in Sri Lanka in 2013 and escaped back  to
             the UK."

26. The judge  took  into  account  counsel's  submissions.  He  considered
    whether PTSD could be an explanation for  inconsistencies,  failure  to
    obtain evidence or difficulty in recounting events but rejected that as
    a sufficient explanation.

27. The third point  raised  by  Counsel  in  the  adjournment  request  in
    relation to PTSD was that there would need to be evidence about whether
    or not there  was  adequate  treatment  available  in  Sri  Lanka.  The
    Tribunal found that the Article 3 claim based on medical need could not
    succeed.  The Tribunal found that there was no medical evidence of PTSD
    and that, in any event, the appeal should not succeed on the  basis  of
    the third appellant in GJ given the clear remit of  GS  (India).  There
    was no appeal against this as a specific finding.

28. The judge considered all the correct factors when deciding  whether  or
    not  to  grant  the  first  adjournment.  He  took  into  consideration
    counsel's submissions that PTSD may have affected  the  evidence  given
    but rejected that as an explanation giving full reasons for  so  doing.
    The failure to grant  the  first  adjournment  did  not  give  rise  to
    unfairness. There was no error of law.

    The second adjournment request

29. In relation to the second adjournment request the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge set out:

         '67. Counsel for the  appellant  renewed  his  application  for  an
             adjournment.  He based this on a submission that the appellant
             was showing signs of lack of capacity.  I asked Counsel to  be
             precise - he said that the appellant was  not  able  fully  to
             follow and comprehend questions.  It was  the  case  that  the
             appellant had said in evidence that he had eight  sessions  of
             CBT and so had serious psychiatric  issues.   The  appellant's
             mistake over the hearing date was all of a  piece  with  this.
             The gaps in his evidence were testament to the condition  that
             the appellant was in.

         68.  Secondly there had been difficulties in  interpreting  in  the
             hearing, which the appellant had told Counsel about during the
             lunch interval.  For  example,  there  was  an  error  in  the
             translation of the questions and answers about why he would be
             concerned and  about  whom  he  was  worried.   Sometimes  the
             answers the appellant had given were twice the length  of  the
             interpreter's version.  For both these reasons there should be
             a complete rehearing.

         69.  The Home Office Presenting Officer objected to this.  She said
             that the appellant  was  clear  and  coherent  throughout.   A
             couple of times questions had to be rephrased, but  there  had
             been nothing to indicate that the appellant had not understood
             questions properly nor that his answers were not pertinent  to
             the questions.  The recommendation for CBT had been  in  2015,
             and was not a surprise.  It was clear that the  appellant  did
             speak some English, and overall there  was  nothing  to  cause
             concern at the way the appellant had given  his  evidence.   I
             said that I would hear the other submissions before the ending
             of the hearing, and make my decision on the second adjournment
             application and then either grant it, or reject it and make  a
             substantive decision.  Both representatives agreed  that  this
             was the best way to proceed.

         Decision on second application for adjournment

         70.  I decline to adjourn this hearing, and  to  relist  it  before
             another judge.  The fact that an appellant is  having  CBT  is
             not synonymous with, or even strongly indicative of, inability
             to give evidence.  There is no medical evidence  on  which  to
             found the contention that the appellant  was  unable  to  give
             evidence.  The appellant was, save for one occasion, clear and
             coherent in his manner, and  after  a  short  pause  recovered
             himself.  This is not unusual in hearings.  The appellant  did
             not give very short answers, but  was  able  to  expand.   His
             facial expression gave no indication that he  was  not  a  man
             able to deal with answering questions.  While his  answers  on
             occasion  did  not  answer  the  questions  I  consider   this
             explicable by evasiveness.  I found  that  the  appellant  was
             perfectly able to give  evidence  to  me,  and  did  so.   The
             submission was partly based on what I should do for a  witness
             who suffers from PTSD, but this was to put the cart before the
             horse, as it was for the appellant to establish that there was
             a reasonable likelihood that he has that  condition.   He  had
             not done so, as he had produced no medical  evidence  that  he
             had that condition.  At one point in the  cross-examination  I
             stopped  Counsel  asking  questions   about   flashbacks   and
             nightmares: this was the road to seeking a  judge  to  make  a
             medical  diagnosis,  and  I  had  declined  to  do  so.    The
             submission that the appellant was incapable of giving evidence
             as he was a vulnerable witness with PTSD had first to  produce
             some evidence that the appellant indeed  had  that  condition,
             and there was none.  (Professor Lingam expressed concern,  but
             expressly did not give evidence on the point.  The nearest  is
             the letter from 13 November 2015 stating  that  the  appellant
             had a Generalised Anxiety Disorder Assessment of  15:  but  no
             explanation of that score.  That letter also mentions suicidal
             ideation, but the only recommendations are to  keep  in  touch
             with  the  GP,  and  to  give  telephone   numbers   of   help
             organisations).

         71.  As to the interpreter, the answers the appellant gave were not
             always directly in answer  to  the  question  asked:  this  is
             frequently the case in hearings such as these, as  anyone  who
             participates in them knows.  However,  the  hallmark  of  poor
             interpretation - that the answer is  not  merely  evasive  but
             does not deal with the subject matter of the initial  question
             - was not present.  At the commencement of the hearing  I  had
             made a particular point of ensuring that  the  appellant  knew
             that he should raise with me any  point  about  which  he  was
             unsure, and he had not done so.  The appellant does speak some
             English as he evidenced during the hearing.  An interpretation
             is just that - it is to convey meaning.  It  is  not  literal.
             The objection that the interpreter was too concise and so  did
             not accurately  and  faithfully  convey  the  meaning  of  the
             appellant is not the way I assessed the questions and  answers
             given.  For the benefit of interpreter and appellant  and  the
             representatives (and myself) I had made  sure  that  questions
             asked through the interpreter were put in  simple  words.   If
             complex sentence structure  was  used,  I  had  rephrased  the
             questions throughout this hearing.  I am  confident  that  the
             questions were fairly put and understood, and that the answers
             heard conveyed the proper meaning of what the appellant said.'

30. I note that the judge ensured at the commencement of the  hearing  that
    the interpreter and the appellant understood  each  other.   The  judge
    records:

         'The initial discussion that I  requested  they  have  about  their
         journey to the Tribunal involved little from the  appellant  before
         the interpreter said they understood one another.  I  then  ensured
         that the appellant spoke at some length to the  interpreter  before
         concluding that they understood one another. I explained  what  was
         to happen and said to the appellant that it  was  important  to  me
         that he understood what went on and that if  he  was  unsure  about
         anything at any time I would be grateful if he would  interrupt  so
         that I could explain to him. I asked the appellant if all was clear
         and he said that it was.'

31. In essence this ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  judge's  finding  is
    unsustainable as the evidence considered by the judge was based upon an
    incorrect depiction of the evidence due to the interpreter's  error  in
    interpreting questions and answers correctly. The judge considered  the
    request for an adjournment fully. He considered carefully the  evidence
    that had been given noting  that  there  was  one  occasion  where  the
    appellant had not been clear and coherent in his manner. The judge  was
    confident that the questions were fairly put and understood,  and  that
    the answers conveyed the proper meaning of what the appellant said

32. At the hearing before me I pressed Mr Mannon several times to  indicate
    any part of the First-tier Tribunal decision where the evidence as  set
    out by the judge from his record of  the  evidence  was  inaccurate  or
    where the judge had failed to record any relevant evidence.  Mr  Mannan
    indicated that unless the judge's record of the evidence was  available
    it would  not  be  possible  to  demonstrate  where  the  evidence  was
    inaccurately recorded. If there was any  inaccurate  recording  of  the
    evidence that has not made its way through to the record set out by the
    judge it is difficult to see how there can be a material error of  law.
    This is not a case where it is difficult to ascertain the evidence that
    the judge took into account  or  his  analysis  of  that  evidence.  In
    paragraphs 43 - 66 (most of which are  lengthy  paragraphs)  the  judge
    records in detail the evidence given by the appellant  in  his  witness
    statements and orally at the hearing. At paragraphs 98 - 103 the  judge
    analyses the evidence in detail giving reasons for the  conclusions  he
    reached. Mr Mannan could not take me to a single item of  this  lengthy
    record and analysis of evidence where it was asserted that  the  record
    or analysis of evidence  was  inaccurate  or  based  on  an  inaccurate
    interpretation of the appellant's answers.

33. There was no unfairness in failing to adjourn in the  circumstances  of
    this case, therefore there was no error of law.

    Refusal to allow counsel to adduce oral  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    mental health

34. It is asserted that the judge erred by failing to permit the  appellant
    to discharge the burden of proof (presumably referring to proof that he
    was suffering from PTSD) by permitting evidence to be  led  as  to  the
    appellant's mental health and what medication  he  was  taking.  It  is
    asserted that there was no intention that the judge would be invited to
    make a clinical diagnosis of the appellant's mental health.

35. The judge recorded:

         'At one point in the cross-examination[1] I stopped Counsel  asking
         questions about flashbacks and nightmares: this  was  the  road  to
         seeking a judge to make a medical diagnosis, and I had declined  to
         do so...

         First, there is no medical  evidence  of  PTSD,  and  I  am  in  no
         position  to  judge  whether  the  appellant  suffers  from  it  or
         not...Nor will I take judicial cognisance of the  prescriptions.  I
         am not expected to be a pharmacist: it would be wholly wrong for  a
         judge to come to conclusions in an asylum case based, even if  only
         in part, on prescriptions without any  other  evidence  about  what
         those prescriptions were for...'

36. If, as the appellant asserts, the purpose of asking the  questions  was
    to enable the appellant to discharge the burden  of  proof  as  to  his
    mental health condition then the judge would indeed have been  required
    to make a finding that would in essence amount to a medical  diagnosis.
    There was no error of law in the judge refusing to allow this  evidence
    to be led.

37. The final ground of appeal is simply that the  judge  was  not  legally
    entitled to reach the findings that he did  in  paragraphs  99-109  and
    that this consequently affected his assessment of risk on return.  This
    is an unparticularised assertion. It was not amplified at  the  hearing
    before me. The findings of the judge on the  evidence  were  ones  that
    were open to him. There was no error of law.

38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  any  material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the Secretary of State stands


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 13 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

-----------------------
[1] It is assumed that the judge was in fact referring to evidence in
chief.

