
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/00579/2020 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 April 2021                     |On 15 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     NN

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr M Karnik, instructed by R&A Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.



 1. The appellant, an Iraqi national who emanates from  Mosul,  capital  of
    the Ninewah Governorate, is of mixed Arab and Kurd ethnicity, with date
    of birth given as 17.8.87, has appealed with permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
    25.3.20 (Judge Meyler), dismissing on all grounds  his  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 30.12.19, to  refuse  his
    claim for international  protection  made  in  further  submissions  of
    13.10.19.

 2. The grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal raise two  grounds.  Ground  1  asserts  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  erred  in  application  of  the  Country  Guidance  of   SMO,
    misunderstanding the appellant's evidence and failing to  consider  the
    various documents he would need to provide to the Iraqi authorities  to
    obtain redocumentation, as set out in AAH and endorsed in SMO.

 3. Ground 2 argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  her
    approach to  the  assessment  of  credibility  and  in  particular  the
    characterisation of  the  appellant's  father's  death  certificate  as
    "excessively informal, non-medical and atypical of the type of language
    that might be recorded as a cause of death  by  a  professional  doctor
    conducting an autopsy." It is argued that whilst that might be  a  view
    which an expert could take, it was not open to the judge to make such a
    finding.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 29.4.20,
    on ground 1 only. However, when the  application  was  renewed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  granted  permission  on
    ground 2 on 12.10.20, considering that whilst  inclining  to  the  view
    that the judge gave lawful reasons for being unimpressed by  the  death
    certificate, it was arguable "that the judge should not  have  regarded
    it as she did without reference to a known comparator."

 5. The respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated 8.1.21,  points  to  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant's CSID remains  in  the  possession  of  his
    family member with power  of  attorney,  that  his  identity  had  been
    previously verified by the Iraqi Consulate in  the  UK,  and  that  the
    appellant was aware of his book and page number for his family  record.
    Pursuant to SMO at [383], with a current or expired passport and/or the
    book and page number for the family registration a CSID can be obtained
    through the consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, as it does
    not have an INID terminal. It is submitted that in  the  premises,  the
    conclusion that the appellant would be able to obtain a CSID before his
    return to Iraq is  sustainable.  Alternatively,  family  members  could
    obtain a replacement CSID from the local CSA office in Iraq.

 6. In relation to the death certificate, the respondent  points  out  that
    regardless of the manner in which his father had been killed, the judge
    was not satisfied that anyone would have an  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant now.

 7. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 8. In relation to Ground 1, I am satisfied that the judge properly applied
    the Country Guidance of SMO and the information as to what was required
    for redocumentation, as it was  understood  at  that  time.  Whilst  Mr
    Karnik made submission at the First-tier Tribunal appeal  hearing  that
    Ninewah had introduced the INID system so that the appellant would  not
    be able to obtain an INID from consular facilities in the UK, the judge
    was correct to rely on both SMO and AAH, as set out at [36]  and  [37].
    Whilst a list of documents are supposedly required, AAH noted that even
    in the absence of some of them, there was a degree of  flexibility  and
    it may be possible to overlook some official requirements. However, the
    key piece of information was the family's volume and page reference  in
    the civil register.  At [38] the judge  noted  the  various  pieces  of
    information available to the appellant and with which he could obtain a
    replacement CSID. There was no evidence before the Tribunal  that  this
    would not be possible. Further, even though there was criticism of  the
    proof of residence document, that was because of  the  additional  note
    purporting to record the manner of the father's death. This was still a
    document that could  be  relied  on  by  the  appellant  to  assist  in
    redocumentation. In the  premises,  considering  the  decision  in  the
    round, I am satisfied that the findings at [38] and [39] were  open  to
    the judge on the Country Guidance, the evidence  before  the  Tribunal,
    and have been adequately supported by cogent reasoning.

 9. In any event, in the alternative as set out at [38]  of  the  decision,
    based on  the  power  of  attorney,  the  judge  also  found  that  the
    appellant's identity documents were with a relative with the  power  of
    attorney and they could be sent to him in the UK. The grounds of appeal
    do not challenge this finding. The judge  also  found  he  remained  in
    contact with family in Iraq. It follows that even if the judge  was  in
    error as to the ability to redocument himself, the judge  was  entitled
    to conclude that the originals would be available to him on request. In
    the premises, no material error  of  law  is  disclosed  by  the  first
    ground.

10. In relation to Ground 2, Judge Perkins is correct to point out that the
    First-tier Tribunal had no basis to criticism the format or wording  of
    the death certificate without a comparator. The grounds go further  and
    suggest that only an expert could take such a view. However,  as  Judge
    Perkins suggested, the judge gave cogent and lawful reasoning for being
    "unimpressed" by the death certificate. However, I  am  not  satisfied,
    even if this aspect of the decision is an error  of  law,  that  it  is
    material. That is because the judge also addressed  the  issue  in  the
    alternative. The judge noted at [30] of the impugned decision  that  in
    2013 Judge Gordon found that the appellant  would  not  be  of  adverse
    interest in Iraq after 2012. The judge was obliged to take this earlier
    finding as her starting point but observed that there was  no  evidence
    before her to displace  those  earlier  findings.  At  [30]  the  judge
    pointed out that the whole asylum claim was based on one incident  from
    2007 when the appellant and two friends  were  approached,  threatened,
    and an attempt was made by a 'tiny' terrorist  group  to  recruit  him.
    Judge Meyler made the obvious point that if he would have  been  of  no
    adverse interest on return in 2012, as was found by Judge Gordon,  this
    "applies with even greater force in 2020. I  therefore  find  that  the
    fresh evidence before me is not capable of displacing the  findings  of
    Immigration Judge Gordon in her decision dated 11 January  2013."  This
    effectively repeated the earlier finding at [28] of the decision  where
    the judge stated, "I concur that there is now even less basis to belief
    that the tiny group would have  an  ongoing  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant 13 years after the initial incident or  that  they  have  the
    capacity to maintain such an interest." The grounds  do  not  challenge
    the judge's refusal at [29] to accept the claim that there were ongoing
    calls from terrorists. Effectively, whatever  view  was  taken  of  the
    death certificate, it was not material to the outcome of the appeal  as
    the conclusion that there would now  be  no  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant is entirely sustainable even  if  the  death  certificate  is
    genuine or reliable and the manner or cause of the  father's  death  is
    taken as claimed. In the premises, no  material  error  arises  in  the
    second ground.

11. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.

Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed on all grounds.

    I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       13 April 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       13 April 2021

