
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00296/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th September 2017                    |On 22nd September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     BH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Chakmakjian, Counsel instructed on behalf of
the Appellant

For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran.
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination  promulgated  on  the  21st
    June 2017 dismissed his claim for protection.

 4.   The  Appellant's  immigration  history  is   set   out   within   the
    determination at paragraphs 1-2 and in the decision  letter  issued  by
    the Secretary of State. The Appellant left Iran in or  about  the  22nd
    August 2015 and travelled through Turkey.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in May 2016 and claimed asylum on the 27th  June  2016.  It  is
    common ground that on arrival he was an unaccompanied minor aged 17.

 5. The basis of the  Appellant's  protection  claim  is  recorded  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 6-18  which  is  also
    referred to in the detailed reasons for refusal.

 6. It can be summarised briefly as follows. The Appellant had problems due
    to his sight and had surgery on his eyes when he was very young and had
    lost vision in his eyes. As a result of medical  problems  he  had  not
    been educated at school and only taught basics at home by  his  sister.
    His ability to read is limited and he did  not  leave  the  house  much
    until he was 16 years of age. He only had  one  particular  friend,  A,
    whom he had known since he was young. He had been told by his friend  A
    that he had been approached by someone who could offer them  employment
    once twice or three times a week. The Appellant was taken to meet a man
    called H who told them that they would be sticking  leaflets  at  night
    time. They could not do this during the days they would be  caught  and
    charged with littering the area which is a criminal offence.  He  began
    working for H when approximately 16 and worked with  him  for  a  year.
    After a couple of months to others joined them to work  together.  When
    they became involved the amount of paper to be distributed increased to
    3 times per week. One night he was distributing leaflets. At the end of
    the night, his two colleagues failed to meet him. He  went  with  A  to
    look for them and they noticed a white car. A set from the intelligence
    service and to colleagues were in the car and  they  were  looking  for
    others. He was told by A he could not  go  home  and  went  to  another
    friend's home. He explained to his father what he had  been  doing  and
    this was the first time  that  he  knew  that  he'd  been  helping  the
    Democratic Party. He had no idea that he been working for  the  Kurdish
    Democratic Party thought he was delivering leaflets at  night  for  the
    "prosperity of the Kurdish people". His friend had not  told  him  that
    delivering would be dangerous or that  he  could  be  punished  by  the
    government. It was later confirmed that the  Iranian  intelligence  had
    visited the family home looking for the Appellant.

 7. The claim was refused by the Respondent and the reasons given for  that
    decision are set out in a detailed reasons for refusal letter dated  22
    December 2016. The decision letter was  summarised  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at paragraphs 19 - 34. The Respondent considered his claim for
    asylum due to his imputed political  opinion  from  being  involved  in
    distributing illegal leaflets for the Kurdish Democratic Party but  for
    reasons of credibility, it was not accepted that he had  been  involved
    in distributing leaflets  or  that  the  Iranian  authorities  had  any
    interest in him.

 8. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 7th June 2017.

 9.  The judge set out his findings at paragraphs [36] to [48].  The  judge
    found at [36] the Appellant had  not  provided  a  credible  basis  the
    challenging the assertions, analysis and  conclusions  in  the  refusal
    letter and rejected his account of being involved with the distribution
    of material in Iran and that the Iranian authorities had  become  aware
    of this and was sought by them.

10.  The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    grounds are set out in the papers.

11. The FTT (Judge Robertson) granted permission to appeal.

12. At the hearing before this Tribunal Mr Chakmakjian, who had drafted the
    grounds, relied on those written grounds. His  overarching  submissions
    related to the assessment of credibility and that when dealing with the
    issue the Tribunal had neglected to take into account  the  Appellant's
    age. In particular, when making an assessment of the events in Iran the
    judge failed to consider it in the context of the Appellant's age as to
    whether the events were plausible in the light of the  fact  he  was  a
    child  at  the  relevant  time.  He  submitted  the  ground  4  was  an
    illustration of how the Tribunal overlooked his age. This concerned the
    failure to claim  asylum  at  the  first  reasonable  opportunity.  The
    Appellant had given reasons as to why he had not as he  was  under  the
    control of an adult agent. The Appellant was a child at  the  time  and
    this was  recognised  in  the  decision  of  AA  (unattended  children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 at  paragraphs  114-115.  Whilst  this
    referred to children in Afghanistan, he submitted that  it  applied  to
    children in general.

13. As to ground 2, he submitted that the plausibility of  the  Appellant's
    account was  consistent  with  the  objective  material  but  that  the
    Tribunal had not considered that material  when  reaching  findings  of
    credibility. In particular he made reference to the two Danish  reports
    which were before the Tribunal which dealt with political  activity  of
    the type undertaken by Appellant and in  particular  circumstances.  He
    submitted that those reports gave and lent weight  to  the  Appellant's
    account but did not feature in the overall assessment.

14.  Ground 3 was pleaded as a procedural unfairness  which  related  to  a
    misunderstanding of the evidence that  had  been  before  the  Tribunal
    dealing with the Appellant's eyesight. The simple point made by Counsel
    was that had this alleged inconsistency set out at  paragraph  39  been
    put to the Appellant for clarification, it could have been dealt  with.
    To have not given the Appellant and opportunity to deal with it when it
    was relied upon as significant and relevant to credibility amounted  to
    a procedural unfairness.

15. Mr Nath on behalf of the Respondent confirmed that there  had  been  no
    rule 24 response filed on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.  Dealing
    with ground 1, he reminded the Tribunal that the Appellant was over  18
    at the date of the interview (see paragraph 20). He submitted that  the
    judge did take into account the Appellant's age and made  reference  to
    paragraph 37 of the decision. He submitted that the questions that  the
    Appellant were asked when he was an adult  although  Mr  Nath  accepted
    that the events took place when he was a child.  At  paragraph  37  the
    judge was considering his cognitive and  intellectual  ability  in  the
    context of his factual claim.

16. As to ground 2, he submitted that paragraph 43 judge had made reference
    to the Danish report. It was clear from the Appellant's account that he
    was not a formal member  of  any  organisation.  As  to  ground  4,  he
    submitted that the decision letter set out issues relating to section 8
    at paragraph 29 and thus the judge was required to consider this issue.
    It was open to the judge to find that he had not taken advantage  of  a
    reasonable opportunity to make an asylum for  human  rights  claim  (at
    paragraph 48).

Discussion:

17. Having had  the  opportunity  to  consider  the  submissions  from  the
    advocates in the light of the determination and the  issues  raised,  I
    have reached the conclusion that the Appellant  has  demonstrated  that
    grounds are made out.

18. I shall therefore set out my reasons as to why have I have reached that
    conclusion.

19. Grounds 1 and 4 can be conveniently considered together which relate to
    the relevance of the Appellant's age when making  an  overall  holistic
    analysis of the credibility or plausibility issues. As set  out,  there
    was no dispute that the Appellant was an unaccompanied  minor  when  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom and that the events that he had recounted
    to the Tribunal related to an earlier time when he was 16 years of age.
    Whilst Mr Nath was right to observe that at the time of  his  interview
    he was 18 years, what has to be  borne  in  mind  is  the  age  of  the
    Appellant at the time the disputed events took place.

20. I have been referred to the relevant authorities and in  particular  AA
    (Afghanistan) (as  cited).  At  paragraph  10  of  that  decision,  the
    Tribunal observed that when dealing with the credibility  of  a  minor,
    their age at the time of the events country of origin is of "first  and
    central importance" and that, "due  allowance  must  be  made  for  the
    Appellant's age time of the events in question." It is  also  right  to
    observe that when reaching credibility findings  which  relate  to  the
    experiences of  a  child,  it  is  important  to  have  regard  to  the
    experience and maturity that may be expected of a child  of  that  age.
    Whilst the judge was aware of his immigration history (see paragraph  4
    and paragraph 20) and that he had entered  as  an  unaccompanied  minor
    that should be  applied  also  to  any  assessment  of  credibility  or
    plausibility of account. In this particular case, there was evidence of
    the Appellant's early life which was relevant to his  actions  in  Iran
    and thus were relevant to an assessment of his behaviour in the context
    plausibility. Whilst the judge at  [37]  as  set  out  the  Appellant's
    account of his earlier problems in Iran and  was  contrasted  with  his
    oral evidence which did not indicate  any  "cognitive  or  intellectual
    deficit". However whilst he  may  not  have  any  particular  cognitive
    deficit apparent during a hearing or recorded in any  recent  evidence,
    does not necessarily mean that his account of having been vulnerable at
    an earlier stage should be entirely discounted.

21. Much of the factual analysis  was  based  general  plausibility  points
    relating to the distribution of leaflets (see paragraph 38  -  43)  and
    whilst it might be presumed that an adult with  some  experience  would
    realise the risks of being involved in such activity, it was  necessary
    to consider his account in the context of his age,  level  of  maturity
    and understanding as at the date of the events. The  findings  of  fact
    were not made with that approach in mind.

22. The section 8 issue is recorded in the refusal letter at paragraphs  26
    - 30. The Appellant travelled through Bulgaria and France but  did  not
    claim asylum and misled the authorities of his identity.  Thus  it  was
    asserted that he failed to take advantage of a  reasonable  opportunity
    to make an asylum claim in a safe country which therefore  damaged  his
    credibility. The judge's findings  in  this  respect  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 47 and 48. The judge did  not  find  that  he  had  given  a
    satisfactory reason for not making an asylum claim  en  route.  However
    reaching  that  finding  the  does  not  appear  to   have   been   any
    consideration given to his circumstances and  in  particular  his  age.
    There does not seem to be any dispute that his journey was a  long  one
    and had been facilitated by the use  of  an  agent.  The  grounds  make
    reference  to  material  set  out   in   the   Tribunal   decision   of
    AA(Afghanistan) (as cited) which  makes  reference  to  the  degree  of
    control that some agents or  facilitators  have  over  those  in  their
    charge and that to "disregard the effect that  they  may  have  on  the
    charges would be  both  unrealistic  and  unjust.  "  It  is  therefore
    necessary to consider the reasonableness of being able to make  such  a
    claim against that background. As I indicated to the parties, the judge
    does not state that he attaches significant weight to  that  factor  in
    the overall assessment and by itself would not demonstrate any error of
    law. However it was a matter placed in the balance of  credibility  and
    supports the overall emphasis set out in ground one.

23. Dealing with ground 2, while an assessment of personal credibility  may
    be a critical aspect to some claims particularly as in this case in the
    absence of independent supporting evidence, it is not an end in  itself
    or a substitute for the application of the criteria for refugee  status
    which must be holistically assessed. Therefore the Appellant's  account
    of his fears and an assessment of credibility must also  be  judged  in
    the context of the known objective circumstances and practices  of  the
    State in question. In this context, it is submitted that  the  Tribunal
    did not take account  of  the  objective  material  when  reaching  the
    overall assessment of credibility. There were  two  reports  that  were
    relied upon by the Appellant in the form of the Danish reports  -Danish
    Refugee Council: on conditions relating to Kurdish parties in Iran  and
    the KR I dated June 2013 and further  Danish  report  from  the  Danish
    Refugee Council. At paragraph 43, the Tribunal did not accept that  the
    Appellant would have been involved in such high risk  activity.  Whilst
    the judge made reference to the report at paragraph  43  (stating  that
    supporters of the KTP would get lesser sentences  compared  to  Marxist
    parties and that if person was caught publishing or carrying a bunch of
    leaflets, this would be considered a crime and the punishment would  be
    severe) that was not  in  dispute  and  in  the  context  of  Iran  was
    uncontroversial. However there were other parts  of  the  report  which
    lent support and weight to his account, for example, at  2.1.2.1  (page
    28) the material makes reference to the youth organisation of the party
    in Iran and sets out that there age ranges between 13 to  30  years  of
    age and further information is given at page 30, that the  identity  of
    those producing printing  flyers  is  not  often  known  to  those  who
    distribute them. It  gives  an  example  that  in  a  school,  students
    distributing flyers may not know that the flies disputed  are  produced
    by his own teacher. The material also refers to flyers being posted  in
    crowded places such as town square, on walls, cars and touristic sites.
    Therefore there was evidence that  those  under  the  age  of  18  were
    involved in this type of political activity and that his account of not
    knowing who distributed them was  consistent  with  the  material.  The
    material also makes reference to the contents of  such  documents  (see
    page 29) that the languages used on the flyers are mostly both  Kurdish
    and Farsi. This is consistent with the Appellant's account  whereby  he
    described the leaflets in that way. As Mr  Chakmakijian  submitted  the
    use of dual languages is an unusual fact to know but it is confirmed in
    the country materials. The Appellant also gave evidence concerning  how
    the leaflets are distributed in particular that it took place at night.
    This is also consistent with the material set out at  page  59  of  the
    report. Whilst Mr Nath submitted that the judge  had  referred  to  the
    report at paragraph 43, I prefer the submission of Mr Chakmakijian  who
    submitted that the reference at that paragraph related to a point  that
    was not in dispute and that the other matters set out above,  if  taken
    into account, would have provided support for the  Appellant's  account
    as being plausible and consistent with the objective material.   Whilst
    the judge made a number of points on plausibility  and  credibility  of
    his account, in reaching an overall  assessment  of  credibility  those
    matters that went to the Appellant's consistency of account  should  be
    balanced against the other elements identified.

24. Consequently I am satisfied that the grounds  are  made  out  and  that
    given the gravity of the consequences of the decision on asylum that it
    has been demonstrated the findings of fact did not  take  into  account
    those material factors in the credibility assessment.

25. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of  this  nature  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the Appellant's evidence in the  light  of
    the country materials provided and for the issues to be  determined  in
    the light of all the relevant evidence.

26. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  this  is  the
    correct course to take and therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to hear afresh.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is hereby set aside; it shall be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing.



    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.  The
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.




Signed[pic]                             Date: 21/9/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

