
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00499/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th November 2018                          |On 19th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [B H]
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge V A Cox, promulgated on 23rd February 2018, following  a  hearing
    at  Birmingham  Priory  Courts  on   9th   February   2018.    In   the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on  [~]  1993.
    He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 22nd  December
    2017,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for   humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he received a  threatening
    telephone call asking that the Appellant be recruited to fight with the
    insurgency.  He declined to do so.  His  house  was  then  bombed.   He
    escaped his home.  The home itself was destroyed.  The  Appellant  does
    not know whether his family  escaped  with  him  or  did  not  and  the
    evidence was ambiguous on  this  issue.   He  does  not  now  have  the
    necessary documentation to enable him to return back to Iraq.

The Judge's Findings

 4. In her determination, Judge Cox made the  following  findings.   First,
    his account of being blown across his front yard  and  against  a  door
    because of a single bomb blast, that blew him towards  the  house,  was
    not credible.  It was not credible that he did not then remain  at  the
    property to investigate the fate of his family.  Nor  was  it  credible
    that the other property he went to was only one minute away and that he
    did not then think of returning back to look for other  family  members
    there.

 5. Second, the judge did not find it credible that the Appellant  did  not
    think to collect his family's identity documents, but  abandoned  them,
    although he stated that all of the money was taken by the other  family
    and the man he ran away with (see paragraphs 52 to 55).

 6. Third, the judge held that the  Appellant  had  given  an  inconsistent
    account in respect of his work ID and having handed the same in at  his
    "AIR" it is incredible that he said that he commenced his employment in
    October 2013 when the card quite plainly  states  that  he  started  in
    February 2013.

 7. Fourth, the judge did not find it credible that the Appellant  received
    a threatening phone call seeking to recruit him.  This would have  been
    no more than a random enquiry.   It  was  never  repeated  again.   The
    Appellant's own evidence indicates that he reported  the  same  to  the
    police and they made efforts to deal with such matters (paragraph  65).
    Accordingly, the judge found that the Appellant's account  was  untrue,
    before turning on to consider whether  he  could  safely  return  as  a
    failed asylum seeker (paragraph 68).

 8. In relation to the Appellant being able to return as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker, the judge stated that "since the Appellant originates from  the
    IKR of Iraq and speaks  Kurdish  I  remind  myself  that  there  is  no
    evidence that the authorities in the IKR require a failed asylum seeker
    to have an expired or current passport  or  laissez-passer"  (paragraph
    71).  For this reason, the judge found that the Appellant could  return
    and not face any risk of  destitution  because  "he  will  be  able  to
    contact his family  and  obtain  a  CSID  in  support  of  his  family"
    (paragraph 75).

 9. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that Judge Cox erred in dismissing the
    Appellant's appeal because she had materially  misdirected  herself  in
    relation to the facts.  First, there was a factual error by  the  judge
    when she stated (at paragraph 70) that the Appellant was  "from  Kirkuk
    which is within the IKR".  The reality was that the Appellant was  from
    a small town by the name of "Tuz Khurmatu" which was  in  the  "Saladin
    province".  Therefore, any suggestion that the Appellant would not find
    any difficulty in relocating within IKR was bound to have been one made
    on a flawed assessment.  Second, the judge asserted that the  Appellant
    could not succeed because of AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA 994, which refers to
    Kirkuk, among other places, being contested and as far as documentation
    was concerned former residents of the  IKR  would  be  returned  there,
    whereas all other Iraqis would be returned to  Baghdad.   However,  the
    judge failed to assess the risk of return to Baghdad in  line  with  AA
    (Iraq).  This was because account had to be taken  of  BA  (Returns  to
    Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018, which makes it quite clear that for
    Kurdish Sunnis to return to Baghdad would be hugely problematic.   Yet,
    there is no reference to this latter case.

11. On 22nd March 2018, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.

Submissions

12. At the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Khan,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, as his Counsel, submitted  that  the  judge  had  materially
    misdirected herself as to the facts.  She states (at paragraph 70) that
    the Appellant is from Kirkuk, which is  not  the  case,  and  then  she
    states at paragraph 71 that he is from the IKR, which was also not  the
    case.  Thereafter, the judge goes on  to  refer  to  the  Appellant  as
    coming from that part of the country (at paragraph 75), such that there
    could be no confidence in the Appellant having been  properly  treated,
    in what is a very long and convoluted decision, whereby it is difficult
    to know precisely where the judge refers to  the  Appellant's  account,
    and where the judge refers to her own findings of fact.  The  statement
    in the end "I therefore find that the  Appellant  can  be  returned  to
    Iraq" (paragraph 76) is problematic, because it is  not  clear  exactly
    where it is in Iraq that the judge felt the Appellant could be returned
    to.   Mr Khan also stated that there was a difficulty in the  way  that
    the judge had  come  to  her  findings  of  fact.   After  stating  the
    Appellant's narrative account, she states (at paragraph  47)  that,  "I
    can state at this early stage that I find that the Appellant was not  a
    credible witness and do not find that  the  core  of  his  account  has
    remained consistent".  Yet,  this  is  without  the  judge  making  any
    findings of fact as such.  She reaches her conclusion first,  and  then
    refers to her findings thereafter, which was not  the  correct  way  of
    approaching matters, particularly as she had got his  place  of  origin
    entirely wrong.

13. For his part, Mr Mills submitted, that he  will  have  to  accept  that
    there is an error in terms of the judge's conclusion as  to  where  the
    Appellant  actually  originated  from,  and  would  be  returnable  to.
    However, whether this was an error that was material was a matter  that
    he would have to leave to this Tribunal.  He submitted that, whereas it
    is true that the Appellant came  from  Tuz  Khurmatu,  this  particular
    place is on the periphery of Kirkuk, and the judge may  well  not  have
    been wrong in saying that the Appellant came from Kirkuk.   Indeed,  if
    the Appellant himself were to be asked, he would doubtless say that  he
    did come from Kirkuk.  Nevertheless, he would have to accept  that  the
    Appellant did not come from the IKR, and insofar as  the  judge  states
    that the Appellant "originates from the IKR  of  Iraq"  (paragraph  71)
    this was plainly wrong.  In any event, Kirkuk was no longer  contested.
    It used to be occupied by the Kurdish Peshmerga Army.  It had now  been
    taken over by the Iraqi Army.  Nevertheless,  the  population  had  not
    been displaced and there were a substantial  number  of  Sunni  Muslims
    living there.  Therefore, the Appellant could conceivably return there.
     Finally, as to the question of the  Appellant  having  access  to  his
    CSID, the question was whether he can procure these documents to enable
    him to travel safely to his  place  of  origin.   The  latest  Tribunal
    judgment of AAH [2017] makes it clear that if he can get the  documents
    then he is returnable.  The Appellant had a family back home,  who  may
    well have documents that he could access, and  he  would  certainly  be
    able to make his way to his place of origin.

14. In reply, Mr Khan submitted that the judge had made it clear  that  she
    did not believe the Appellant, on the basis of a flawed assessment, and
    looked at in its entirety, it  could  not  be  said  that  that  flawed
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility, could be  divorced  entirely
    from the plainly wrong factual conclusion reached by the  judge  as  to
    where the Appellant originated from.  In any event, the implications of
    AA (Iraq) have not been properly followed through, although  that  case
    was referred to in passing (at paragraph 75).   It  was  certainly  the
    case that BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT  00018,  was  not
    referred to.  To conclude that, "I therefore find  that  the  Appellant
    can be returned to Iraq" (paragraph  76)  begged  the  question  as  to
    precisely where the judge thought the Appellant was returnable to.

15. He asked me to allow the appeal.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  This is a case where, the  judge
    has wrongly concluded, in terms of the eventual question of whether the
    Appellant is returnable to Iraq, on the basis of her  conclusion  that,
    "since the Appellant originates from the IKR of Iraq and speaks Kurdish
    I remind myself that there is no evidence that the authorities  in  the
    IKR require a failed asylum  seeker  to  have  an  expired  or  current
    passport or laissez-passer" (paragraph 71).  The Appellant is not  from
    the IKR.  He is from Tuz Khurmatu which is in the province of  Saladin.
    The judge, even if one makes an allowance, for not knowing whether  the
    Appellant came from the province of Kirkuk or from the city of  Kirkuk,
    makes no clear finding on this question.  In the event, the question of
    returnability has been wrongly arrived at.  Therefore, the decision  in
    this respect has infected an  actual  finding  as  to  the  Appellant's
    returnability.  It is also the case that the full  implications  of  AA
    (Iraq) [2017] have not been properly applied and neither has there been
    a reference to BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018.   For
    these reasons, this matter needs to be returned back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge V A Cox.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I re-make  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge V A Cox,  pursuant  to  Practice
    Statement 7.2(a) at the next available opportunity.

18. An anonymity direction is made.

19. This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018


