

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: PA/00519/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                | Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On October 18, 2016                | On October 19, 2016            |
|                                   |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                    MISS LENA JULIAMAREIKER AMENOPE FUMEY
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant      Mr Olorunfemi (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent     Ms Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    2. The appellant is a national of Togo. On March 25, 2015 the appellant
       entered the United Kingdom on a visit  visa  valid  until  July  28,
       2015. On May 22, 2015 she claimed asylum. The respondent refused her
       application in a decision dated June 30, 2015.

    3. The appellant appealed that decision on July 14, 2015 under  Section
       82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  her
       appeal came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  M  Davies
       (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge" on  April  14,  2016.  In  a
       decision promulgated on May 5, 2016 he dismissed her claims.

    4. The appellant appealed the Judge's decision  on  May  19,  2016  and
       permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Parkes on June 1, 2016. He found that it  was  arguable,  given  the
       fact the  appellant  was  unrepresented,  the  Judge's  decision  to
       proceed  without  an  interpreter  when  one  had  been  booked  was
       incorrect.

    5. The matter initially came before me on the above date  and  on  that
       occasion I heard submissions from both representatives.  I  reserved
       my decision.

SUBMISSIONS

    6. Mr Olorunfemi adopted the grounds of appeal and addressed  me  on  a
       number of grounds. His primary submission was  the  Judge  erred  by
       dealing with the appeal without an interpreter. Whilst  it  was  not
       disputed the appellant could speak English  it  was  not  her  first
       choice of language and she had been interviewed with an  interpreter
       at her asylum interview. The Judge referred in paragraph [27] of his
       decision to telling the appellant she could refer to an  interpreter
       when one was not there. The Judge's approach  was  both  unfair  and
       unsafe.

    7. Ms Aboni adopted a Rule  24  response  dated  June  16,  2016.   She
       referred me to her colleague's note from the hearing in which it had
       been recorded that the appellant was happy  to  proceed  without  an
       interpreter. She argued that if there had  been  any  concerns  then
       either  the  Judge  or  the  Presenting  Officer  would  have   said
       something.

    8. Both parties also addressed me on other issues but I do not  address
       those concerns due to my decision on the primary ground.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

    9. In granting permission to appeal Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Parkes identified arguable errors of law on  grounds  of  procedural
       unfairness.

   10. I had the benefit of the Judge's hearing notes  and  these  recorded
       the fact that when the case was called on at 10am  the  interpreter,
       booked by the Tribunal,  had  not  arrived.  The  matter  was  quite
       properly stood down for enquiries to be made at 10.15am. The hearing
       resumed at 10.30am but there is no record of any discussion  between
       the Judge and the appellant and her father who had also been present
       save the appellant indicated that she was happy to proceed without a
       "witness".

   11. I  am  unclear  whether  the  word  "witness"  was  supposed  to  be
       interpreter but what is clear is that she used an interpreter at her
       interview and had requested an interpreter  for  these  proceedings.
       She was unrepresented and did not have  the  benefit  of  any  legal
       advice as to the pros and cons of proceeding without waiting for  an
       interpreter.

   12. She may have agreed to proceed but I have to consider that  decision
       against the background that these proceedings were alien to her  and
       as she stated in a recently filed statement  that  whilst  she  does
       understand and speak English she does not do so to the  level  where
       she can  easily  and  promptly  assimilate  information  and  answer
       questions to the best of her ability. She stated, "If I was speaking
       in "Ewe" I will be able to express myself properly and clearly so as
       to convey my subjective fear".

   13. In the circumstances I find there was a procedural unfairness and  I
       set aside the whole decision.

   14. In light of this finding  I  therefore  see  no  need  to  make  any
       findings on other matters raised.

   15. I raised with both representatives where this appeal should be heard
       in the event there was an error in law.  Both agreed that  in  light
       of Part 3, Section 7.1 to 7.3 of the Practice Statement  the  matter
       should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

   16. I direct that any additional evidence should be served on  both  the
       Tribunal and other party in accordance with the  current  Procedural
       Rules.

DECISION

   17. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

   18. The appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  these
       issues to be addressed hearing under Section 12  of  the  Tribunals,
       Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

   19. The matter should not be  listed  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal M Davies. Ideally, this  matter  should  be  listed  before
       myself in the First-tier but I leave that to the listing  department
       to decide if that is necessary.


Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
