
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00889/2019
                                                               PA/00890/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 August 2019                    |On 5 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     SYA
                                     DKM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mustafa, Counsel, instructed by CB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellants. This direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 15 April  2019  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lodge which refused the appellant's protection  and
    human rights appeals.

 2. The appellants are nationals of Iraq. The first appellant was  born  on
    22 November 1999 and she is the daughter of the second appellant,  born
    on 1 January 1982.  They are of Kurdish ethnicity. They came to the  UK
    on 6 September 2016 and claimed asylum on the basis of a blood feud  or
    reprisals from another tribe as a result of a road traffic accident  in
    which two young men were killed. The claims were refused in a  decision
    dated 18 January 2019.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal did not find the account of  the  road  traffic
    accident and mistreatment thereafter to  be  credible.  The  appellants
    appealed  against  the  credibility  findings  but  were  not   granted
    permission to appeal in the permission decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
    dated 1 July 2019.

 4. The only ground of appeal  before  me  concerned  the  availability  of
    internal relocation. Paragraph 4 of the grounds stated:

         "At [81]-[83] Judge Lodge concludes that, even  if  the  Appellants
         were telling the truth about their fears in their  home  area,  the
         Appellants would be able to relocate to another area of the IKR  to
         avoid their enemies. Judge Lodge give (sic) no consideration to the
         practical difficulties that the Appellants may face on  seeking  to
         relocate within the IKR and  makes  no  reference  to  the  country
         guidance case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG
         UKUT 212 (IAC). It is therefore submitted  that  the  determination
         displays inadequate reasoning and is wrong in law."

 5. The grant of permission stated that:

         "However, it is arguable that insufficient consideration was  given
         to the Country Guidance, including  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
         relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212  (IAC)  and  the  ability  to
         relocate elsewhere in the IKR, a relatively small area of Iraq.  On
         that issue alone permission is granted."

 6. The grounds and the grant of permission make it  clear  that  the  only
    issue in question is that of internal relocation and the application of
    the Country Guidance on that point. The grant of permission did not act
    to admit a ground of challenge that the credibility  findings  were  in
    error for failing to apply Country Guidance, as argued  by  Mr  Mustafa
    before me. Paragraph 4 of the grounds does not set out such a challenge
    and the grant of permission does not admit or grant permission on  such
    a challenge.

 7. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that  the  family  were
    from Sulaymaniyah in the Independent Kurdish Region (IKR). In paragraph
    12, the judge recorded the evidence of the  first  appellant  that  her
    maternal grandfather was living  in  the  IKR.  In  paragraph  20,  the
    evidence of the first appellant was that her grandfather  had  assisted
    her and her mother to leave Iraq. The evidence of the second  appellant
    was the same; see paragraph  25.  The  first  appellant's  father  (the
    second appellant's husband) confirmed, as  recorded  in  paragraph  42,
    that his father-in-law remained in Iraq.

 8. There was no direct evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  from  the
    appellants  concerning  the  location  of  their  CSID  documents.  The
    evidence at its highest was  that  they  left  Iraq  with  nothing  and
    illegally. As above, the appellants were not  found  credible.  It  was
    specifically not considered credible in paragraph 76  of  the  decision
    that they had not brought with them documents to support  their  asylum
    claims. The judge found that "they had ample time  to  obtain  all  the
    documents".

 9. Further, nothing in the materials or the  decision  suggests  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was asked to find that the appellants did not  have
    access to their CSID  documents.  The  skeleton  argument  and  witness
    statements before the First-tier Tribunal were silent on the issue  and
    there is no reference in those documents or elsewhere to the appellants
    expecting to have any difficulties in going from  Baghdad  to  the  IKR
    because of not having a CSID.

10. Given those matters, it is not my view that the case put to the  First-
    tier Tribunal was that the appellants did not have access to their CSID
    documents or could not obtain them. There can therefore be no  material
    error in failing to apply AAH.  The case put to the First-tier Tribunal
    did not require it to do so. If it had done so, the appeal would  still
    have been refused as nothing showed other  than  that  they  could  use
    existing CSIDs and travel from Baghdad to the IKR without difficulty.

11. Further,  as  above,  they  have  a  male  relative  in  Iraq  who  was
    significant in assisting them to leave the country. There is no  reason
    to suppose that he will not be prepared to assist  with  their  return.
    They are returning with  their  father/husband  also  so  will  not  be
    returning without male support. Even if they  do  not  have  access  to
    their CSIDs following paragraph 1 of the headnote of  AAH,  nothing  in
    the evidence suggests that the appellants would not be able  to  obtain
    the ones they left at home via their male relative in the IKR or,  with
    his assistance, provide the information that would make obtaining a new
    CSID "straightforward". There was no  evidence  indicating  that  there
    were difficulties with their relevant civil  registry  office.  Nothing
    suggests  that  the  grandfather/father  could  not  assist  with   the
    administrative work involved in obtaining a new CSID.

12. It is therefore my conclusion, firstly, that the factual matrix  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was that the appellants  had  access  to  their
    CSIDs so there was no issue concerning return to the IKR  via  Baghdad;
    see paragraph 3 of the headnote of AAH. In the  alternative,  the  only
    other possible factual matrix before the First-tier Tribunal was  that,
    with the assistance  of  a  male  relative,  the  appellants  could  be
    expected to obtain a CSID that had  already  been  issued  to  them  or
    obtain a new one and then return  to  the  IKR.  It  is  therefore  not
    material the First-tier Tribunal did not apply AAH as the appeal  could
    not have been  allowed  on  the  basis  of  the  guidance  on  internal
    relocation and CSIDs set out in that case.

13. For these reasons, it is my conclusion that there is no material  error
    in the decision.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed: [pic]                           Date: 22 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

