
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00015/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 21 December 2015                  |on 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               HALIM ALI NOOR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss L Irvine, Advocate, instructed by Drummond
                    Miller, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as above, but for ease and continuity of reference  the
    rest of this determination refers to them as they were  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hands, promulgated on  29  September  2015,  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal against deportation to Uganda.

 3. The SSHD categorises each of her 4 grounds of appeal (the  last  2  are
    both numbered "3") as "failure to give reasons  on  material  matters".
    The appellant's rule 24 response challenges each ground by pointing out
    reasons which are given in the determination but which  are  overlooked
    (or even misrepresented) in the grounds.

 4. On the first ground, the response makes it plain that the judge did not
    decide that the appellant did not constitute a danger to the  community
    "simply because he said  so".   The  judge  carefully  considered  also
    expert  social  work  evidence  and  evidence  from   the   appellant's
    "surrogate family" to explain her conclusion that he  would  not  be  a
    danger in future.

 5. On the second ground, the response demonstrates that the judge did  not
    simply "accept the appellant's account of his sexuality on face value".
     There was also an independent psychiatric report and evidence  of  two
    close friends who were found credible and reliable.

 6. It is unnecessary to go into further detail.  The grounds and  response
    speak for themselves.  The grounds on reference  to  the  determination
    and in light of the response are no more than disagreement and a highly
    partial reassertion of the SSHD's case.

 7. The case may have been a difficult and finely  balanced  one,  but  the
    grounds do not show that the judge's resolution of it is undermined  by
    any legal error.

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           21 December 2015
