


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00476/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : UT(IAC) Birmingham             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On : 7 June 2017                          |On : 14 June 2017                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                      A
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, instructed by Wilsons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Following a grant of permission to the respondent to appeal  against  the
   decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
   against the refusal of his protection and  human  rights  claim,  it  was
   found, at an error of law hearing on 31 January 2017, that the First-tier
   Tribunal had made errors  of  law  in  its  decision.  The  decision  was
   accordingly set aside and is to be re-made.

2. The appellant is a citizen of the Russian Federation born on  [  ]  1981.
   He arrived in the UK on 10 May 2000. He has a lengthy immigration history
   including a grant of exceptional leave to remain from 6 September 2002 to
   6 September 2003  based  on  draft  evasion  from  the  Russian  military
   followed by various unsuccessful applications  for  leave  to  remain  on
   asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.  A  more  detailed  account  of  his
   immigration history is set out in my error of law decision of 3  February
   2017.


3. The more salient parts  of  the  appellant's  history  are  that  he  was
   convicted, on 15 January 2001, of indecent assault on a female aged 16 or
   over and was sentenced to 18 months at a Young Offenders Institute.  That
   pre-dated the grant of exceptional leave to remain. Following the refusal
   of an application for  leave  to  remain  in  August  2005  he  was  next
   encountered upon his arrest on 4 September 2009 for fraud relating  to  a
   Polish passport. He was served with papers as an overstayer. On 5 October
   2009 he was convicted and sentenced to 13 weeks' imprisonment,  suspended
   for 12 months. On 18 August 2014  the  respondent  issued  a  deportation
   order against the appellant under the automatic deportation provisions in
   the UK Borders Act 2007 and served an accompanying decision on him on  22
   August 2014. However  the  deportation  order  was  withdrawn  after  the
   appellant married BA, a British citizen, on 12 December 2014 and produced
   his marriage certificate to the  Home  Office.  On  31  May  2015  a  new
   decision to deport was made, under section 5(1) of  the  Immigration  Act
   1971. The appellant made submissions in a section 120 notice  which  were
   considered as an asylum and human  rights  claim.  That  claim  was  then
   refused by the respondent on 5 January 2016.

4. In refusing the claim,  the  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant
   would be at no risk on return to Russia and that he was not  entitled  to
   humanitarian  protection.  With  regard  to  Article  8,  the  respondent
   considered the appellant's relationship with his daughter, EG, a  British
   citizen born on 21  November  2011  from  a  previous  relationship.  The
   respondent noted that social services had been  involved  with  EG  since
   December 2013, when the appellant's ex-partner and the mother of  EG  was
   deemed not fit to look after EG due to mental illness. As a result EG was
   in  the  care  of  her  grandmother,  AG,  who  had  obtained  a  Special
   Guardianship Order. The  appellant  had  applied  for  contact  with  his
   daughter in February 2015 through a child  arrangement  order  which  was
   still pending, and in the meantime he had informal  contact  through  AG.
   The respondent noted the recommendation in a  Cafcass  report,  that  the
   appellant spend time with EG, once fortnightly, initially supervised  but
   with the possibility of subsequent unsupervised contact.  The  respondent
   referred to two court orders regarding contact and  noted  that  parental
   responsibility was held by AG with limited contact by the appellant.  The
   respondent considered that it would not be unduly harsh for EG to  remain
   in  the  UK  if  the  appellant  was  deported  and  concluded  that  the
   requirements in paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules  had  not  been
   met. The respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship with BA but noted that their marriage was entered
   into at a time when he was subject to a deportation order. The respondent
   considered that it would not be unduly harsh for BA to live in Russia  or
   to remain in  the  UK  without  the  appellant  and  concluded  that  the
   requirements in paragraph 399(b) of the immigration rules  had  not  been
   met. The respondent did not accept that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
   requirements in paragraph 399A on the basis of private life,  as  he  had
   not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life,  he  was  not
   socially and culturally integrated in the  UK  and  there  were  no  very
   significant obstacles to his integration into Russia. The respondent  did
   not accept that there were very compelling circumstances which outweighed
   the public interest in the appellant's deportation.

5.  The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard on  4
   March 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hall, who dismissed the appeal on
   asylum, humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 grounds but  allowed
   the appeal on Article 8 grounds. Whilst he found that the appellant could
   not meet the requirements of paragraph 399(b) or 399A, he  accepted  that
   the criteria in paragraph 399(a) were met. He accepted that the appellant
   had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  daughter  EG  and
   concluded that it would be unduly harsh  for  EG  to  remain  in  the  UK
   without him. The appellant  was  without  legal  representation  at  that
   hearing.


6. The respondent sought, and was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal against Judge Hall's decision on Article 8. At an error of
   law hearing on 31 January 2017 I found the judge's  determination  to  be
   materially flawed, for the following reasons:

      "13. Judge Hall, in focussing on the best interests of the appellant's
      daughter and the adverse effects of the appellant's  deportation  upon
      her, without balancing that against  the  public  interest  and  other
      relevant considerations including his  past  criminal  offending,  had
      clearly been following the approach taken in the  case  of  MAB  (para
      399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435. The Court of  Appeal  in  MM
      (Uganda) & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Rev  1)
      [2016] EWCA Civ 617, however, has since resolved the conflict  between
      MAB and KMO, favouring the approach taken in KMO and finding that  MAB
      was wrongly decided. Judge Hall's  approach  was  accordingly  legally
      flawed.


      14. Mr Mills relied on the Court of Appeal's finding in The  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department v AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012,
      at [17], that it would be rare for the best interests of the  children
      to outweigh the strong public interest in deporting foreign criminals,
      and submitted that that was clear authority for the  proposition  that
      great weight had to be given to the  public  interest  in  considering
      proportionality under Article 8 in criminal deportation cases. I agree
      with his submission that that was  a  matter  which  the  judge  ought
      plainly to have considered but clearly did not. Indeed the judge  gave
      no indication  that  the  public  interest  formed  any  part  of  his
      consideration of the "unduly harsh" test.


      15. Accordingly the conclusion reached by Judge Hall in regard to  the
      "unduly harsh" test was unsustainable in law and has to be re-made. As
      Mr  Mills  submitted,  the  balancing  exercise  was  only   partially
      undertaken by the judge and needs  to  be  completed  by  taking  into
      account other relevant factors  including  in  particular  the  public
      interest.  I therefore set aside Judge Hall's decision in  respect  to
      paragraph 399(a). His other findings,  including  those  on  paragraph
      399(b) and 399A, are preserved.


      16. Whilst it would have  been  possible  to  go  on  to  re-make  the
      decision with the benefit of the additional evidence produced  by  the
      appellant, including the most recent Cafcass report dated 19  December
      2016 prepared for the family court proceedings, I considered  that  it
      was in the interests of justice for the matter  to  be  listed  for  a
      resumed hearing on another date in order  to  give  the  appellant  an
      opportunity to find legal representation and,  if  available,  produce
      any further evidence. The appellant expressed his preference for  such
      an opportunity, although I advised him that the appeal  would  proceed
      even if he was not successful in finding legal representation.


      17. I note that the final order of the family court,  further  to  the
      submission of the  Cafcass  report,  does  not  appear  to  have  been
      produced to the Tribunal and it would  be  helpful  if  the  appellant
      could produce that, together with any other evidence of  contact  with
      his daughter. It is anticipated that the matter will  proceed  on  the
      basis of submissions, but the Tribunal does not exclude  further  oral
      evidence and any witnesses should therefore attend."

7. The appeal then came before me again on 7 June 2017, by  which  time  the
   appellant was legally represented and had produced a bundle  of  evidence
   including statements from himself, his wife BA,  his  mother-in-law,  his
   friend and his daughter's grandmother AG, letters of support, a  forensic
   psychologist report/risk assessment and a Child Arrangements  Order  from
   the family court dated 7 April 2016.

8. The appellant, his wife BA and his friend VS  all  attended  and  adopted
   their witness statements. None  were  cross-examined  by  Mr  Mills.  The
   appellant explained that his ex-partner, the mother of his  daughter  EG,
   had applied for a contact order before Christmas and  the  court  hearing
   was set for 27 July 2017. However she had not co-operated with Cafcass or
   provided any of the papers required by the court. The recommendation from
   Cafcass was that she would see her daughter once or twice  a  month.  The
   appellant said that he was involved in the  proceedings  because  he  had
   parental responsibility for his daughter. His mother-in-law  had  had  an
   operation on her knee recently and was unable to care for EG  so  he  had
   been caring for her with his wife.  They  had  taken  her  to  visit  her
   grandmother most days after school.  His  daughter  was  doing  well  but
   suffered from severe anxiety because of the uncertainty of her situation.
   She did not understand what was happening and they had tried to  explain.
   He believed that she should have some contact with her mother as that was
   what she wanted.


9. Mr Mills then made submissions. He said that there was  no  challenge  to
   the facts and that the appellant's relationship with his daughter EG  had
   been accepted by the Tribunal. It  was  particularly  telling  that  EG's
   grandmother trusted the appellant as a stable parent. This was  therefore
   a strong case for the best interests of the child being for the appellant
   to remain in the UK with her, given that she had had difficulties in  her
   upbringing and suffered from anxiety, and Mr Mills accepted that the best
   interests of EG were therefore a weighty factor.  Although  there  was  a
   public interest in deportation, given the appellant's offences  in  2001,
   the arguments in favour of the public interest had become much weaker. Mr
   Mills referred to the case  of  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department v  AJ  (Zimbabwe)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1012  in  which  it  was
   emphasised that the "unduly harsh" test was an onerous test and  that  it
   would only rarely be met, but he accepted that this was such a  case  and
   was not simply a case of a child who would miss her father.  He  accepted
   that it would be unduly harsh for EG to be separated from her father.

10. In view of Mr Mills' helpful submissions I did not consider there to  be
   any need to hear  from  Ms  Easty  and  I  allowed  the  appeal.  In  the
   circumstances there is no need for me to set out  detailed  findings  and
   reasons. I simply make the following summary findings.


11. I am entirely in agreement with Mr Mills that this is one  of  the  rare
   cases where the best interests of the child outweigh  the  strong  public
   interest in deportation. The appellant's daughter EG  has,  as  Mr  Mills
   submitted, had a difficult childhood with a mother who is unfit  to  care
   for her and who has been under the guardianship of  her  grandmother  AG.
   The appellant has a strong relationship with EG and  has  been  her  main
   carer for the past few weeks whilst her grandmother has been recuperating
   from an operation and therefore unable to care for her.  In her letter of
   4 April 2017 at page 46 of the  appellant's  appeal  bundle,  the  Family
   Court Advisor Karen Hughes noted AG's proposal that EG  reside  with  the
   appellant if anything should happen to her and recommended that it was in
   EG's best interests for the appellant to remain in the UK. A letter  from
   the headteacher of EG's school, dated 3 April 2017, at  page  48  of  the
   appeal bundle, provides strong  support  for  the  appellant's  continued
   presence in the UK. Clearly there can be no doubt that the best interests
   of EG are for the appellant not to be deported.


12. The public interest  factors  weighing  in  favour  of  the  appellant's
   deportation are, of course, his lack of lawful basis to remain in the  UK
   together  with  his  criminal  convictions.  However  the   most   recent
   conviction was over seven years ago. The appellant received  a  suspended
   sentence and has not offended since then. The more  serious  offence  was
   over 16 years ago, shortly after he  arrived  in  the  UK.  The  forensic
   psychologist's report from Angela Phillips, prepared for Coventry  Family
   Court in January 2016, which considered both offences, concluded that the
   appellant had accepted responsibility for his offending and posed  a  low
   level risk of reoffending, a very low risk of any sexual  recidivism  and
   no risk to children or to anyone else. The recommendation in  the  report
   was that he  be  reunited  with  his  daughter.   Those  conclusions  are
   supported in the Cafcass report of 19 December 2016  from  Karen  Hughes.
   The appellant has been in a genuine and stable relationship with his wife
   BA for several years and she has provided  a  compelling  and  supportive
   statement at page 22 of the appeal bundle. Further  support  is  provided
   from BA's mother and the appellant's  friend  VS,  all  of  whom  provide
   weighty support for the appellant's character.

13. In all the circumstances, and given in particular Mr  Mills'  supporting
   submissions, I accept that the "unduly harsh" test, as considered  in  MM
   and AJ, and as onerous as it may be, is met in this  particular  case.  I
   accept that the very strong interests of EG  in  having  a  reliable  and
   stable parent present  in  her  life  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
   deporting the appellant. The appellant therefore meets  the  requirements
   of the exception to deportation on the basis of family life with a  child
   under paragraph 399(a)  of  the  immigration  rules  and  his  appeal  is
   accordingly allowed on Article 8 human rights grounds.


DECISION

14. The original Tribunal was found to have made an  error  of  law  in  its
   decision on Article 8 and the decision  was  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
   decision by again allowing the appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8  human
   rights grounds.


    Anonymity


    The anonymity order previously made is continued, pursuant to  rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.










Signed   [pic]                               Dated: 9 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede



