
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA004832017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 May 2017                                |On 30 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                               Renada Shabanaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Saleem, Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. This is an appeal by Ms Renada Shabanaj, who is a  citizen  of  Albania
    born on 12 January 1990.  She arrived in the UK on 14 December 2012 but
    did not claim asylum until 28 May 2013.  She claimed  to  have  been  a
    victim  of  trafficking  for  prostitution  and  to  be  at   risk   of
    retrafficking.

 2. The respondent referred her to the National Referral Mechanism and,  on
    19 December 2016, the competent authority issued a conclusive  decision
    that there were insufficient grounds to believe  the  appellant  was  a
    victim of modern slavery.  On 8 January 2017,  the  respondent  refused
    the appellant's asylum application.

 3. The appellant appealed on protection grounds.  She also maintained that
    removing her would breach Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention
    because she would face significant obstacles to reintegrating into life
    in her home country.  She has a child born in the UK on 7 February 2016
    whom, she claims, is illegitimate.

 4. The appellant's appeal was heard  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  16
    February 2017 at the  Taylor  House  hearing  centre.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed for reasons set out in a decision  promulgated  on  10  March
    2017 in which the judge made an adverse credibility finding.   She  did
    not  accept  the  appellant's  account  of  having  been  forced   into
    prostitution by a person called Niki and she found  the  appellant  was
    not vulnerable or at risk of retrafficking on return to  Albania.   She
    found there was no evidence the appellant would lack family support.

 5. Permission to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was sought
    on  a  single  ground  which  was  that  the  Tribunal  had  overlooked
    background evidence and country guidance which showed  that  being  the
    unmarried  mother  of  an  illegitimate  child  would  lead   to   very
    significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant  reintegrating  in  Albania.
    Indeed, it  was  a  risk  factor  to  be  considered  with  respect  to
    retrafficking.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    ground that  the  Tribunal  may  have  erred  in  overlooking  material
    evidence.

 7. A Rule 24 response has been filed opposing the appeal.

 8. I heard submissions from the representatives on the question of whether
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by  material  error
    of law.  Mr Saleem, for the appellant, argued  that  the  decision  was
    erroneous, expanding on the grounds seeking permission to  appeal.   He
    said the focus needed  to  be  on  the  fact  the  appellant  would  be
    returning to Albania with an illegitimate child.  There  was  objective
    evidence and country guidance which had not been considered although he
    had to accept that the case law refers to trafficked women and the risk
    of retrafficking whereas the primary finding of the judge in this  case
    was that the appellant was not trafficked.

 9. For the respondent, Mr Staunton argued there was no material  error  of
    law in the decision.  The judge gave  sufficient  reasons  and  applied
    case law.

10. Mr Saleem made no further submissions in reply.

11. Having carefully read the decision and considered the submissions  made
    to me, I have concluded that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    does not contain  a  material  error  of  law  and  shall  stand.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.  My reasons are as follows.

12. In this decision the judge directed herself correctly in law as to  the
    burden and standard of proof.  She set out the evidence in  detail  and
    analysed it  closely  so  as  to  arrive  at  her  conclusions  on  the
    credibility challenge mounted by the respondent.  In my  judgment,  she
    was entitled to make an adverse credibility finding for the reasons she
    gave.

13. It is important to note that, in reasoning as she did, the  judge  took
    account of the country guidance cases (see paragraphs 54,  60,  66,  84
    and 89 of the decision).  The judge also set out the  submissions  made
    to her on this point (see paragraphs  58  to  62).   It  is  unarguable
    therefore that the judge did not have the guidance at the forefront  of
    her mind. Nor can it sensibly be argued the judge did not take  account
    of the fact the appellant was an unmarried mother  of  an  illegitimate
    child.  She set this out at paragraph 84.  However, this  finding  does
    not lead ineluctably to the decision that an appellant is  entitled  to
    protection under the Conventions.

14. The consequence of the overall adverse credibility finding made by  the
    judge was that, logically, she did not accept  anything  the  appellant
    had told her about her circumstances in Albania or why she had left her
    country.  That is why, at paragraph 89, she stated that  there  was  no
    evidence to show the appellant would lack family support.

15. In my judgment, the judge was entitled to draw that  inference  and  it
    follows that, notwithstanding the fact  that  the  background  evidence
    shows that Albanian families, particularly those from  the  North,  can
    hold conservative attitudes, that  does  not  inevitably  mean  that  a
    person with the appellant's profile will be at risk or  even  that  she
    would find there are very significant obstacles to integration.  I note
    in passing that the  judge  referred  to  the  background  evidence  in
    paragraph 61 of her decision.  I am not persuaded she  failed  to  make
    her findings in that context. The  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    decision she reached.

16. In conclusion, it is factually wrong  to  argue  the  judge  overlooked
    material evidence.  She was plainly aware that the appellant  would  be
    returning with a child born out of wedlock.  The judge gave  sufficient
    reasons as to why that fact did not entitle the  appellant  to  succeed
    under either Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law and the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction  and  I  see  no
reason to make one.


Signed                                  Date 16 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 16 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom

