
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00056/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2019                 |On 26 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AAJ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Forster instructed by TMC Solicitors LTD
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. In a decision promulgated on 19 June 2019 it was found a  judge  of
        the First-Tier Tribunal had erred in law in a  manner  material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal. The reasons  for  it  being  so
        found are set out at [3 - 9] of the Error of Law finding.
     2. The country guidance case of BA (returns to  Baghdad)  Iraq  [2017]
        UKUT 00018 found the authorities in Baghdad were unable and in  the
        case of Sunni  complainants  likely  to  be  unwilling  to  provide
        sufficient  protection.  Mr  Diwnycz  confirmed  the   respondent's
        position is that it was accepted that the  appellant,  as  a  Sunni
        Muslim, would not be able to rely on the authorities for protection
        if targeted within Baghdad.
     3. Mr Diwnycz did not concede  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been
        targeted prior to his leaving Iraq at the error of law hearing  but
        accepted there were concerns such that  the  matter  needed  to  be
        looked at again. It does not  appear  to  be  disputed  that  those
        targeting the appellant are nonstate actors. It was  also  accepted
        the internal relocation  issue  requires  further  examination,  it
        being submitted by  Mr  Diwnycz  there  are  a  number  of  options
        available to the appellant including the IKR, where  the  issue  of
        reasonableness requires further consideration.
     4. The matter comes back before the Upper Tribunal today to enable  it
        to substitute a decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.



   Background



     5. It is not disputed the appellant is a citizen of Iraq who  had  his
        own practice as a dentist there  and  that  he  originates  from  a
        wealthy family. It is not disputed that the appellant  is  a  Sunni
        Muslim.
     6. In addition to the appellant being a successful dentist his  mother
        was a lawyer and his sister a pharmacist.
     7. The appellant states in his earlier evidence that  in  August  2017
        three people approach him at home claiming there  were  members  of
        the Asaib' Ahl Al'Haq (AAH) and demanding $1,000 as  protection.  A
        row resulted after which the alleged members of the  AAH  left  the
        property.
     8. Later in August 2017 the appellant stated members of the AAH  again
        came to the appellant's home demanding money but fled after arguing
        with the appellant and his friend.
     9. In September 2017 the  Appellant's  car  was  broken  into  and  he
        claimed the note was left  by  AAH  stating  that  unless  he  paid
        protection money he would be killed.
    10. The appellant applied for a student Visa on 19 September 2017 which
        was granted on 28 September 2017.
    11. On 1 October 2017 members of AAH came  to  the  appellant's  dental
        clinic and threatened and assaulted him.
    12. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  using  his  visa  on  12
        October 2017.
    13. At the end of February  2018  members  of  the  AAH  spoke  to  the
        appellant's family and said they had to pay money which his  mother
        refused.
    14. The end of March 2018 members of AAH left the appellant's mother  a
        note stating that unless she paid money her "sons" would be killed.
    15. The appellant's claim is that if he returned to Iraqi  he  will  be
        killed by AHH because he was considered to be a higher social class
        as  a  dentist,  as  medical  professionals   were   targeted,   or
        alternatively he would be killed by AAH as he is a Sunni Muslim.





   Discussion



    16. The appellant's home is was located at Saidya in  Iraq.  Al-Saydiya
        is a neighbourhood  in  the  Al  Rashid  district  of  southwestern
        Baghdad. A once middle-class district, Al-Saydiya  is  one  of  the
        'turned-Sunni Arab' areas after 2006-2007. Before that time it  was
        mixed with respect to the facts that the majority sections  of  the
        neighbourhood were overwhelmingly Sunni, like the officers' quarter
        reserved for  Hussein  loyalists.  The  appellants  home  area  was
        described as one of the worst areas of Baghdad as Sunni  insurgents
        planted roadside bombs intended for American troops  and  fired  at
        the  mainly  Shia  policemen  from  mosques  and  other   buildings
        overlooking  their  bases  and  checkpoints.  Thousands   of   Shia
        residents have fled as a result of the violence.
    17. A substantial volume of material has been provided  in  support  of
        the appellant's case. It is not disputed by the respondent that  if
        the appellant is targeted in the manner claimed he will not receive
        any support or protection from the police in Baghdad and  that  the
        issue in the appeal is therefore whether  there  is  any  where  to
        which the appellant can reasonably be expected to relocate.
    18. Discussions at the outset of the hearing identified three  possible
        regions being elsewhere in Baghdad away from the  appellant's  home
        area which is effectively ruled out following the country  guidance
        decision in BA referred to above, the IKR which was accepted as not
        a realistic proposition  as  the  appellant  as  a  Sunni  Arab  is
        unlikely  to  be  granted  entry  to  that  region,  he  having  no
        connection whatsoever with the Kurdish north, or the areas  between
        Baghdad and the IKR and south of Baghdad including Basra.
    19. In terms of whether the appellant's claim to have been targeted  is
        credible it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  country  information
        provided. Ms. Forster  relies  upon  the  European  Asylum  Support
        Office (EASO) Country of  Origin  report  for  Iraq  "Targeting  of
        Individuals" dated March 2019. There are in addition  a  number  of
        photographs provided which the appellant states show members of the
        AAH, have occupied his property.
    20. In relation to a risk to those perceived as being wealthy there  is
        within the report section 3.9 the following:

           '3.9   People perceived as wealthy


           In May 2018 an article in the Washington Post reported that Shia
           militias 'operate as Mafia style organisations  that  engage  in
           criminal activities, extortion and human rights  abuses'.  In  a
           February  2018  report,  Red24,  a  global  security  specialist
           consultancy based in  South  Africa  indicated  'the  kidnapping
           threat will remain high  in  conflict  and  previously  conflict
           affected areas of Iraq in 2018, in particular in the central and
           northern Sunni  governorates.  In  addition  to  the  kidnapping
           threat posed by Islamic militant groups,  such  as  the  Islamic
           State (ISIL), in the above-mentioned  regions,  the  upsurge  in
           kidnapping by a myriad of criminal and militia groups  which  we
           have witnessed over the past 18 months is expected to  continue,
           and possibly increase, in 2018.  Locals  are  cited  as  primary
           targets. The report  further  notes  the  kidnapping  threat  is
           expected to remain lower in the Kurdish north and Shia south. In
           its 2017 Country Report on Terrorism, USDOS  notes  all  through
           2017 kidnapping for ransom remained  a  source  of  funding  for
           ISIL.


           In a September 2018  article  the  New  York  Times  noted  that
           organised crime groups are rampant  in  Basra.  The  leaders  of
           these criminal organisations are said to be linked  to  powerful
           Shia militias. In a September 2017 article Iraqi News reports  a
           surge  in  ransom  kidnappings  of  the  relatives  of  well-off
           residence merchants in Mosul. A source  within  Mosul's  police,
           who asked not to be named, indicated  that  many  of  the  armed
           groups and mobilisation troops do not receive salaries from  the
           Iraqi government, which prompts undisciplined elements to  carry
           out kidnappings and armed robberies. In January 2017 article Al-
           Monitor reports on the rise kidnappings for ransom  in  Baghdad.
           According to Al-Monitor some  criminal  gangs  employ  a  person
           called Al-Atlas, which means  a  bounty  hunter.  This  person's
           mission  is  to  provide  the  names  and  details  of   wealthy
           individuals of families to gang members. A deputy  head  of  the
           Security Committee of  the  Baghdad  Provincial  Council  stated
           influential political or armed group are behind the  kidnappings
           to secure funds through ransoms. An  Iraqi  consultant  Landinfo
           and Lifos met in Amman in February 2017 indicated  that  militia
           were directly involved  in  the  wave  of  criminally  motivated
           kidnappings witnessed in Iraq since 2014.


           Mark Latimer explains at EASO's practical cooperation meeting on
           Iraq in April 2017 Sabea-Mandeans are perceived as rich  because
           they were associated with the jewellery trade.


           Because of this they became a target for extortion by  extremist
           groups and criminal gangs. In a January 2017 article Middle East
           Eye reports numerous kidnappings -  politically  and  criminally
           related - take place  almost  daily  in  Baghdad.  Former  Iraqi
           Interior Minister Mohammed al-Ghabban informed Middle  East  Eye
           the criminal gangs aim to blackmail people to get money, and the
           terrorist, political type aims to impose the gangs influence and
           blackmail people at the  same  time.  A  senior  Iraqi  security
           official who declined to be named indicated  that  some  of  the
           abductors 'are either supported by big Shia  armed  factions  or
           take advantage of contacts with the  security  forces'.  Several
           key security officials told Middle East Eye that  the  abductees
           and their abductors were mainly Shia.  According to Middle  East
           Eye the criminal gangs responsible for the kidnappings  aims  to
           extort ransoms ranging from USD 10,000 to USD 100,000  depending
           on the financial situation of a victim's family.


           In  a  March  2016  report  Michael  Knights  and  the  southern
           provinces was caused by criminals claiming to be PMU. In a  June
           2015 report Norman Cigar notes that after  June  2014  'in  many
           areas the departure of  army  and  police  units  to  the  front
           created  a  security  vacuum  that  was  exploited  by  criminal
           elements that engaged in kidnappings, extortion  and  robberies.
           Often,  the  perpetrators  claimed  to  belong  to  one  of  the
           militia'. AAH's leader Qais al-Khazali  acknowledged  that  some
           criminals joined the  militia  as  a  cover  for  their  illegal
           activities.


           In a December 2014 article Middle East  Eye  reports  dozens  of
           kidnappings take place every week in  Baghdad.  Some  abductions
           are a direct result of the  sectarian  tension  that  has  grown
           since ISIL took over part  of  Iraq;  others  are  the  work  of
           extortion gangs that are prospered in the confusion. Victims  or
           their families  report  that  the  kidnappers  often  used  text
           messages to make their demands, and that  the  amount  asked  is
           usually subject to negotiation. The  agreed  ransom  is  usually
           between USD 20,000 and UD 30,000.

    21. The reference to PMU is a reference to Popular  Mobilisation  Units
        which is the overall term  for  the  main  militia  and  associated
        groups within Iraq.  One of these is the Asaib al-Haq  (AAH)  which
        broke away from the Mahdi army, the militia run by  an  influential
        Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, in 2006. In September 2014  the  New
        York Times designated AHH as 'the largest and  most  formidable  of
        the Iranian-backed Shiite militias dominating Baghdad'.   According
        to a report published in August 2017 the group  was  between  5,000
        and 10,000 men strong as of March 2015.
    22. I find the appellant has established to the lower standard of proof
        applicable in appeals of this nature that his claim  to  have  been
        targeted  as  a  person  perceived  as  being  wealthy   by   armed
        individuals in the manner described in his evidence is credible  as
        it is in accordance with the country information. In terms  of  the
        identity of those who approached him it appears there is  a  strong
        possibility that they are  criminal  elements  within  the  AAH  or
        acting independently but pretending to be members of  this  militia
        for the purposes of frightening those they choose to target.
    23. The appellant's home area of Baghdad was described as  one  of  the
        most lawless in the country information and to lower standard it is
        accepted the appellant has established that such groups will have a
        presence and will have operated in the manner he describes.
    24. It is not made out the appellant has been targeted  directly  as  a
        result of any adverse political view but rather as  a  means  of  a
        potential further source of economic gain to  those  who  chose  to
        target him through extortion.
    25. Whilst I find there is no evidence the  appellant  will  experience
        problems in redocumentation,  the  appellant's  mother  the  lawyer
        remaining in Iraq, or any  difficulty  in  his  being  returned  to
        Baghdad airport in light of the country information, it is not made
        out that he will be able to return to his home area.
    26. Miss Foster raised as an issue within the appeal of the appellant's
        name which will identify him as a Sunni Arab. In the EASO report at
        section 1.15 there is reference to people with Sunni names  seeking
        to change their name to hide their religious identity.  The  report
        refers to the fact that persons passing checkpoints  in  Iraq  must
        prove their identity and that surnames and clan names can  to  some
        extent indicate which part of the population a  person  belongs  to
        and where they come from.  Sectarian  violence  within  Iraq  is  a
        serious problem  and  Sunnis  could  arbitrarily  be  suspected  of
        sympathy with ISIS which could subject them to abuse. An April 2015
        article  published  in   the   Guardian   newspaper   stated   that
        identifiable Sunni names may arouse suspicion at checkpoints manned
        by Shia militia or Iraqi soldiers.  The  report  refers  to  family
        names being deleted from citizenship cards.  There  is  a  specific
        reference to a July 2014 Human Rights Watch report of  how  a  Shia
        man was abused and mistreated by members of AHH assuming he  was  a
        Sunni.
    27. In light of the fact he has been targeted in the past and  that  no
        sufficiency of protection will be available to him in the future in
        Baghdad the question is, as it has  always  been  in  this  appeal,
        whether it is reasonable in all the circumstances for the appellant
        to internally relocate elsewhere.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the
        United Kingdom has a right as a matter  of  international  law  and
        subject to treaty obligations  to  control  entry,  residence,  and
        expulsion of aliens, unless such expulsion gives rise to breach  of
        article 3.  If substantial grounds have been  shown  for  believing
        that the person concerned will face a real risk of being  subjected
        to treatment contrary to article 3, removal of that person  by  the
        United Kingdom will contravene a protected right.
    28. Paragraph 339O of the  Immigration  Rules,  which  is  intended  to
        incorporate the Directive, states:

        (i)  The Secretary of State will not make:


           (a)    a grant of asylum if in part of the country of  origin  a
           person would not have a well founded fear of  being  persecuted,
           and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in  that  part
           of the country; or


           (b)    a grant of humanitarian protection  if  in  part  of  the
           country of return a  person  would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
           suffering  serious  harm,  and  the  person  can  reasonably  be
           expected to stay in that part of the country.


        (ii)      In examining whether a part of the country of  origin  or
        country of return meets the requirements in (i)  the  Secretary  of
        State, when making his decision  on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or
        humanitarian  protection,  will  have   regard   to   the   general
        circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
        personal circumstances of the person.


        (iii)     (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return
        to the country of origin or country of return.

    29. The principle of internal relocation applies equally to an  Article
        3 claim.
    30. In AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
        Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) the Tribunal held that there  is
        no legal burden on the Secretary of State to prove that there is  a
        part of the country of nationality etc of  an  appellant,  who  has
        established a well-founded fear in their home area,  to  which  the
        appellant  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  go  and  live.  The
        appellant  bears  the  legal  burden  of  proving  entitlement   to
        international protection; but what  that  entails  will  very  much
        depend upon the circumstances of the particular case. In  practice,
        the issue  of  internal  relocation  needs  to  be  raised  by  the
        Secretary of  State  in  the  letter  of  refusal  or  (subject  to
        procedural fairness) during the appellate proceedings. It will then
        be  for  the  appellant   to   make   good   an   assertion   that,
        notwithstanding the general conditions in  the  proposed  place  of
        relocation, it would not be reasonable to  relocate  there.  In  an
        Article 3 claim, a similar position pertains, in that, although the
        test of reasonableness/undue harshness  does  not  formally  apply,
        unduly  harsh  living  conditions  etc  -  albeit  not   themselves
        amounting to a breach of Article 3 - may nevertheless be reasonably
        likely to lead to a person returning to their home area, where such
        a breach is reasonably likely.
    31. In Januzi and others v SSHD  [2006]  UKHL  5  the  House  of  Lords
        appeared to suggest that the test was whether  an  applicant  would
        face conditions such as utter destitution or exposure to  cruel  or
        inhuman  treatment,  threatening  his  most  basic  human   rights.
        However, in AH Sudan [2007] UKHL 49 the House of Lords  said  that,
        if the AIT considered that conditions  in  the  place  of  intended
        relocation could not be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  unless  they
        were liable to infringe an applicant's rights under  article  3  or
        its equivalent, it was plainly wrong. Nothing in Januzi or  in  the
        materials referred to in Januzi suggested such a test. No  argument
        to that effect was advanced in Januzi, because there was  no  issue
        on the point. To the extent that reference was made to article 3 in
        Januzi it was to make clear, as might be thought  obvious,  that  a
        claimant for asylum could not reasonably or without undue  hardship
        be expected to return to a place where his rights under  article  3
        or its equivalent might be infringed.
    32. In VNM v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 47 the Court of Appeal said that  the
        reasonableness of relocation would  require  consideration  of  the
        practicability of an appellant settling elsewhere: consideration of
        her ability convincingly to present to those in her milieu a  false
        history  relating  to  herself  and  her  daughter,  including  the
        latter's paternity; and  a  false  explanation  for  their  arrival
        there; and the ability to sustain  a  reasonable  life  beyond  the
        short term given her psychological vulnerability.
    33. In this appeal the appellant originates from a wealthy  family.  It
        is not made out  this  is  a  case  in  which  there  will  not  be
        sufficient  financial  resources  to  assist   the   appellant   in
        resettling elsewhere which, in light of the tensions and risk  form
        the militia present in the central regions of  Iraq,  realistically
        only leaves the southern area including Basra as a potential  place
        of relocation.
    34.  As  the  country  information  shows,  however,  similar  criminal
        elements to those the appellant experienced in Baghdad  operate  in
        Basra and the southern provinces.
    35. The appellant is a dentist by profession and to  properly  maintain
        himself  in  terms  of  meeting  his  requirements  for  living   a
        reasonable life elsewhere he is likely to be required to set  up  a
        new practice in his new home area. The appellant  is  clearly  very
        successful at the work he undertakes and is  very  competent  based
        upon the economic benefits he secured when in Baghdad. The risk for
        the appellant is that any form of economic betterment  or  external
        signs of means and resources is likely to place him at real risk of
        further extortion by the criminal gangs. There is also an  addition
        the difficulty the appellant is likely to face as a  person  moving
        into an area of been able to hide his religious affiliation or even
        his area of origin, based upon the naming conventions  referred  to
        above.
    36. The extent of the difficulties reflected in the country information
        is that the reality for the appellant is that wherever he sets up a
        successful business within Iraqi  he  is  likely  to  draw  adverse
        attention to himself and be targeted. It was not made out in any of
        the country information that the  appellant  will  benefit  from  a
        sufficiency of  protection  from  either  the  Iraqi  police  or  a
        favourable militia group as followers of the Shia  faith  may  from
        the  various  militia.  When  the  appellant  is  targeted  it   is
        reasonably likely, for the reasons noted above,  that  there  is  a
        real risk he will be subjected to treatment  by  way  of  extortion
        threats or further acts of violence sufficient to breach article  3
        ECHR. On that basis it cannot be said that it is reasonable in  all
        the circumstances to expect the appellant  to  internally  relocate
        within Iran.
    37.  Whilst  the  IKR  is  an  area  where  such  concerns   would   be
        substantially reduced and  where  the  appellant  may  be  able  to
        internally relocate to in principle, this is not an  area  of  Iraq
        that is available to him in light of  the  country  conditions  and
        country guidance case law.
    38. I find the appellant has discharged the burden of proof upon him to
        the  lower  standard  applicable  in  appeals  of  this  nature  to
        establish a real risk of further  treatment  sufficient  to  breach
        article 3 if he returns to his home area Baghdad, a risk  of  being
        the victim of extortion or adverse criminality in any other part of
        Baghdad or elsewhere if he is perceived to be a  person  of  means,
        from which  there  will  be  no  sufficiency  protection  from  the
        authorities. I find the appellant  has  discharged  the  burden  of
        proof upon him to the required standard to establish that there  is
        no reasonable internal relocation option available to  him  in  any
        other part of Baghdad to which he will  realistically  be  able  to
        gain entry.
    39. On that basis the appeal is allowed on article 3 grounds.   It  has
        not  been  made  out  that  the  difficulties  the  appellant  will
        encounter arise as a result of any Convention Reason but rather  as
        a result of criminal actions by Non-State Actors.


Decision


    40. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.




   Anonymity.


    41. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 25 September 2019
