
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: PA/00322/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2019                |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                  |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
                    Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, entered the UK  illegally  and  then
      claimed asylum on 10 July 2017. His protection claim was refused on 19
      December  2017.  His  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse   him
      protection status was heard and refused  by  decision  of  First  tier
      Tribunal Judge TR Smith, promulgated on 4 May 2018.
   2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      by decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer of 25 September  2018,  on
      the ground that it was arguable that having found the Appellant to  be
      a genuine convert to Christianity  the  Judge  had  failed  to  assess
      properly the prospects of a risk of harm upon return to Iran. All  the
      grounds of appeal advanced to the First  tier  Tribunal,  and  to  the
      Upper Tribunal, were said to be arguable.
   3. Neither party  applied  in  writing  under  Rule  15(2A)  for  further
      evidence to be admitted in the remaking of the  decision,  should  the
      decision of the First tier Tribunal be set aside.
   4. Thus the matter comes before me.


Error of law?
   5. Although this was a matter of considerable dispute  before  the  First
      tier Tribunal, the Judge was satisfied that the Appellant  had  indeed
      undertaken a genuine conversion from Islam to Christianity [110], even
      though elements of his evidence about his  experiences  in  Iran  were
      considered to be untrue. The Judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  that
      conclusion, which relied heavily  upon  the  assessments  and  opinion
      evidence of Ms Ingram, Ms Martins, Pastor Waugh and Rev Bunce. In  any
      event there is no cross appeal from the Respondent, and  that  finding
      must therefore be  the  focus  of  the  assessment  of  the  risk  the
      Appellant would be likely to face upon return to Iran.
   6. The Judge was also satisfied that the Appellant had a  genuine  desire
      to continue his education in the Christian faith [94]. Again there  is
      no challenge from the Respondent to this  finding,  and  it  too  must
      therefore form part of the focus of the assessment of risk. The  Judge
      gave no consideration however to how the Appellant would  be  able  to
      undertake  this  further  education  within  Iran  without  attracting
      adverse  attention  from  either  the  authorities,  or,  the  general
      population. Nor did he consider this finding in  the  context  of  the
      assessment required by HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC  3.  Thus  there  was  no
      evaluation of whether the Appellant would be dissuaded  from  pursuing
      this further education in Christianity out of fear of the consequences
      of doing so, or, how he would be able to  access  it  without  drawing
      adverse attention to his apostasy.
   7. To the extent that it is relevant, pursuant to the guidance in SZ  and
      JM (Christians, FS confirmed) Iran  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  82,  the  Judge
      accepted that the Appellant had joined the congregations of  sacrament
      based denominations; Wakefield Cathedral and Stockton Baptist  Church.
      He had been required to change congregations because he had been moved
      from Wakefield to Stockton by the Respondent. It is of course a  tenet
      of the Baptist Church that individuals should be brought to baptism.
   8. As the renewed grounds of the application for permission to appeal set
      out (a document with which Ms Cleghorn had not been supplied by  those
      instructing her) the relevant CPIN for consideration in the  light  of
      the favourable  findings  of  primary  fact  was  CPIN;  Christians  &
      Christian Converts, March 2018 v4. The parties are agreed that neither
      representative at the  hearing  below  had  placed  that  document  in
      evidence before the Judge. Nor had they drawn  its  existence  to  his
      attention. Neither could offer an  explanation  for  that  failure  by
      their predecessors. No doubt that is, in part, an explanation for  the
      Judge's own lack of reference to it.
   9. Had the Judge given consideration to the CPIN he would have noted that
      a distinction appears to be drawn by the Iranian  authorities  between
      those who are ethnically Christian, and those who are  apostates  from
      Islam. The former may, or may not, be largely tolerated,  but  on  the
      Judge's findings the Appellant is not one of them.  Nor  would  he  be
      perceived as one of them, given his Islamic  name.  The  CPIN  content
      clearly records a pattern of arbitrary arrest and detention and  abuse
      of apostates. The Appellant as an  apostate  joining  a  house  church
      would plainly face a real risk of arrest, with the continuing  pattern
      of suppression of the house churches by the authorities. Nor would  he
      find it easy as an apostate to join the congregation of an established
      Church; they are required to report the details of anyone joining, and
      as a result new members are discouraged.
  10. In more general terms the Judge would  have  recognised  in  the  CPIN
      clear evidence of a continuing deterioration in attitudes within  Iran
      towards  apostates.  The  pattern  identified  in  SZ  and  JM  of   a
      deterioration since FS [#149] has continued subsequently.
  11. Having determined that the Appellant was indeed a genuine  convert  to
      Christianity, in my judgement what the Judge then  failed  to  do  was
      take heed of the fact that it was implicit within his finding that the
      Appellant genuinely wished to continue to worship in  that  faith,  as
      part of a Christian congregation; SZ and JM. There  was  certainly  no
      finding to the effect that the Appellant would  not  wish  to  do  so.
      Indeed, had the Judge reached such a conclusion it would no doubt have
      been challenged as inconsistent and perverse.
  12. At no stage did the Judge go on to ask  himself  the  questions;  what
      would happen if the Appellant did seek to worship within  a  Christian
      congregation, or seek to further his Christian education, upon  return
      to Iran? Accordingly, Mr Bates accepted on behalf  of  the  Respondent
      that the Judge had erred in law in his approach to the issue  of  risk
      upon return to Iran, and, that his error was sufficiently material  to
      require the Judge's decision to be set aside and remade.
  13. Whilst I was at the hearing persuaded that in  order  to  remake  that
      decision the Upper Tribunal would need to hear further evidence, I  am
      upon further reflection satisfied for two reasons that this course  is
      inappropriate, and that the decision can, and should, be  remade  upon
      the basis of the Judge's own core findings. First, neither  party  has
      applied under Rule 15(2A) for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  consider  new
      evidence. There is no good reason offered as to why the Upper Tribunal
      should waive that requirement. Second, the key  positive  findings  of
      primary fact by the Judge are unchallenged by the Respondent and in my
      judgement they are sufficient to permit the decision to be remade.
  14. The Upper Tribunal accepted in SZ and JM that a genuine convert  to  a
      sacramental faith such as the Roman Catholic Church,  who  was  unable
      upon return to Iran to join a congregation to worship, was entitled to
      succeed in his appeal  because  in  reality  he  would  be  unable  to
      practice his new faith [#167], applying the two stage test of HJ. That
      is in my judgement the position the Appellant faces. He will be unable
      to pursue his acknowledged and genuine desire to  educate  himself  in
      the Christian faith without attracting adverse attention, and the fear
      of that is likely to dissuade him from doing so. The same  applies  to
      attempts to join an established congregation.
  15. In the circumstances I allow  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  Article  3
      grounds.





DECISION


    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 4  May
    2018 did involve the making of  an  error  of  law  that  requires  the
    decision to be set aside and remade.


    The appeal is allowed on asylum and Article 3 grounds


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.







Signed





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 8 February 2019

