

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00515/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Friday 22 July 2016                        |On Friday 29 July 2016       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   MR E H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa, Solicitor, MAC solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity order was not made by the First-tier Tribunal, as
this is a protection claim and in light of my decision, it is appropriate
to make that order.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Raymond  promulgated  on  25  April  2016  ("the   Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 1 July 2015 refusing his protection and human  rights
       claims.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He came to the UK  as  a
       student  in  2010  with  leave  which  expired  in   October   2011.
       Thereafter he remained unlawfully as  an  overstayer  until  he  was
       encountered in April 2015 whereupon he made his asylum claim.


    3. The Appellant claims to be an active member of Jamiatul Ulama  which
       goes by a number of names and which I refer  to  hereafter  as  JUI.
       The Appellant claims that he became involved with JUI as  a  student
       and became the secretary of the local union.  JUI is one of a number
       of opposition parties in Bangladesh.  The Appellant says that he and
       other JUI supporters are harassed and persecuted on account of their
       views.  He claims that his name is on a list held by the authorities
       in  Bangladesh  of  senior  members  of  the  party  and  that   the
       authorities will detain him on return.


    4.  The  Appellant's  asylum  claim  developed  following  his   asylum
       interview and I will need to deal with that below.    The  Appellant
       also claims that he and his family were involved in a  land  dispute
       with neighbours who were claiming ownership of land  to  which  they
       were not entitled.  He says that  in  light  of  his  religious  and
       political affiliations, he would not be assisted by the  authorities
       in relation to that claim and  that,  generally,  as  an  opposition
       supporter he, as many others, is deprived of his  rights  unless  he
       pays a bribe.  The final basis of the original asylum claim is  that
       the police in Bangladesh had prevented JUI  holding  meetings  on  a
       number of occasions  to  prevent  them  attracting  support.   As  a
       result, on at least one occasion they were denied access to a mosque
       where a meeting was to be held.


    5. The Appellant's human rights claim centres on his relationship  with
       his brother and sister-in-law who live in the UK and his links  with
       the community and charities in the UK.  He terms  himself  a  Muslim
       priest and in that capacity, it is said, he has helped young  people
       with his teachings.


    6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Kebede on 17 June
       2016 on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  was  arguably  influenced  by
       extraneous matters in making the adverse credibility findings  which
       he did and that this  may  have  arguably  materially  affected  his
       findings on all matters.  Accordingly, the permission grant was  not
       limited.  The matter comes before me to decide whether the  Decision
       contains a material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision
       or remit the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

Submissions


    7. Mr Mustafa focussed his submissions on  the  protection  claim.   He
       submitted that the Judge's judgment was clouded  by  the  sentiments
       and presumptions expressed  in  the  Decision.   He  pointed  me  in
       particular to what is said at [124] and [125] of the Decision which,
       he submits, has nothing whatsoever to do with the Appellant's  case.
       He also pointed me to [110] where he submitted that what was said by
       the  Judge  was  contradicted  by  the  background  evidence.   That
       evidence  showed  that,  as  a  person  with  more  than  low  level
       affiliations to JUI, the Appellant would be at risk on  return  from
       the authorities.


    8. In relation to the finding at [113] in  the  context  of  the  human
       rights claim, that the Appellant had fabricated  his  asylum  claim,
       that was not explained and the Judge had  failed  to  deal  properly
       with the documents which the Appellant provided in  support  of  his
       claim.  He also pointed me to [122] where  the  Judge  purported  to
       find  that  the  Appellant  should  be  excluded  from  the  Refugee
       Convention under Article 1F(c) by reason of his extremist views.  He
       submitted that the Judge had failed  to  provide  reasons  for  this
       finding.


    9. In summary, he submitted that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  consider
       relevant factors and had taken into account irrelevant factors.   No
       proper account was taken of  the  circumstances  in  Bangladesh  and
       accordingly I should find there to be an error  of  law  and  should
       remit the appeal for redetermination  (as  the  adverse  credibility
       findings are the basis of the challenge).


   10. Mr Wilding  accepted  that  the  Decision  was  very  dense  in  its
       consideration of the claim and did at times  stray  into  extraneous
       matters.  He submitted though that the findings in relation  to  the
       asylum claim contained in the section from [73] to  [122]  could  be
       insulated from the remainder of the Decision and that was  therefore
       not infected by the taking into account  of  factors  which  may  be
       irrelevant.


   11.  In  response  to  a  question  from  me  concerning  the   apparent
       contradiction between what is said at [90] of the Decision with  the
       background evidence set out at [20], in particular the citation from
       that evidence at [1.3.11], Mr Wilding submitted that this needed  to
       be considered in the context of the subjective  evidence.   In  that
       context, the Appellant was found to be a  low  level  supporter  for
       reasons given at [93] of the Decision. His attempt  to  elevate  the
       risk by reason of his appearance as referred  to  at  [94]  was  not
       accepted.  The  Judge  held  against  the  Appellant  the  delay  in
       claiming asylum as he was entitled to do.


   12. There was also a delay in referring to certain aspects of the  claim
       until after the interview ([95] to [98]). Contrary to  Mr  Mustafa's
       submissions, Mr Wilding submitted that the Judge had dealt with  the
       documentary evidence but had given reasons why those documents  were
       rejected as not being genuine.


   13. The core finding in relation to the Appellant's claim based  on  his
       membership of JUI is set out at [98] where the Judge accepts that he
       may have an allegiance to JUI and may even  have  had  an  executive
       role at local level.  However, the Judge  did  not  accept  that  he
       would thereby come to the attention of the authorities  as  the  key
       planks of his claim in that regard were found to be not credible.


   14. The Judge's main findings are set out at [105] to [110].  The  Judge
       had given clear reasons for those findings.  In relation to  Article
       1F, although Mr Wilding accepted that the  Judge  did  not  actually
       need to consider this at all given his findings that  the  Appellant
       could not qualify for refugee status, he pointed out that  there  is
       nothing in the case law relating to  Article  1F  which  prevents  a
       Tribunal from making that finding even though the Secretary of State
       has not taken the point. Insofar as that was an error by  the  Judge
       given his earlier findings, it was not material.


      Discussion and conclusions

   15. As I noted at the hearing, I have concerns about the  way  in  which
       the Judge has expressed some of his views in the Decision which  may
       tend to suggest that his opinion was clouded by what  he  considered
       to be the extreme views as expressed by the  Appellant  in  evidence
       and the concern that the Appellant  might  have  communicated  those
       views to young people in the UK which  may  run  contrary  to  their
       interests.  Mr Wilding accepted that he could not see a basis in law
       for the Judge's direction  that  the  Decision  be  communicated  to
       various bodies as an indication of the Judge's concern.


   16. However, the question for me is whether, as  Mr  Mustafa  submitted,
       the Judge has allowed those sentiments to infect  his  reasoning  on
       the core elements of the protection and human rights claims.


   17. I start by considering the human rights claim as Mr Mustafa (rightly
       in my view) did not pursue this in argument.   The position  of  the
       Appellant, as the Judge notes, is as a person who has lived  in  the
       UK for less than twenty  years  (in  fact  only  about  six  years),
       continues to have family and friends in Bangladesh and  has  studied
       and worked in that country.  Absent success in the protection claim,
       it is difficult to see what  factors  could  lead  to  a  successful
       outcome of the Article 8 claim.  He has a brother and  sister-in-law
       here but also has family in Bangladesh.  He has supporters in the UK
       but equally maintains contact with his friends in  Bangladesh.   The
       consideration of the human rights claim is short ([113]  to  [120]).
       However apart  from  a  submission  that  the  finding  against  the
       Appellant is based in part on  him  fabricating  his  asylum  claim,
       there is nothing in that section which is open to criticism  on  the
       basis of the factors taken into account.   There  is  nothing  which
       could there give rise to a successful human rights  claim.  Even  in
       relation to the finding that he has  fabricated  his  asylum  claim,
       this can only have any material impact if the Appellant's  claim  is
       in fact found credible, in which case he would not be removed in any
       event.  I find that there is no material error of law in relation to
       that aspect of the Appellant's claim.


   18. I therefore turn to consider the  Judge's  approach  to  the  asylum
       claim and, in particular the adverse credibility findings.


   19. The Judge has set out at [4] to [7] and [20]  of  the  Decision  the
       background evidence  relating  to  the  Appellant's  case.   I  have
       carefully considered the  background  evidence  in  the  Appellant's
       bundle.  Those paragraphs contain a fair summary of that evidence.


   20. The Appellant's asylum claim was made late in the day - nearly  four
       years after his leave expired.  The Judge explains at [24]  to  [25]
       the reasons given by the Appellant for that delay.   The  Judge  did
       not accept that explanation as credible [95].


   21. However, more damaging to the Appellant's credibility by far was his
       complete failure to mention at his asylum interview the key bases of
       the claim on which he now relies.  I have already noted at  [3]  and
       [4] above, the bases on which the Appellant made his initial  claim.
       However, by the time that the matter came to hearing, the  Appellant
       had elaborated on his case significantly.   The  initial  claim  was
       based on a land dispute with neighbours which he could not report to
       the authorities, a denial of his rights arising from  his  religious
       and political persuasion (including the denial of a  right  to  hold
       meetings) and the fact that he said his name appeared  on  a  "list"
       held by the authorities of prominent JUI supporters which would lead
       to his arrest on return.


   22. Following the interview, the land dispute had developed into a  case
       that his neighbours had filed a complaint against him and two  other
       individuals (including it appears his brother) for a violent assault
       which led to a warrant against him due to his absence. I  note  that
       his brother, along with his mother, continue to live  in  Bangladesh
       at the same address as previously. The claim that his name  appeared
       on a list of JUI supporters wanted by the authority  merely  because
       of their involvement with that party became  a  claim  that  he  was
       wanted for an attack on a passenger bus (which he apparently did not
       deny) and that his friend, Foysal Ahmed, had been detained (although
       later bailed).


   23. The Appellant also claimed that he was in hiding  before  coming  to
       the UK in order to avoid arrests for those incidents  said  to  have
       occurred in early 2010 whilst he was still in Bangladesh.  Not  only
       did he not mention that earlier but it also  runs  contrary  to  his
       evidence that he always intended to return to Bangladesh  after  his
       studies but was prevented from doing so by the  worsening  situation
       there.  It also further undermines the  Appellant's  credibility  in
       relation to the delay in claiming asylum.


   24.  The  Judge  dealt  with  the  substantial  inconsistency   in   the
       Appellant's claim at [73] to [90] of the  Decision.   As  the  Judge
       points out, not only do the documents relied on deal with  incidents
       which the Appellant had completely failed to  mention  at  interview
       but the documents themselves  gave  rise  to  further  discrepancies
       which led the Judge to reject them ([85] to [89]).


   25. The Judge pointed  out  that,  if  the  documents  relating  to  the
       Appellant's friend, Foysal Ahmed, were genuine, those showed that Mr
       Ahmed had been bailed  and  therefore  not  unfairly  treated  (even
       though Mr Ahmed had completely failed to make any reference to being
       arrested or bailed in his letter of support which  might  have  been
       expected).  The Judge also went on to note that,  if  the  Appellant
       were involved in the two incidents of violence which  the  documents
       suggest, then the authorities would be justified in seeking him  out
       for the criminal offences which those documents disclose.   However,
       that does not alter the Judge's primary finding that  the  documents
       are not reliable ([99]).


   26. Although the Judge may appear to contradict  himself  at  [100],  my
       reading of that paragraph in context is that the Judge accepted that
       the incidents referred to in the documents were consistent with  the
       violent incidents in which the background evidence shows JUI  to  be
       involved.  The Judge's conclusion  though  remains  that  the  claim
       based on the documents showing the Appellant as subject  to  one  or
       more arrest warrants was not credible.  As  the  Judge  observed  at
       [93]:-


           "In  this  context  it  should  be  noted  that  the  appellant,
           according to his own evidence, has only played  a  quite  modest
           role in JUI at a local level, which had to be dragged out of him
           during his oral evidence and this does not tend to suggest  that
           he is not someone involved with JUI who the AL authorities would
           bother targeting (see paragraph 27 above).  That he  could  have
           been arrested on one occasion as a result of committing acts  of
           violence in public with fellow JUI members, or from  a  personal
           dispute which got out of hand, is an entirely different  matter.
           Although the appellant even tried to make a very tenuous link in
           my view between the land dispute and his JUI affiliations."


   27. The Judge goes on to consider  therefore  whether  he  accepts  that
       latter facet of the Appellant's claim.  He rejects  it  due  to  the
       late making of the asylum claim and the even  later  elaboration  of
       the claim as discussed above.  Based on evidence cited at [43] about
       the ease of obtaining forged documents  together  with  the  Judge's
       consideration of the documents at [45] to  [48]  which,  as  I  have
       already noted, the Judge rejects as not genuine, the Judge concludes
       as follows [98]:-


           "I  consider  that  the  cumulative  weight  of  these   serious
           evidential fault lines in the asylum narrative of the  appellant
           leads me to conclude that,  whilst  he  may  well  have  had  an
           allegiance to JUI, even possibly taking the form of an executive
           role at a local  level,  he  has  fabricated  the  key  elements
           constituting that narrative."


   28. It is in the context of the claim as accepted at [98] that the  risk
       on return falls to be considered.  I noted above my concern that the
       Judge may have reached a finding which contradicted  the  background
       evidence relating to risk on return for JUI supporters.  That is set
       out at [20] as follows:-


           "1.3.11     Perceived  political  opponents  whose  fear  is  of
           serious harm at the hands of  the  state  on  account  of  their
           political opinion  or  activities  and  who  have  come  to  the
           attention of the authorities would be unable to avail themselves
           of protection from the authorities." [my emphasis]


   29. The Appellant's initial claim as outlined in interview was  that  he
       had not been arrested by the police.  His claim to be  on  a  "list"
       has not been corroborated; the Judge rejected  any  suggestion  that
       this was consistent  with  the  arrest  warrants  finding  that  the
       Appellant would know the difference between  being  on  a  list  and
       being subject to an arrest warrant.  The Judge was entitled to  find
       against the Appellant's later claim to be subject to arrest warrants
       for reasons which are explained in some detail.  The claim which the
       Judge had to consider therefore was one of being at risk on  account
       of being a low level supporter of JUI (which is recorded at [27]  of
       the Decision as being his oral evidence) and importantly one who had
       not individually at least come to the attention of the  authorities.
        The finding that he would not be at risk on  that  account  is  not
       inconsistent with the background evidence as cited above.


   30. For the above reasons, I do not doubt that if the Judge had confined
       himself to a consideration of the evidence before him, he could have
       found the Appellant not  to  be  credible  for  the  reasons  given.
       However, he has not so confined himself.  The Judge was entitled  to
       make comment on what he perceived  to  be  the  Appellant's  extreme
       views of Islam and to express his concerns about  whether  a  person
       like this Appellant ought to be allowed to pass on  those  views  to
       young people in the UK.  The Judge though, at [9] to [17],  [61]  to
       [65] and [123] to [130], goes  beyond  simply  passing  comment.   I
       cannot, as Mr Wilding invites me to do, insulate the Judge's adverse
       credibility findings from the very clear dislike which the Judge has
       formed of the Appellant as expressed in those paragraphs.  I  cannot
       exclude the possibility that the Judge has  allowed  himself  to  be
       influenced in  those  findings  by  his  own  sentiments  about  the
       Appellant's religious views.  It is also unclear whether  the  Judge
       has in expressing those views allowed himself to be  deflected  from
       considering the central question of whether this Appellant would  be
       at a real risk on return and has rather  focussed  on  whether  this
       Appellant is  a  danger  to  the  community  in  the  UK.   This  is
       particularly apparent in the Judge's reference to events which  are,
       on their face, completely irrelevant to this  Appellant's  case,  at
       [124] and [125]. I am therefore satisfied that the Decision contains
       an error of law.


   31. Whilst, for the reasons set out at [19] to [29] above, it  may  well
       be the case that another Judge could reach the same view in relation
       to the credibility of the Appellant's claim, I  cannot  exclude  the
       possibility that another Judge could reach the opposite view  having
       heard the Appellant give evidence and discounting the impact of  the
       Appellant's extreme views on the question of his credibility.  I  am
       therefore satisfied that the error of law is material.


   32. Both parties agreed that, if I were to find a material error of law,
       the appropriate course would be to remit the appeal  to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal since what is here  under  challenge  is  the  Judge's
       adverse credibility findings.  I agree that this is the  appropriate
       course and  I  therefore  remit  the  appeal  for  re-hearing  by  a
       different Judge.


   DECISION
   I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error  of  law.  The
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond  promulgated  on  25  April
   2016 is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
   re-hearing before a different Judge.
      Signed           [pic]            Date 28 July 2016


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
