
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00552/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2016                 |On 30 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     MFU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Saleem of Counsel instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Background

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 14 April  1992.   The
    appellant first entered the United Kingdom on a Tier 4  (Student)  visa
    on 12 January 2013 having been granted a  visa  on  12  December  2012.
    Leave was granted until February 2016 although his leave was  curtailed
    on 22 February 2015 as his sponsor licence was provoked.  The appellant
    applied for asylum on 1 September 2015.   The  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's claim for reasons set out in a Reasons for  Refusal  Letter
    dated 5 January 2016.  The appellant's appeal against that refusal  was
    dismissed by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 12 July 2016.  The appellant appeals with permission.

Error of Law Hearing

 2.  Mr  Saleem  submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  were  inadequate.
    Although he conceded that it is not  an  error  of  law  in  itself  to
    consider, as the judge did, Section 8 (of The  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004) matters at  the  beginning  of
    his reasons, what he contended was the manner in which  the  delay  had
    been considered and the mindset of the judge.

 3. Paragraph [19] demonstrates that because there has been  a  substantial
    delay in this case in the appellant claiming asylum this has caused the
    Immigration Judge not to believe the appellant.  Mr Salem  went  on  to
    submit that at [21] the judge considered  in  the  alternative  if  the
    appellant's account were accepted.  However it was noted that the judge
    did not set out in any detail what he does and  does  not  accept.   He
    simply states that he does not believe the appellant's account  due  to
    the delay.  Mr Saleem pointed to the very  detailed  witness  statement
    setting  out  the  appellant's  account  at  pages  10  to  19  of  the
    appellant's bundle which includes an explanation as to why he  did  not
    claim asylum on arrival.

 4. Whilst it was  open  to  the  judge  not  to  believe  the  appellant's
    explanation he failed to give any reasons why this was  the  case.   It
    was also the appellant's case that he had  been  unable  to  leave  his
    country without paying a  bribe.   However  the  judge  simply  made  a
    finding that the appellant had been able to leave the country  lawfully
    on a student visa with his own national passport and does not  consider
    or give any reasons as to why he has rejected the appellant's  reasons.



 5. At [22] of the  judge's  decision,  where  he  considered  the  country
    guidance, the judge finds that the appellant has no family  association
    of Tamil separatism and there is no record of any subsequent visits  to
    his home.  It was submitted  that  this  was  simply  an  error  and  a
    material one as at paragraph 18 of the appellant's  witness  statement,
    the appellant had said:

         "The authorities are looking for me and I know this  as  they  have
         made enquiries and they have been going to my house."

 6. Again, it was open to the judge not to believe the appellant's  account
    but he needed to give reasons for not doing so and he failed to do  so.
    Although the judge had at paragraphs [10] to [15] set out the evidence,
    it was submitted that the judge had failed to factor this evidence into
    his decision and had failed to give reasons as to why he  had  rejected
    what the appellant had  said  in  oral  evidence  and  in  his  witness
    statement.  It was insufficient to make a sweeping  statement  that  he
    did not believe the appellant because of the delay and there  had  been
    no anxious scrutiny of the appellant's case.

 7. Ms Fijiwala quite properly  conceded,  particularly  in  light  of  the
    witness statement and the mistakes of fact made by Judge Lal, that  the
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal must succeed.

 8. I am satisfied that  for  all  the  reasons  highlighted,  Judge  Lal's
    approach disclosed material errors of  law  as  he  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's account.  I  am  further
    satisfied that his findings have been infected by his consideration  of
    the issue of delay (rather than his consideration of Section 8 per se).
     The fact that there has been a substantial delay in this case and that
    the judge was entitled to take this into consideration does not obviate
    the need for adequate findings of fact on the appellant's claim.

Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision cannot stand  and  set  the  decision  aside.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, courts and enforcement  Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2, the nature  and  extent  of  judicial  fact
    finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard,
    de novo, by any judge other than Judge Lal.  No findings are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
