
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00800/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Microsoft     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams)                               |                                     |
|On 16 July 2021                      |On 3 August 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     CI
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer instructed by Fisher Stone Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The  appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Sills ('the Judge') promulgated on 3 December 2020,  in
      which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
   2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on 18 January 2021. The operative part of the grant being  in
      the following terms:

           "... The grounds in the application  for  permission  to  appeal
           argue that the judge  erred  in  law  on  four  grounds,  namely
           committing a procedural irregularity capable  of  affecting  the
           fairness of proceedings  the  applicability  of  the  vulnerable
           witness guidance, Ground 2, failure to resolve a dispute between
           the parties: the Appellant's religion, Ground 3, failure to take
           into account material evidence: background country material.


           Counsel argues  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing,  the
           Appellant's advocate raised the applicability of  the  guidance,
           namely the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010,
           providing guidance in respect of  child,  vulnerable  adult  and
           sensitive appellant's and the Respondent's  advocate  could  not
           oppose that application and Judge Sills therefore  granted  that
           application. However, the determination makes  no  reference  to
           the Joint Presidential Guidance Note.


           I accept that this raises an arguable error of  law  bearing  in
           mind the judge has  not  referred  to  the  application  of  the
           guidance  anywhere  throughout  the  determination  and  it   is
           difficult to state on a fair reading of the  decision,  to  what
           extent the guidance  has  been  applied  in  making  credibility
           findings and in dealing with the overall evidence.  This  raises
           an  arguable  error  of  law,  however  all  other  grounds  are
           arguable, in view of the first ground."



   3. The Secretary of State has filed a  Rule  24  response  and  Reply  to
      directions opposing the appeal, claiming the  Judge  directed  himself
      appropriately and has given clear and cogent reasons for rejecting the
      appellant's credibility that  are  not  affected  by  the  appellant's
      social phobia.

Error of law

   4. The transcript of the opening section of the hearing before the Judge,
      obtained by Mr Greer, clearly shows that the issue of the  appellant's
      vulnerability was raised and that the Judge accepted the appellant  is
      a vulnerable witness in the terms identified in the Joint Presidential
      Guidance.
   5. It is not suggested the Judge did not conduct the hearing in a  manner
      that prevented the appellant from being able to participate  and  give
      her evidence, the alleged error arises on the basis the allegation the
      Judge paid no attention to the section of the Joint Guidance  relating
      to the writing of the determination; which is in the following terms:

           "Determination


           11.    An  appellant  is  entitled  to  a  clear  decision  with
              reasons.


           12.    Record whether the appellant had someone there to support
              him or her and the role played, if any.


           13.    The weight to be placed upon factors of vulnerability may
              differ depending on the matter under appeal, the  burden  and
              standard of proof and whether the individual is a witness  or
              an appellant.


           14.    Consider the evidence, allowing  for  possible  different
              degrees of understanding by witnesses and appellant  compared
              to those are not vulnerable, in the context of evidence  from
              others associated  with  the  appellant  and  the  background
              evidence before you. Where there were clear discrepancies  in
              the oral evidence, consider the extent to which  7  the  age,
              vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was an element of
              that discrepancy or lack of clarity.


           15.    The decision  should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has
              concluded the appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable
              or  sensitive,  the  effect  the  Tribunal   considered   the
              identified vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before
              it and thus whether the Tribunal was  satisfied  whether  the
              appellant had established his or her  case  to  the  relevant
              standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should be  given
              to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to a
              state of mind.

   6. The Judge in the decision under challenge makes no  reference  to  the
      Joint Presidential Guidance, indeed failing to make any  reference  to
      it in the section of the decision headed "legal  framework"  in  which
      the Judge sets out a number of self directions in relation to the  way
      in which the issues are to be considered.
   7. At [12] the Judge states, initial consideration will be given  to  the
      factual issues before applying legal principles, but with,  again,  no
      mention of the application of the Joint Guidance.
   8. The Judge in the findings from [13] refers to parts of the appellant's
      evidence being inconsistent, it being difficult to understand why  the
      appellant failed to mention an issue  regarding  her  father's  second
      wife with no indication this was actually put to her as an issue,  the
      failure to mention matters the Judge  found  damaged  the  appellant's
      credibility, failure to provide a clear  explanation  in  relation  to
      when the appellant started  attending  church,  inconsistency  in  the
      appellant's evidence, inadequate explanation, and confusion.  At  [25]
      the Judge referred to answers given by the appellant in her interview,
      which are said on occasion to be "surprisingly  vague"  and  that  the
      appellant's inability to be more specific  is  inconsistent  with  her
      claim to be a Christian convert [25]. At no point during any of  these
      findings does the  Judge  factor  in  what  weight  is  given  to  the
      identified vulnerability. It may  be  that  no  additional  weight  is
      warranted, but the determination does not say this.
   9. The Judge refers to the medical evidence at [28] where it is  written:
      "I note the medical evidence in the Appellant's bundle indicating  the
      Appellant has sought treatment for symptoms  of  anxiety,  depression,
      and social phobia. Whilst there has been reference to  the  health  or
      developmental difficulties of the appellant's son, no evidence in this
      regard has been provided". The Judge was clearly  aware  therefore  of
      not only the need to treat the appellant as a vulnerable  witness  but
      also the evidence indicating she had sought assistance for the matters
      that created her vulnerability.
  10. The Judge's conclusion that he rejects  the  claimed  conversion  from
      Islam or having family problems or difficulties due to  her  Christian
      faith in Kyrgyzstan, can only be a conclusion safely arrived  at  once
      there has been a proper assessment of the evidence.
  11. It is accepted that Christian churches are present  in  Kyrgyzstan  as
      the Eastern Orthodox Christian church and the  Roman  Catholic  Church
      have been present for a number of generations. The specific claim made
      by the appellant is that she faces a real risk on return  as  she  has
      converted and because her church is an evangelical  Christian  church.
      Despite this there is no indication of how this was assessed as a risk
      factor by the Judge when there  was  evidence  of  certain  Christians
      being targeted for acts of violence.
  12. I find the appellant has established her grounds of challenge and  out
      of an abundance of caution I set aside the decision of the  First-tier
      Judge with specific  reference  to  Ground  1,  the  fairness  of  the
      hearing. The Judge does not enable a reader of  the  determination  to
      establish what weight was given to the vulnerability of the  appellant
      in assessing her evidence.
  13. The decision is therefore set aside as a whole to be remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal (IAC) at Bradford to be heard de novo by  a  judge
      other than Judge Sills.

Decision

  14. The Judge materially erred in law. I  set  the  decision  aside.  This
      appeal shall  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
      Bradford to be heard afresh by Judge other  than  Judge  Sills.  There
      shall be no preserved findings.


   Anonymity.

  15. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
  16. I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated: 19 July 2021












