
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00651/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th January 2017                      |On 18 January 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Imamovic instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.   This  direction
      applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and a  failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   contempt   of   court
      proceedings.

Introduction

   2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Afghanistan and  of  the  Sikh
      religion.  She was born on 1 January 1983 and she arrived in the UK on
      1 September 2015 and claimed asylum shortly thereafter.  On 6  January
      2016, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim for asylum,
      humanitarian protection and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   3. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Suffield-
      Thompson).  The appellant claims that if she were returned to Kabul in
      Afghanistan she would be at  risk  of  persecution  as  a  Sikh.   She
      claimed that her family  owned  a  shop  and  the  Taliban  constantly
      demanded money from them.  One day, the Taliban killed her brother and
      attacked her husband who suffered a serious head injury which has left
      him with a memory deficit.  Eventually, they sold the shop  and  their
      home and moved to Pakistan where, with the services of an  agent,  the
      family came to the UK.

   4. Judge Suffield-Thompson,  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
      grounds.  She made an adverse credibility finding and did  not  accept
      any  of  the  appellant's  account,  including  that  she   was   from
      Afghanistan (rather than Pakistan) and that she was a Sikh.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   5. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on six grounds.

   6. First, the judge had been wrong to place no weight upon a letter  from
      the Gurdwara in Afghanistan which confirmed who the appellant was  and
      where she came from.  The judge  had  been  wrong  to  find  that  the
      document was "not genuine" simply because it did not mention that  her
      brother had been killed.

   7. Secondly, the judge had been wrong to place no weight on the  evidence
      of the expert, Dr Giustozzi who had stated in his report that  he  had
      asked an associate to make enquiries of the Sikh  community  in  Kabul
      and who had confirmed that, having contacted them, that the  appellant
      and her family had been living in the neighbourhood.   The  judge  had
      been wrong to not give this evidence "any credence" as it was  "third-
      hand knowledge at best" and, again, failed to mention  the  murder  of
      the appellant's brother.

   8. Thirdly, the judge had wrongly reasoned  that  because  the  appellant
      spoke the language of "Hindko", and that that  was  mostly  spoken  by
      Hindus, the appellant was a Hindu rather than a Sikh.

   9. Fourthly, and related to last ground, the judge had misunderstood  the
      appellant's evidence when she said that she was a "Hindu/Sikh" and had
      failed to take into account her evidence that she belonged to  a  sect
      of Sikhism called "Mona Sikh" which shared similarities with Hindus as
      they did not practise the five Ks.

  10. Fifthly, the judge had been  wrong  to  take  into  account  that  the
      appellant's husband had not attended the hearing in the light  of  the
      medical evidence  from  his  GP  as  to  his  mental  state  and  had,
      therefore, been wrong to find that he had not  attended  in  order  to
      evade cross-examination.

  11. Finally, in relation to Article 8, the judge had failed adequately  to
      consider the best interests of the appellant's children.

  12. On 16 August 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ  Garratt)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on all grounds.

  13. On 9 September 2016, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  notice
      seeking to uphold the judge's decision on the basis that she  had  not
      materially erred in law in dismissing the appellant's  appeal  on  all
      grounds.

Discussion

  14. In her oral submissions, Ms Imamovic relied upon her grounds of appeal
      and, in particular, the judge's failure to  give  any  weight  to  the
      letter from the Gurdwara and the expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi.  She
      also submitted that the judge had failed properly to take into account
      all  the  appellant's  evidence  concerning  her  religion   and   her
      explanation that she was  a  Mona  Sikh  whom  she  self-described  as
      "Hindu/Sikh".

  15. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of State indicated that he had
      misgivings about the determination.  He acknowledged  that  the  judge
      had materially erred in law in rejecting (without  giving  any  weight
      to) the letter from the Gurdwara (see para 44  of  the  determination)
      and the evidence of Dr Giustozzi which, Mr Richards acknowledged,  was
      based upon evidence from an individual with  stated  credentials  whom
      the expert had asked to make enquires on his behalf (see  paras  44-47
      of the determination).  Mr Richards also acknowledged that the judge's
      reasoning in relation to the appellant's claimed  religion  failed  to
      take into account her evidence in her witness statement dated  8  July
      2016 (especially at paras 25-29) which explained that she was a  "Mona
      Sikh" and explained how that branch of the Sikh religion differed from
      others who followed the five Ks.

  16. In the light of Mr Richards'  acceptance  that  the  judge  materially
      erred in law, it is unnecessary for  me  to  analyse  the  appellant's
      submissions and the judge's determination in any detail.

  17. I accept the submissions made  by  Ms  Imamovic  that  the  judge  did
      materially err in law in concluding: (1)  that  the  letter  from  the
      Gurdwara was not genuine simply because it failed to mention that  the
      appellant's brother had been murdered; and (2) that the evidence of Dr
      Giustozzi should not be given "any credence" on the basis that it  was
      "third-hand knowledge at best" and, again, failed to mention that  the
      appellant's brother had been murdered.  As Mr  Richards  acknowledged,
      Dr Giustozzi is a recognised expert and the credentials of the  person
      he entrusted to make  the  enquiries  on  his  behalf  were  provided.
      Further, the judge's reasoning in paras 51-55 is, with  respect,  both
      confusing and fails to take  into  account  the  appellant's  evidence
      about her religion  given  in  her  witness  statement.   The  judge's
      consistent reliance on the appellant being  a  "Hindu/Sikh"  fails  to
      take the evidence seeking to explain that there were elements  of  her
      religion, as part of the Mona sect, that differentiated her from other
      Sikhs.

  18. I am satisfied that cumulatively these errors  were  material  to  the
      judge's adverse credibility finding and her decision  to  dismiss  the
      appellant's appeal.  Consequently, it is unnecessary  to  address  the
      remaining grounds.

Decision and Disposal

  19. For these reasons, therefore, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      to dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an  error  of
      law and its decision cannot stand.  The decision is set aside.

  20. Given the nature and extent of  fact-finding  required,  and  applying
      para 7.2 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,  the  proper
      disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal  for
      a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Suffield-Thompson.



                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


