
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00655/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 September 2017                          |On 20 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     LM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Martin, instructed by J M Wilson, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, LM, is a female citizen of Albania who was born in 1968.
     Following a hearing in Birmingham on 6 February 2017, the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was set aside and directions were  made  for  a
    resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.  Following that resumed hearing,
    I  invited  both  parties  to   send   to   me   written   submissions.
    Unfortunately, there was a delay in receiving the Secretary of  State's
    submissions and opinions upon the need to cross examine the  appellant,
    hence the delay in the promulgation of this decision.

 2. My reasons for finding an error of law were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent  and  to  the
         respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The  appellant,  LM,  is  a  citizen  of
         Albania who was born in 1968.  She was refused asylum by a decision
         of the respondent dated 31 July 2015.  She appealed to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal (Judge Asjad) which, in a decision promulgated on  18
         August 2016 allowed the appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds
         and dismissed it on asylum grounds.  The  Secretary  of  State  now
         appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The appellant comes from the  Gora  region  of  Albania.   She
         claims to have suffered sexual and domestic abuse in  Albania  and,
         in consequence, to be suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder
         (PTSD). She says that she is both  anxious  and  depressed.   Judge
         Asjad found that the appellant was a credible  witness.   She  also
         accepted the medical  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  mental
         health.  She found that the appellant had been a victim of domestic
         violence [33].  She found also the appellant had been the victim of
         very severe sexual violence which had  led  her  to  become  highly
         distressed and to self-harm [34].

         3.   At the appeal hearing in the Upper Tribunal at  Birmingham  on
         6th February 2017, Miss Aboni for the respondent, told me that  the
         Secretary of State did not challenge the findings of fact  made  by
         the judge.  The difficulty in the decision lay in  the  failure  of
         the judge, having made findings of  fact,  to  use  that  factorial
         matrix  as  the  basis  for  assessing  risk  on  return  for   the
         availability of internal flight within Albania for this  appellant.
         At [35], the judge wrote this:

             "I do find that the medical evidence and the  opinion  of  the
             medical professionals is particularly persuasive in this case.
              The appellant has had a number of sessions of counselling and
             had there been any other reason for her  mental  state,  I  do
             find that it would have been picked up.   As  it  stands  more
             than one medical professional gives the opinion  that  she  is
             suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder as a  result  of
             the abuse in Albania.  I do not accept  that  she  could  have
             consistently given the same account to all these professionals
             who are experts in their field and have interviewed and  dealt
             with many patients.  When all of this  is  considered  against
             the  country  guidance  about  Albania  -  the  prevalence  of
             domestic abuse and  trafficking  of  women,  the  balance  has
             tipped in the appellant's favour.  The appellant does not come
             across as an educated intelligent women and  I  find  she  has
             been consistent because there is an element of truth  to  what
             she states.  She may well have lied about certain matters  and
             we may never know the whole truth.  But for all the reasons  I
             have given and applying the lower standard of proof I do  find
             there are substantial grounds that she  would  suffer  serious
             harm and therefore her claim for  humanitarian  protection  is
             granted."

         4.   It is a pity that, having  considered  the  evidence  in  such
         detail, the judge should have concluded her decision without making
         any proper examination of  the  risk  to  appellant  on  return  to
         Albania.  I acknowledge that that credibility  of  the  appellant's
         account was put in doubt by the Secretary of State but this was not
         a case where the respondent had indicated that,  if  the  appellant
         were to be found credible by the Tribunal, then the  appeal  should
         be allowed in any event.   Although  rather  briefly,  the  refusal
         letter at [36-37] had given "further consideration...to your  claim
         at its highest."  The Secretary  of  State  considered  that  "[the
         appellant] could obtain a sufficiency of protection and or in  turn
         internally relocate within Albania to avoid your fear of [S]."   In
         subsequent paragraphs [38] - [54], the  Secretary  of  State  gives
         reasons for her assertion that  the  appellant,  if  credible,  can
         still safely return  to  Albania.   Those  reasons  have  not  been
         addressed at all by the judge.  In the circumstances, I  set  aside
         the decision.  I consider that this appeal is now better  remaining
         in the Upper Tribunal which will remake the  decision  following  a
         resumed hearing.  I accept that both parties  may  wish  to  submit
         evidence prior to that resumed hearing.  Although I acknowledge  it
         may be distressing for her, it will be important for the  appellant
         herself to attend to  submit  to  cross-examination.   The  resumed
         hearing will proceed on the basis that the appellant's  account  of
         past events in Albania is true and accurate as found by  the  judge
         in the First-tier Tribunal.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  18  August
         2016 is set aside.  The findings of fact are preserved.  The  Upper
         Tribunal will remake the decision following a resumed hearing on  a
         date to be fixed in Birmingham before Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive
         Lane.

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings.

 3. At the resumed hearing, there was no oral evidence.  I have  considered
    the submissions sent to me by the representatives for both parties.

 4. The starting point for my decision are the findings of fact made by the
    First-tier Tribunal which I directed should be preserved.  In the First-
    tier Tribunal decision at [35], the judge wrote:

         "I do find the appellant was a victim of both physical  and  sexual
         abuse at the hands of her partner  ...  She  was  consistent  about
         three incidents  that  she  said  led  to  her  scarring:  she  was
         consistent about how she was attacked with a blade  to  her  wrist;
         she was consistent about having  her  kneecap  dislodged;  she  was
         consistent about her teeth being broken by S  [the  partner].   She
         was consistent about the fact that she was repeatedly subjected  to
         violence by S.  She was consistent about  the  fact  that  she  was
         forced to have sex with other men and she was also consistent about
         the fact that [S] would go where he  wanted  and  she  didn't  know
         where he was."

 5. I accept also that  the  First-tier  Judge  found  that  the  appellant
    suffers from PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder) as is  evidenced  by
    the medical professionals who have  reported  upon  her  treatment.   I
    accept that the  appellant  is  (as  described  by  Mr  Martin  in  his
    submissions) a "traumatised single woman being sent back to Albania".

 6. I have considered the background evidence relating to Albania which has
    been  provided  by  both  parties.   Domestic   violence   and   indeed
    discrimination against women in Albania remains a very serious problem.
     The US State Department (USSD)  report  records  that  the  police  in
    Albania do not have "training or  capacity  to  deal  effectively  with
    domestic violence cases".  It is also clear from the report  of  UNICEF
    [7.1.6-7.1.7] that accommodation for a woman in  the  position  of  the
    appellant would follow on only after the grant of a  protection  order,
    in the appellant's case against her former partner, S.  The grant of  a
    protection order appears to be fairly rapid but it is  clear  from  the
    UNICEF  report  that  the  administrative  structures  responsible  for
    following up  upon  that  order  and  providing  accommodation  to  the
    appellant are by no means as rapid.  Mr Martin  submits  that,  in  the
    appellant's precarious mental condition (as a result of her  PTSD)  she
    may never be able to apply for protection in the  first  instance.   He
    submits that, even if the appellant does apply  for  protection,  there
    remains the problem with persuading the police to assist  her  and,  if
    she were to obtain a protection order, it  would  be  hindered  by  her
    current depression and passivity (as a  result  of  her  PTSD)  chasing
    those administrative bodies which should but may not provide  her  with
    shelter.

 7. The difficulties outlined by  Mr  Martin  would  affect  the  appellant
    throughout Albania.  I am not satisfied, as Mr Martin submits,  that  S
    would locate the appellant if she were to return to a different area of
    Albania (for example, Tirana) as  there  was  no  suggestion  that  his
    influence is so extensive as to enable  him  to  locate  the  appellant
    within Albania wherever  she  may  be  living.   I  am,  however,  very
    concerned  that  the  appellant's  mental  condition  as  it  currently
    presents would be a significant factor impeding her ability to initiate
    or follow up the procedures which she would require in order to  obtain
    protection from the authorities and  adequate  shelter.   Weighing  the
    evidence as a whole, I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant,  given  her
    particular  characteristics,  would  be  at  real  risk  of   suffering
    significant harm if  not  from  S  directly  then  on  account  of  her
    inability to access basic assistance and facilities including  adequate
    accommodation.  If she did not gain access to such facilities, there is
    a very strong likelihood that  she  would  be  exposed  to  sexual  and
    physical violence at the hands of those  seeking  to  exploit  her,  as
    occurred in the past.  She cannot return to her home  area  of  Albania
    for fear of encountering S and, in the light of my findings, I find  it
    would be unduly harsh for her to relocate within the country.   I  find
    her appeal should be allowed on Article 3 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

 8. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 31 July 2015 is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR).



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 10 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 10 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
