
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00270/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Head at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 05 September 2017                         |On 31 October 2017            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                     BSW
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms L Fenney, NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 2. The Respondent is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of  their
    family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Respondent  and  to  the
    Appellant.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a Sikh national of Afghanistan, born in January  1971,
    his wife born in 1974, also seek national Afghanistan is dependent upon
    his appeal. He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  20  June  2016.  He
    applied  for  asylum  on  the  same  day.  On  28  December  2016,  the
    application was refused. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. On 27 February 2017, the appeal was dismissed. The judge  made  adverse
    credibility findings. The judge concluded  that  flight  had  not  been
    predicated  upon  their  having  suffered  persecutory  treatment.   In
    assessing risk  on  return  currently  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant could return to his home area of Jalalabad in line  with  the
    country guidance case  of  TG  and  others  (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)
    Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595 and  DSG  and  others  (Afghan  Sikhs:
    departure from CG) Afghanistan [ 2013] UKUT 00148.

 5. The appellant was  granted  permission  to  appeal  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis that although the challenge to  the  factual  and
    credibility findings were without merit because  they  were  adequately
    supported by reasons, it was arguable that there had been no assessment
    of risk to the appellant on return to Afghanistan as a Sikh: that there
    has been no assessment whether he would face a real risk of persecution
    or would manifest such individual risk factors might increase  risk  to
    him of serious harm for the purposes of humanitarian protection.

 6. The respondent filed rule 24 response defending  the  judge's  decision
    pointing out that at paragraphs 24 and 25  the  judge  expressly  takes
    into  account  the  country  guidance  case  of  TG,  noting  that  the
    assessment of risk is fact specific pursuant to  the  country  guidance
    and credibility assessment has been done within  the  context  of  this
    background evidence. The judge goes on to find the appellant's  account
    of attacks and extortion by the Taliban was not credible  at  paragraph
    26 to 34. Between 34 to 36 the judge accepts that the appellant is seek
    and again invokes TG and finds that the appellant  can  return  to  his
    home area without risk.

 7. In submissions Ms Fenney asserted that in the country guidance case  of
    TG  the  individual  risk  factors  which  might  increase  risk   were
    identified and the judge in her decision had failed to go through those
    factors, such  as  their  likely  financial  circumstances,  access  to
    accommodation,  and  availability  of  support  of  the  Gurdwara,  and
    consider how they applied to the appellant.

 8. I invited clarification as to the evidence  on  those  points  and  the
    submissions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. Ms Fenney was not  the  representative  below,  but  had  the  skeleton
    argument of counsel on the day. She took  me  through  the  appellant's
    bundle of  evidence  including  witness  statements  and  the  skeleton
    argument but conceded that no  individualised  risk  factors  had  been
    argued before the court.

10. Mr Kotas relied the absence of evidence and submissions  going  to  the
    individualised risk factors and referred me to the rules 24 response.

Discussion

11. The appellant's historical account in summary is of his having suffered
    a violent incident some 8 years' prior. The couple said they had wanted
    to leave then but  did  not  have  enough  money.  They  had  continued
    working, required to pay a levy to the Taliban for the  last  2  years,
    until they could afford to come to the United Kingdom, and had sold all
    their assets to pay for their trip. The judge rejected their account of
    the incident,  of  the  levy,  and  of  their  financial  circumstances
    including how they came to fund the trip. As identified  by  the  judge
    granting permission there is no merit in the grounds' challenges to the
    judge's adverse credibility findings.

12. At the First-tier Tribunal the case was argued  on  the  basis  of  the
    credibility  of  the  historical  account.  As  far   as   humanitarian
    protection is concerned the skeleton argument reveals that the articles
    2 and 3 points were argued on the same basis as the asylum  ground,  to
    the point that the persecutory treatment suffered also met the test  of
    inhuman or degrading treatment, so that they stood  or  fell  together.
    The only argument in the alternative was a request for a recommendation
    for discretionary leave to remain, due to the risk of the appellant and
    his wife being detained at the airport for being Sikh. That relied on a
    newspaper article from 3 July 2012, i.e. predating the country guidance
    case, which found that that was not a risk.

13. The head note of TG at (ii) is that

      a) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan  do  not
         face a real risk of persecution oil treatment such  as  to  entitle
         them to a grant of international protection on the basis  of  their
         ethnic or religious identity, per se. Neither can it be  said  that
         the cumulative impact of discrimination suffered by  the  seek  and
         Hindu communities in general which is the threshold of persecution.



14. The grounds correctly point out that TG at (iii)  identifies  the  need
    for a fact specific assessment, and refers to factors, including likely
    financial circumstances and ability to access basic  accommodation  and
    the availability of support from the gurdwara.

15.  Ms  Fenney's  submission  that  the  judge  needed  to  give   express
    consideration of the matters listed in TG (iii) lacks merit because, as
    revealed by the skeleton  argument  of  Counsel  on  the  day  and  the
    appellant's documentary bundle including the witness  statement,  there
    was no evidence of difficulties  of  the  type  referred  to  as  being
    matters that might give rise  to  individualised  risk.  There  was  no
    reliance on anticipated difficulty in terms of the  appellant's  likely
    financial circumstances or accommodation, or their ability to  rely  on
    the gurdwara, or of other matters that would bring the appellant within
    the criterion set out in the country guidance of TG.  In addition,  the
    appellant had the hurdle of the adverse  credibility  findings  in  the
    context of the appellant's financial position in Afghanistan. The judge
    correctly  self-  directs  in  respect  of  the  relevant  cases,   and
    specifically mentions the  need  for  a  fact  specific  approach.   No
    submissions were directed to the criterion now relied upon. I also note
    Counsel's point in the skeleton argument that  internal  relocation  to
    Kabul would give difficulty because the appellant would be deprived  of
    the local support of his gurdwara. In those circumstances for the judge
    to list the relevant factors so as to point out the lack of reliance on
    them and of any evidence to substantiate any claim based upon them,  is
    formulaic rather than substantive.

16. Even though the standard  of  proof  is  low,  the  burden  nonetheless
    remains on the appellant to bring forward their evidence and to put the
    case. The judge was entitled to deal with the case on the basis it  was
    argued and the evidence submitted. The judge correctly self-directed in
    respect of the country guidance case and did not overlook  any  of  the
    appellant's  evidence  but  dealt  with  it  all.  The  judge   reached
    conclusions which were open on the evidence.

 Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appeal  reveals
    no material error of law and stands.





Signed                          Date 27 October 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
