






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00833/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th February 2019                |                                     |
|Typed, corrected, signed and sent to |On 11 March 2019                     |
|Promulgation on 7th March 2019.      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                               Mr suleman [r]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not given)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

    First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer made a direction under Rule 13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  I discharge that certificate there  is  no  basis
    upon which the appellant is entitled to anonymity.




1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and claims to  be  a  Christian.
    He applied for six months' family visit to the United Kingdom  on  10th
    July 2011 and he was granted a visa until 24th October 2012.   On  18th
    July  2016  he  made  an  appointment  and  eight  days  later  claimed
    international protection.  His claim for asylum  was  refused  on  12th
    January 2017 and the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant claimed that he would be killed on return to his  country
    of origin by Muslims associated with a  madrassa  or  school  near  his
    college that he attended in 2011.  He was found  in  December  of  that
    year to be in possession of a flash drive at the college which had  two
    derogatory cartoons of the prophet loaded onto it.  It was assumed that
    he put them there.  It was not his flash drive and he did not know  how
    they had been recorded.  He borrowed the flash drive as  he  was  on  a
    computer course and had some  files  he  wished  to  put  on  it.   The
    incident occurred in December 2015.

3.   His appeal was initially heard by Judge Cameron who allowed the  appeal
    in  a  determination  dated  16th   March   2017.    Subsequently   the
    determination was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and  the  appeal  was
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Judge Freer noted that there  was
    fresh material to consider  in  addition  to  the  original  claim  for
    asylum, because the appellant claimed to have started doing  evangelism
    in 2017 and earlier.  He claimed that  he  was  a  Roman  Catholic  but
    having arrived in the  United  Kingdom  he  is  now  involved  with  an
    Anglican Church and feels the need to evangelise.

4.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, from  [SM]  and  from
    the Reverend Canon Younis.  Unfortunately, the judge does not give  any
    indication as to whether or not he found the evidence of [SM]  credible
    or not.  There appears to be a contradiction between  the  evidence  of
    both witnesses.  Canon Younis says that the appellant was  involved  in
    street evangelising and  was  not  actively  preaching  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It said that he was assisting and leafleting and that this is
    done on a door-to-door basis.  The  Reverend  Younis  was  recorded  by
    Judge Freer as saying that the appellant does not speak to people,  but
    simply delivers leaflets although he is able to answer  questions.   In
    his evidence [SM] says, and it is recorded at paragraph  38,  that  the
    appellant helps his friends with leafleting on  a  monthly  basis.   He
    works under supervision. It is also said that the appellant understands
    the Word and he preaches.  It is not explained why, as a Roman Catholic
    he had not previously understood the  Word.   That  appears  to  be  in
    direct contradiction with what Canon Younis said and  it  is  important
    because of the findings made by the judge at paragraphs  115  and  117.
    Ms Yong asked that the appeal be remitted to the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    and that the determination be set side so that  fresh,  clear,  logical
    and properly reasoned findings can be made.

5.   The determination is set aside.  None of the  findings  are  preserved.
    The matter will be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge  Freer  and
    Judge Cameron.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
