
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00449/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 May 2019                               |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                                     SA
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Lindsey, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs E. Stuart King of counsel, instructed by J D
                    Spicer Zeb              Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1.   The Respondent is a national of Iraq, who is also Kurdish and  who  was
    born in the Kurdish Region of Iraq. He first entered the United Kingdom
    on 20 July 2001 and applied for asylum.  His  application  was  refused
    and his subsequent appeal was dismissed on 4 September 2001,  after  he
    did not attend his appeal hearing.

2.   Between 31 May 2002 and 1 March 2007, the Respondent was convicted  for
    a number of offences and on 21 August  2007  a  deportation  order  was
    signed in relation to him. He made a voluntary return to Erbil  in  the
    KRG on 6 December 2007 on an EU letter. It is his  case  that  he  then
    remained in hiding with an aunt in Halalbja until he left Iraq in 2008.



3.   The Respondent re-entered the United Kingdom  on  25  January  2009  in
    breach of his deportation order and in March 2010 representations  were
    made on his behalf, seeking to have his deportation  order  revoked  on
    asylum grounds. The Secretary of State refused this application  on  24
    January  2014.  This  decision  was  subsequently  withdrawn  and   the
    application to revoke his deportation order was referred  back  to  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department.

4.   The Secretary of State made a further decision to refuse to revoke  the
    Respondent's deportation order on 25 June 2015.  On  1  July  2016  the
    Respondent was sentenced to 20 years in prison for conspiracy to supply
    a Class A drug,  namely  heroin,  and  also  12  years  in  prison  for
    possession of a Class A drug, also heroin, with intent  to  supply,  to
    run concurrently. The Secretary of State then maintained  his  decision
    to refuse to revoke the Respondent's deportation order on 7 July  2017.
    He appealed and in a decision promulgated on 31  January  2019,  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Callow dismissed the appeal on  Refugee  Convention
    and Humanitarian Protection grounds but allowed it on  the  basis  that
    his deportation would amount to a breach of Article 3 of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

5.   The Secretary of State appealed the Article 3 decision  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimmett granted him permission to appeal on 26 February
    2019.  On 18 April 2019 the Respondent filed  his  Rule  24  Reply  and
    sought  to  "cross-appeal"  on  the  basis  that  he  was  entitled  to
    Humanitarian Protection. However, no grounds of appeal were attached to
    the Rule 24 Reply.


ERROR OF LAW HEARING
6.   At the start of the hearing it became clear that neither the  Secretary
    of State or the Upper  Tribunal  had  been  served  with  the  document
    entitled "Grounds of Appeal" drafted by the  Respondent's  counsel  and
    dated 17 April  2019.  It  was  copied  and  I  gave  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer  fifteen  minutes  to  consider  these  grounds  and
    whether they should be admitted.

PRELIMINARY POINT ONE
7.   Counsel for the Respondent sought permission  to  appeal  out  of  time
    against the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow in so  far  as
    he found in paragraph 42 of his decision that:

         "... [a decision in relation to  the  Respondent's  entitlement  to
         Humanitarian Protection] does not first require a  decision  to  be
         made by [the Secretary of State] and  a  consideration  by  him  of
         whether the appellant  is  excluded  from  HP  because  'there  are
         serious reasons for considering that they have committed a  serious
         crime'.

8.   She submitted that this amounted to an error of law as nowhere  in  his
    decision letter had the Secretary of State found  that  the  Respondent
    was not entitled to Humanitarian Protection.

9.   She relied on the fact that paragraph 339D  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    states:

         "A person is excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection under
         paragraph 339C(iv) where the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
         (i)   there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering  that  he  has
         committed a crime against peace,  a  war  crime,  a  crime  against
         humanity, or any other serious crime  or  instigated  or  otherwise
         participated in such crimes".

10.  Therefore, she submitted that the Frist-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    have the jurisdiction to find that the Respondent was not  entitled  to
    Humanitarian Protection in the  absence  of  a  prior  finding  by  the
    Secretary of State that  he  was  satisfied  that  the  Respondent  had
    committed a serious crime.

11.  I note that this was not the argument which was relied upon by  counsel
    at the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow as the  skeleton
    argument relied upon by counsel  at  that  hearing  clearly  stated  at
    paragraph 8 "as the [Secretary  of  State  had]  made  no  decision  to
    exclude the [Respondent] from Humanitarian Protection, and has made  no
    consideration of whether he should be so excluded, the Tribunal can and
    should consider his entitlement under this provision". Paragraph 40  of
    the decision also indicates  that  counsel  asked  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Callow to reach a decision on  the  Respondent's  entitlement  to
    Humanitarian Protection.

11.  Counsel is now seeking to argue that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Callow
    erred in following her interpretation of the law at the hearing  before
    him.

12.  It would be possible for me to find that there was a  Robinson  obvious
    error in the manner in which the Judge approached his consideration  of
    the Respondent's entitlement to Humanitarian Protection. Paragraph 339D
    of the Immigration Rules clearly states:

         "A person is excluded from a grant of humanitarian  protection  for
         the purposes of paragraph 339C(iv) where the Secretary of State  is
         satisfied that:
         (iv) there are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  they  have
         committed a serious crime".

13.  It is also the case that in the decision letter the Secretary of  State
    had not stated that he was satisfied that there  were  serious  reasons
    for considered that the Respondent had committed a serious crime.

14.  However, as First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow noted in paragraph  38  of
    his decision, counsel, who still represents  the  Respondent,  had  not
    attempted to argue that  the  Respondent  had  not  been  convicted  of
    particularly serious crimes. Therefore, any mistake made by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Callow in his approach to this issue cannot be  said  to
    have been material to his final decision.

15.   Furthermore,  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Callow's   decision   was
    promulgated on 31 January 2019 and both parties then had 14  days  from
    the date on which they were  provided  with  written  reasons  for  his
    decision to appeal. The Respondent did  not  appeal  within  this  time
    scale and did not provide the Upper Tribunal or the Secretary of  State
    with any grounds of appeal until the date of the hearing. This  clearly
    put  both  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  at   a
    disadvantage, even though they had a short period of time to  read  the
    grounds on the day of the hearing.

16.  It was submitted in the grounds of appeal that, as the appeal had  been
    allowed on Article 3 grounds, there was no material  advantage  to  the
    Respondent  of  initially  appealing  in   relation   to   Humanitarian
    Protection. It  was  only  when  the  Appellant  appealed  against  the
    decision to grant him  leave  on  Article  3  grounds  that  it  became
    material to "cross appeal". However, no  reasons  were  given  for  the
    further delay from 5 March 2019 (the date  on  which  the  Respondent's
    solicitors would have been on notice that the Secretary  of  State  had
    been granted permission to appeal)  to  the  date  of  the  hearing  to
    formulate any "cross-appeal".

17.  I find that due to this delay and the fact that there was  no  material
    error of law, it is not in the interest of justice to extend  time  for
    the Respondent to make any such "cross-appeal".

18.  Counsel for the Respondent  had  also  submitted  that  I  should  have
    allowed the Respondent to raise this point as it  was  one  of  general
    importance. However, in AZ (error of law; jurisdiction;  PTA  practice)
    Iran [2018] 00245 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:

         "(3) Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should  be  granted
         on a ground that was not advanced by an applicant  for  permission,
         only if:
             (a)  the judge is satisfied that the  ground  he  or  she  has
             identified is one which has a strong prospect of success:
                  (i)  for the original appellant; or
                  (ii) for the Secretary of State, where the ground  relates
                  to a decision which,  if  undisturbed,  would  breach  the
                  United Kingdom's international Treaty obligations; or
             (b)  (possibly) the ground relates  to  an  issue  of  general
             importance, which the Upper Tribunal needs to address".

19.  For the reasons given above, I  did  not  find  that  the  Respondent's
    prospects of success were  strong  and  paragraph  (3)(a)(ii)  was  not
    relied upon. Furthermore, there was no  material  basis  upon  which  I
    could find that it was  an  issue  of  general  importance.  I  had  no
    knowledge of cases in which a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  made  a
    similar error  and  the  wording  of  the  Immigration  Rule  were  not
    ambiguous.  Therefore, there was  no  basis  on  which  I  could  grant
    permission to the Respondent to "cross appeal" on the  basis  that  the
    grounds related to an issue of general importance.

PRELIMINARY POINT TWO
20.  The Home Office Presenting Officer noted that in  paragraph  8  of  the
    Rules 24 Reply the Respondent submitted that permission to  appeal  had
    only been granted on two narrow points:


         (1)  That First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow erred  in  law  when  he
         found that the Respondent could not be able to obtain the necessary
         identity documents to enable him to  make  a  voluntary  return  to
         Iraq.
         (2)  That he also erred in law when he found that he  would  be  at
         risk of destitution if removed to Iraq when there was  no  risk  to
         the Respondent in his home area.

21.  This is correct but in Ferrer (limited  appeal  grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]
    UKUT 00304 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:

         "Where the First-tier Tribunal judge nevertheless intends to  grant
         permission only in respect of certain of the  applicant's  grounds,
         the judge should make this abundantly plain..."

22.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett did not do so.  In  any  event,  the
    Secretary of State's first  ground  of  appeal  was  capable  of  being
    summarised in the manner in which it was by  the  Judge.  Therefore,  I
    permitted that Home Office Presenting Officer to proceed as outlined in
    the grounds of appeal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION
23.  In the Rule 24 Response the Respondent submitted that there was no
    material error in the decision reached by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Callow in relation to his entitlement to protection under Article 3 of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

24.  However, the first basis upon which First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett
    granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal was that it was
    arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow erred in law when he
    found that the Respondent would not be able to obtain identity
    documents in order to apply for a voluntary return to Iraq.

25.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow was correct to refer himself  to  AAH
    (Iraqi   Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq  CG  UKUT  00212  (IAC),  in
    which the Upper Tribunal found that:

         "Section C of Country Guidance annexed to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is  supplemented  with  the
         following guidance:


         "1.  Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returned  (P)
         to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or do so within  a
         reasonable time frame, will depend on the individual circumstances.
         Factors to be considered include:


               i)  Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or
                  an expired CSID would all be  of  substantial  assistance.
                  For  someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents the process should be straightforward. A laissez-
                  passer should not be counted for these purposes: these can
                  be issued without any other form of  ID  being  available,
                  are not of any assistance in 'tracing back' to the  family
                  record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;


              ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it
                  is in an area held, or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?


             iii) Are there male  family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his  CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage. It  must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that  they  could  be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to  assist  with  the  process  of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all".

26.  But, when considering this Guidance, in paragraph 45 of  his  decision,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow merely stated:

         "in addressing this  guidance  I  am  mindful  of  the  appellant's
         profile as at the last date of hearing his appeal. He  is  a  Sunni
         Muslim Kurd from the KRG who has no documents of identification and
         has no known male member of  his  family  who  can  assist  him  to
         located family records in the KRG. He has  no  connections  (family
         and/or friends) in Baghdad".

 27. He also used this as the basis to find in paragraph 48 of his  decision
     that "as the [Respondent] is unable to obtain the  necessary  identity
     documents to make a voluntary return to  Iraq  he  would  have  to  be
     returned to Baghdad and  would  have  to  make  his  own  arrangements
     thereafter".


 28. However, he did not provide any reasons for finding that the Respondent
     had no male family members to assist him to contact a civil  registry.
     Given that he had found in paragraph  44  of  his  decision  that  "in
     giving evidence and making his protection claim the  [Respondent]  was
     an unreliable witness", it was necessary for him to explain why he was
     willing to rely on the Respondent's own evidence in relation  to  this
     aspect of his case. This was particularly so when in paragraph  50  of
     Immigration Judge Hanson's earlier decision he had also found that the
     Respondent was not a credible witness.


 29. This amounted to a basic error of law in so far as it was a failure  to
     give adequate reasons for a key finding in his decision.


 30. In addition, there was no evidence to  show  that  the  Respondent  had
     taken any steps to obtain an identity document, passport or CSID  from
     his embassy or through an agent, in the absence of any family  member.
     In the context of the  previous  adverse  credibility  findings,  this
     would clearly have been relevant. (See TK  (Burundi)  v  Secretary  of
     State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 40 at paragraph 21.)


 31. It is also the case that the evidence now available  does  not  support
     the finding in Section E of Country Guidance annexed to the  Court  of
     Appeal's decision in  AA (Iraq) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
     Department [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ  944  that  there  "are
     currently no international flights to the Iraqi Kurdish Region  (IKR).
     All returns from the United Kingdom are to Baghdad".


32.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow accepted that this was the case but
    he then relied on his unreasoned conclusion that, as the Respondent had
    no identity documents and no known male relatives in Iraq who could
    assist him to obtain a CSID, he would not be able to make a voluntary
    return.

33.  He also failed to take into account that paragraph 2.7.14 of the CPIN
    Iraq: Internal relocation, civil documentation and returns, dated 17
    October 2018, also states that:


         "Iraqi Foreign National Offenders  who  have  served  time  in  the
         United Kingdom can be issued with a  laissez-passer  when  enrolled
         onto an interview and documentation scheme run by the  Home  Office
         in conjunction with the Iraqi Embassy".


 34. In addition, he also did not remind himself that in AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds)
     CG, the Upper Tribunal found that:


         "Once at the IKR border (land or air) P would normally  be  granted
         entry  to  the  territory.  Subject  to  security   screening   and
         registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would  be  permitted
         to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal impediments or
         requirements. There is no sponsorship requirement for Kurds".


 35. These omissions also amounted to errors of law.


36.  The second basis upon which First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett granted
    the Secretary of State permission to appeal was that it was arguable
    that First-tier Callow erred in law when he found that the Respondent
    would be at risk of destitution even though he would not be at risk in
    the KRG.

37.  The Upper Tribunal found in AAH (Iraqi Kurd) that "If P has family
    member living in the IKR cultural norms would require that family to
    accommodate P".  Therefore, it was necessary for First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Callow to make reasoned findings as to the presence of any of the
    Respondent's relatives in the IKR before he could find that he would be
    destitute in Iraq.


38.  For all of these reasons there were errors of law in First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Callow's decision.


Decision

(1)  The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow or Grimmett.

Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 16 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


