
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00493/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 18 July 2019                      |On 25 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     S K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr R Liaquat, of Anderson Rizwan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 14 March 2019, FtT  Tribunal  Judge  Doyle
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and
    human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT in respect only  of
    the outcome on human rights.

 3. Mr Whitwell conceded that the decision errs in  law  at  paragraph  30,
    where the judge finds nothing to show that  return  to  Pakistan  would
    result in neglect or destitution for the appellant  and  her  children,
    because those are not the tests.   He  said  that  the  judge  had  not
    decided the correct question, whether it would be reasonable to  expect
    the children to leave the UK (the oldest of the 3 children appearing to
    be a qualifying child, in terms of section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act)
    and that the decision should be set aside.

 4. The appellant has  not  tendered  any  further  evidence.   Mr  Liaquat
    acknowledged that the outcome to be expected was for the UT  to  remake
    the decision based on evidence already tendered, and upon  submissions.
    However, having been given time to consider the position  further  with
    his client, he  indicated  that  updating  evidence  should  have  been
    obtained and an application should have been made  for  its  admission.
    The fault was his.

 5.  Mr  Whitwell,  fairly,  did  not  oppose  the  appellant  having   the
    opportunity to update her evidence, and in that light,  it  was  agreed
    that the case should be remitted.

 6. The decision of the FtT, in so far as it dismissed the appeal on asylum
    and  humanitarian  protection  grounds,   stands   unchallenged.    The
    decision, in so far as it dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds,
    is set aside. It stands also as a  record  of  what  was  said  at  the
    hearing.

 7. Under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, the
    case is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing, on human rights  only.
    The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Doyle.

 8. Parties agreed that the  decisive  question  is  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

 9. I observe incidentally that although  the  grounds  and  the  grant  of
    permission take JG [2019] UKUT 72 as a point of reference, in this case
    both parties envisage that the appellant, her husband and  their  three
    children would leave or remain together.  The facts do not appear to be
    analogous to JG.  However, any relevance which JG may have is a  matter
    for the FtT.

10. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is maintained.


            [pic]

            18 July 2019
            UT Judge Macleman

