
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00857/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 September 2019                  |On 16 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     G D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Ahmed, Jones Whyte Law (on 23 May)
     Mr Caskie, instructed by Maguire Solicitors (on 6 September)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer (on 23 May)
     Mr Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer (on 6 September)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an order for  the  anonymity  of  the  parties  in  this  appeal
    pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 as children are involved.  Any breach of this order  may  lead  to
    contempt proceedings.  The appellant will be referred to as GD and  his
    partner in the United Kingdom as L.

 2. The appellant,  who  is  a  national  of  Pakistan,  has  been  granted
    permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Farrelly.  For reasons given in his  decision  dated  14  January  2019
    Judge Farrelly dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary
    of State's decision dated  5  January  2018  refusing  his  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claim.

 3. As to his immigration history, the appellant entered the United Kingdom
    in May 2012 with entry clearance as a student, giving  leave  until  15
    October  2013.   Revocation  of  his  sponsor's  licence  resulted   in
    curtailment of that leave to  25 November  2012.   The  appellant  was
    nevertheless successful in  obtaining  further  leave  to  remain,  the
    latest grant until 7 October 2015.  A  further  application  for  leave
    beyond that date was  refused  on  26  November  2015.   The  appellant
    requested administrative review which resulted in  the  decision  being
    upheld on 12 January 2016 and thereafter he applied for  permission  to
    bring judicial review proceedings.  This was refused on 30 August 2016.
     After being encountered by enforcement officers on 17 January 2017 the
    appellant was served with notice, IS96 as an overstayer.  On 2 February
    2017  he  was  again  refused  permission  to  bring  judicial   review
    proceedings against that decision.  On 20 September 2017 the  appellant
    applied for protection leading to the decision under  appeal  in  these
    proceedings.

 4. The appellant's case is based on a fear of harm in Pakistan as a result
    of his relationship with  a  Brazilian  national  (L)  which  began  in
    October 2014.  The appellant was already married  his  maternal  cousin
    who with his father had paid for him to study in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The appellant and L began to live together and their  relationship  was
    discovered by his mother in the course of a video phone  call  in  June
    2015 (L was standing behind him).   As  a  consequence,  the  appellant
    fears  his  own  family  and  that  of  his  wife.   Difficulties  were
    compounded by L being a Christian.  A  further  element  was  that  the
    appellant's wife's brother was a police officer  and  could  track  him
    down throughout Pakistan.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and L.   He  concluded  the
    appellant was most likely married and had one child (rather  than  four
    as suggested in interview).  He also found that he is divorced from his
    wife  in  Pakistan.   He  accepted  the  appellant  and  L  were  in  a
    relationship and that she is nevertheless married (to another) and  has
    two children.  He accepted on balance that the  incident  during  which
    their relationship was discovered had occurred and that it was probably
    not unreasonable for the family to react badly.

 6. Nevertheless the judge placed little reliance on the documents produced
    by the appellant as evidence of the steps taken by his family to  cause
    him harm and considered little weight  could  be  given  to  the  death
    certificate of his brother who was said to have been harmed for  having
    helped him.  He considered that the couple could  go  to  Pakistan  and
    relocate within the country and thus the appellant had not demonstrated
    a  real  risk  of  persecution.   Finally,  the  judge  concluded  that
    interference with rights under  Article  8  was  proportionate  in  the
    interests of immigration control.

 7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Keane  in
    response to grounds of challenge as to:

    (i)  The judge's understanding of the FIRs.

    (ii) A failure by the judge to consider the appellant's  evidence  that
         his brother who had been killed was assisting him.

    (iii)    The judge had failed to fully consider the death  certificate.



 8. Judge Keane considered the judge had  arguably  erred  when  apparently
    drawing on his own personal knowledge when  stating  that  "...  it  is
    commonly known that they (FIRs) relate  to  complaints  made  often  to
    harass people" and, "... to be any way affecting [sic] the  [sic]  must
    have a basic foundation".  In addition, the judge  had  arguably  erred
    with regard to  an  irrelevant  consideration  as  to  the  appellant's
    failure to mention at this asylum interview his brother's assistance.

 9. At the first hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mr Ahmed  acknowledged  his
    difficulties with the  first  ground.   He  accepted  that  he  had  no
    evidence with which to rebut the judge's understanding of the misuse of
    FIRs.  He no longer relied on this ground.

10. As to ground 2 he clarified the challenge with respect to  the  judge's
    reasoning at [35] of the decision which is in the following terms:

         "35. The appellant then has introduced the killing of  his  brother
             in support of his claimed  fear.   He  has  suggested  he  was
             helping him.  However, in his substantive interview I find  no
             reference to any brother helping him or attempting to mediate.
              At question 17 he said for 2 years he  had  no  contact  with
             anyone.   At  Question  69  he  refers  to  speaking  only  to
             childhood  friends  who  told  him  about  the   FIR's.    The
             provenance of the death certificate submitted  is  not  known.
             On balance I find this  evidence  carries  little  weight  and
             appears to have been introduced in an attempt to  enhance  his
             claim."

11. The text of the grounds of challenge is as follows:

         "2.  The Judge at paragraph 35 makes reference to  the  appellant's
             brother death certificate.  The appellant's [sic]  had  stated
             that his brother had sought to assist him and due to  this  he
             was killed.  The Judge  makes  reference  to  the  Substantive
             Interview Q17 and Q69.   The  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
             appellant's evidence at  the  hearing  that  his  brother  was
             assisting him.  The appellant's Substantive interview  was  on
             19th December 2013, the asylum hearing was heard on 23rd  July
             2018 and the appellant's brother's death was registered on 8th
             March 2018."

12. Mr Ahmed argued that the Presenting Officer  had  asked  the  appellant
    when his brother was killed and he submitted  that  the  appellant  had
    responded at the hearing under cross-examination that the assistance by
    his brother  had  occurred  after  the  interview.   Mr  Ahmed  readily
    acknowledged the difficulty this posed and had nothing more to  say  on
    this ground.

13. In relation to the death  certificate,  Mr  Ahmed  explained  that  the
    original had been produced at the hearing.  He argued  that  the  judge
    had not fully considered it.  Mr Govan contended this was a credibility
    issue and referred to [14] of the judge's decision:

         "14. Within the papers in [sic] a death  certificate  stating  that
             his brother was found dead on  8  March  2018  from  unnatural
             causes.  The appellant said he received this through a  friend
             whom he did not want to name."


14. And he contended that  the  judge  had  given  sufficient  reasons  for
    rejecting the reliability of that certificate.  Mr  Ahmed  had  nothing
    further to add to his initial submissions and I reserved my decision.

15. On reflection, I considered that as this involved  a  protection  claim
    and in order to give this case anxious scrutiny, that it was  desirable
    for the hearing to be reconvened in order for the parties to produce  a
    note of the exchange on this aspect at the  hearing.   Directions  were
    given as follows:


         "1.  I have decided to reconvene this  hearing  in  order  to  hear
             further submissions on ground two as the issue  relates  to  a
             protection claim.   This  is  despite  the  lack  of  a  clear
             indication in the ground as to the basis of challenge and  the
             lack of any supporting evidence as to the exchange it is  said
             that the appellant had under cross-examination on  the  matter
             of the timing of contact between him and his brother.


         2.   The appellant is directed to file with the Upper Tribunal  and
             serve on the respondent by  no  later  than  31  May  a  typed
             transcript of Counsel's  note  relating  to  the  exchange  in
             question.


         3.   The respondent is directed to file with the Upper Tribunal and
             serve on the appellant within the same time a copy of any note
             on this aspect taken by the Presenting Officer.


         4.   The appeal will then be re-listed for a  further  hearing  for
             submissions on ground two."


16. The Secretary of State responded on 31 May 2019  and  specific  to  the
    point explained:

         "I have examined my court notes from the day, and regret that  they
         are brief in form and were not verbatim.  I can confirm that I have
         no specific note on  responses  to  any  cross-examination  on  the
         aspect raised in the  grounds  before  you,  that  of  the  brother
         assisting the appellant prior to his death.  However, the  lack  of
         note does not equate to a refutation that any such  questions  were
         asked on the day as cross-examination progressed."

17. The accompanying notes of the hearing does not cover the point.

18. At some point the appellant changed solicitors.  Nothing  was  produced
    apart from an affidavit by the appellant disclosing the identity of the
    provider  of  the  death  certificate  and  an  expert  report  on  the
    difficulties the appellant would encounter.

19. Mr Caskie understood the position the proceedings had reached which had
    been left at the point the judge had failed to  consider  the  evidence
    relating  to  the  timing  and  nature  of  his  brother's  role.    He
    nevertheless considered that as drafted ground 2 was sufficient to deal
    with the point although on reflection indicated he wished to amend  the
    grounds and gave an indication of the basis on which he  wished  to  do
    so.  Before proceeding further I read out the  judge's  record  of  the
    questions and answers in  cross-examination.   After  being  questioned
    about the certificate it was put to the appellant that nobody knew  who
    had done this and he responded:

         "The day brother killed for which I am getting phone calls, unknown
         numbers.  One was my brother-in-law who said you will end  up  like
         this.  There is no doubt in it how can  I  prove  this  [illegible]
         made me switch off phone."

20. The Presenting Officer then said "you used your mobile"  to  which  the
    appellant responded "yes".  It was then put to the  appellant  that  he
    "could have shown call when this happened" to which  he  replied,  "How
    could I remember".

21. The questioning then switched to the appellant's family  circumstances.



22. In response to my questions Mr Caskie explained that  the  evidence  of
    the appellant's brother's  assistance  in  intervening  in  the  family
    dispute first emerged in cross-examination and it had not  appeared  in
    the witness statement.  He proposed an amendment to the  second  ground
    as :

         "Where there is no record by the Home Office Presenting Officer and
         representative or the judge  as  to  the  nature  of  the  evidence
         provided  regarding  the  appellant's  brother  assisting  him   as
         demonstrated in the second sentence of this ground of appeal".

23. Mr Clarke objected on the basis that the appellant had the  opportunity
    of amending the grounds before the hearing.   By  way  of  response  Mr
    Caskie explained that new information had been obtained in  the  course
    of the hearing, being the  absence  of  any  record  of  the  exchange,
    including the record by the judge.

24. I refused the application on the basis that if the parties were  unable
    to say or agree what was before the judge, I  failed  to  see  how  the
    appellant was able to demonstrate that the judge had erred.

25. I thereafter heard from further  submissions  from  Mr  Caskie  on  the
    second ground, essentially in terms that  the  judge  was  required  to
    explain his reasons for reaching the conclusion in  his  decision.   In
    the absence of relevant evidence it could not be said the decision  was
    in accordance with the law.

26. By way of response Mr Clarke contended  the  judge  had  given  anxious
    scrutiny to all the evidence, and made no error of law.

27. I reached these conclusions  on  ground  2.   The  appellant's  witness
    statement which he adopted at the hearing the  appellant  explained  at
    [14]:

         "In or around the middle of March 2018 my brother Ghulam Qadar  was
         killed.  I was shocked when I  found  out.   Ghulam  was  the  only
         brother in my family that was helping me.  I used to speak with him
         and he helped me as much as possible.  He helped me by  sending  me
         copies of police reports and he was speaking to  my  wife  and  her
         family to try to mediate between us.  He was the only  one  that  I
         could trust in Pakistan and he was careful not to show anyone  that
         he was openly helping me.  I was really shocked when I found out he
         was killed.  He was lying on the side of the road badly beaten.  No
         one helped him and by the time he was  taken  to  hospital  he  was
         dead.  I know that Ghulam was coming back  from  my  wife's  family
         home because he wanted to persuade them to forgive me  and  not  to
         attack me and kill me if I was to return.  My brother-in-law called
         me around about the end of  March  2018.   He  told  me  they  were
         responsible and told me that he knew he was helping me.  My brother-
         in-law told me this is what would happen if I was  to  return.   He
         was trying to frighten me.  It worked."

28. The statement is dated 16 July 2018.   The  appellant  was  interviewed
    about his claim on 19 December 2017.   At  question  17  he  was  asked
    whether he was in contact with any family members in Pakistan to  which
    he responded:

         "I about 2 years  I  have  not  contacted  anyone  since  this  was
         exposed."

29. At question 39 the appellant was asked  when  he  had  last  spoken  to
    someone in Pakistan, to which he responded:

         "I am still talking to my friends but my family I have  not  spoken
         to them in the last 2 years."

30. And at question 40 he was asked when he last spoke to his  in-laws,  to
    which he replied:

         "About 18 to 19 months ago I spoke to my wife but I don't  remember
         the last time I spoke to my in-laws."

31. At question 62 the appellant was asked  the  date  when  he  was  first
    threatened, and he responded:

         "It was very next day when I spoke to my father  and  explained  to
         him the whole thing about me and Nara  living  together,  my  elder
         brother called me and said you know what kind of family  we  belong
         to you have ruined our respect and humiliated us whatever you  said
         to father it is so embarrassing.  He said we  will  deal  with  you
         whenever you will come back to Pakistan he was not listening he was
         shouting and threatening me again and again.  I think  it  was  the
         end of June 2015."

32. The appellant then went on to refer to threats  that  he  had  received
    from his wife and at question 69 he was asked whether he  had  received
    any further threats from Pakistan since then, to which he responded:

         "After that I did not speak to anyone directly however my childhood
         friends I am in contact with they keep telling me  that  everything
         is still the same they don't like you anymore  and  they  are  very
         angry over what you have done.  My friends told me about the Police
         report and application file against me."

33.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  was  asked  about  this
    inconsistency at the hearing nor has the appellant  advanced  the  case
    that the intercession by his brother occurred  only  after  his  asylum
    interview.  Given the  timing  of  the  family's  discovery  and  their
    hostile reaction, I consider the judge was entitled to draw an  adverse
    inference from this aspect and I do not consider he fell into error.

34. It remains a case that the first ground is no longer relied on and I am
    satisfied  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for   questioning   the
    reliability of the death certificate of his brother.

35. Accordingly I am not persuaded the judge erred  on  the  basis  of  the
    challenge on  which  permission  has  been  granted.   This  appeal  is
    dismissed.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 11 October 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson









