
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00739/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2018                         |On 15 October 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                  Km (iraq)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Allison, Counsel instructed by Solomon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing her appeal against the decision to refuse  her  refugee  sur
    place claim which she had brought on the basis that  she  had  a  well-
    founded fear on return to the autonomous Kurdistan region in the  north
    of Iraq, which is administered by  the  Kurdistan  Regional  Government
    ("KRG"), on account of her setting up and maintaining an internet  blog
    on which she periodically post articles promoting the rights of Kurdish
    women.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Iraq who is of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  and
    whose habitual residence is in the city  of  Sulaymaniyah  in  the  KRG
    (also known as the "IKR").  She first entered the United Kingdom in May
    2011 as the dependant of a Tier 4 (General migrant) student.  This  was
    her husband, "AS", who is also an Iraqi national of Kurdish  ethnicity.



 3. Accordingly to her immigration history, she had last returned  to  Iraq
    in December 2015, coming back to the UK on 18 February 2016.

 4. Her claim was that in June 2015 she started a blog called  "Action  for
    Women" which relates to Iraqi women, their struggles and the abuse  and
    mistrust which they experience.  The blog is written in Kurdish.

 5. She said that she came across  a  video  made  by  a  woman  from  East
    Kurdistan who had been raped and threatened by Ardalan  Nuraddin.   She
    posted an article about this on her blog on 16  June  2017.   She  said
    that her article criticised the membership of the  Patriotic  Union  of
    Kurdistan, and also of the Kurdish Democratic Party  (KDP),  for  their
    treatment of women. She said  that  the  article  named  7  members  of
    political parties.

 6. On 19 June 2017, she received a threatening text from Ardalan Nuraddin,
    and on the same day she received a threatening email from Hakim  Kadir,
    one of the prominent  politicians  named  in  the  same  article.   She
    reported the matter to the police on 19 June 2017.  On  30  June  2017,
    she received a further threatening email from Hakim Kadir.

 7. On the basis of the information which she gave in her asylum interview,
    the respondent understood her to fear that on her return to the KRG she
    would be killed by Hakim  Kadir  or  by  Ardalan  Nuraddin  or  by  the
    authorities on their behalf due to her posting a political  article  in
    which they were named.

 8. On 3 January 2018, the respondent gave her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's refugee sur place claim.  The evidence which  she  provided
    comprised untranslated emails and text messages; an  untranslated  copy
    of her blog; and a list of names which she said were contained  in  her
    article of 16 June 2017.

 9. It was accepted that she was a blogger who posted articles on a website
    called "Action for Women" which was said to be  written  by  women  for
    women in the Kurdish language, and whose goal was to help  and  improve
    female  lives  in  the  Kurdish  society  where  gender   and   culture
    intersected.  It was a matter of speculation that the persons who  sent
    the emails or text messages were Hakim Kadir and Dr  Ardalan  Nuraddin.
    Also, a Google search revealed no independent verifiable evidence  that
    either of these men had been highlighted in the  public  domain,  under
    various spellings of their names, in conjunction with the terms  "rape"
    and "accused".  She claimed that  her  father's  boss  had  called  her
    father and told him that they were aware of what she had done, and that
    his boss had made threats against  her.   This  was  considered  to  be
    hearsay evidence.

10. It was also noted that she claimed that her husband, who was a champion
    chess player in Iraq, had  been  targeted  in  a  terrorist  attack  in
    Baghdad in  December  2016.   This  claim  was  inconsistent  with  the
    objective information of the World Chess Federation rankings for  Iraqi
    chess players.   In  the  light  of  the  above,  her  credibility  was
    considered to have been damaged  and  this  aspect  of  her  claim  was
    rejected.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Henderson  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 13 February 2018.  Both parties were legally represented.  The
    appellant was represented by Ms Muzira of Solomon Solicitors. The Judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant, her  husband  and  from  the
    appellant's sister-in-law, "SAS".

12. In her subsequent decision, the Judge noted that  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing the appellant had provided a  supplementary  bundle  containing
    translations of the threatening texts and emails, and  translations  of
    her blogs.

13. Under the heading  of  "Evidence  and  Findings  of  Fact",  the  Judge
    referred in detail to the evidence  given  by  the  appellant  and  her
    husband, and also made findings and observations on their  evidence  as
    she went along.

14. At paragraph [23], she held as follows: "The appellant confirmed in her
    oral evidence that she had received no further threats  since  30  June
    2017 (after she deleted her blog of 16 June 2017) and that she had  not
    been physically  harmed  in  any  way.   I  accept  the  appellant  was
    concerned at the time and appropriately reported the  incident  to  the
    police, but she has not been the subject  of  any  actual  violence  or
    further intimidation.  It appears that,  having  achieved  the  desired
    result of the deletion of the offending blog, the threats have ceased."

15. At paragraph [24], the Judge addressed the evidence that the  appellant
    had given about threats made to her father in July 2017.  The appellant
    said that he had been called to a meeting by  his  boss  at  the  Water
    Board where he worked, and  was  told  the  appellant  had  written  an
    article about "us":  and that "we" knew how to silence her.  But he had
    not been physically harmed and he still worked at the Water Board.  The
    Judge did not make any further comment at this stage on this aspect  of
    the appellant's evidence.

16. At paragraph [25], she addressed the appellant's evidence about contact
    with her family in Sulaymaniyah.  The appellant said that she feared to
    contact them direct, as she did not wish to endanger them.   The  Judge
    did not find her  evidence  on  this  issue  to  be  "plausible".   The
    appellant's sister-in-law, SAS, also gave oral evidence, and said  that
    she was aware of the threats in July  2017,  but  not  of  any  further
    incidents.  On  the  basis  of  SAS's  evidence,  she  found  that  the
    appellant's family in IKR were not in any apparent danger.

17. The Judge went on to address the evidence of the  appellant's  husband.
    She found, at paragraph [26], that he  had  given  evidence  about  the
    circumstances in which he had gone to Baghdad in  December  2015  which
    contradicted the evidence given by the appellant  on  the  same  issue.
    She went on to find that it was plausible that  AS  had  been  shot  at
    while in Baghdad, but she was not persuaded to the  lower  standard  of
    proof that he was attacked because he was Kurdish.

18. At paragraph [28], she  recorded  the  appellant  and  her  husband  as
    confirming that, but for the threats relating to  the  blog,  they  and
    their family would be safe in IKR.

19. In her conclusions, the Judge found the appellant and AS to be credible
    witnesses on most matters.  However, while she  accepted  much  of  the
    evidence they gave, she did not find that the totality of the  evidence
    demonstrated, even to the lower standard of proof, a  serious  or  real
    risk that on return to IKR the appellant would be persecuted because of
    her political opinion, "namely the content of her blogs".

20. She found that the blog of 16 June 2017 was  deleted  and  the  threats
    ceased after 30 June 2017, most  likely  because  the  authors  of  the
    emails and texts had achieved the desired result.   She  also  accepted
    the appellant's evidence about her father's meeting with  his  boss  in
    July 2017.  This was "a warning" so he could influence his daughter  to
    remove the blog.  While this was still  unacceptable  and  intimidating
    behaviour, it did not amount to  persecution  and  there  would  be  no
    adverse consequences to the appellant's family in IKR.

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

21. The appellant's solicitors settled an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Ground 1 was that the Judge had  made  a
    mistake as to an existing fact.  The Judge had mistakenly held that the
    appellant's blog post of 16 June 2017  had  been  permanently  deleted.
    There was, however, subsequent evidence following the email of 30  June
    2107 indicating that the post was still  in  the  public  domain,  "the
    appellant stating she had merely temporarily de-activated the  relevant
    blog post soon after receiving the threats but thereafter  re-activated
    it on her blog."

22. Ground 2 was that the Judge failed to take into  account  relevant  key
    background evidence in assessing risk on return.  At  paragraph  43  of
    her witness statement for the appeal, the appellant had said  that  she
    would  always  write  and  always  express  herself  in   relation   to
    inequalities, criticisms  of  politicians,  and  raising  awareness  in
    relation to women's rights.  These subjects  were  considered  'no  go'
    areas in Iraq, and she would be at risk wherever she went in Iraq.  The
    Judge had erred in not considering whether - apart from  the  offending
    blog post of 16 June 2017 - the appellant would be at risk on return as
    the result of her other writings on her blog  in  relation  to  women's
    rights and her public criticisms  of  prominent  political  figures  in
    Kurdistan.







The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

23. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,  but  was
    granted on a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal.   On  6  August
    2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Storey granted permission to appeal  for  the
    following reasons: "It is arguable that the Judge erred in finding that
    the appellant had permanently deleted her blog in June 2017 whereas the
    relevant blog was still in the public domain.   Given  that  the  Judge
    found the appellant and AS to  be  credible  witnesses,  this  arguable
    mistake of fact may have had a bearing on the outcome of the appeal."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

24. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Allison took me  through  the  evidence  given  in  the  asylum
    interview and in the witness statement for the appeal by the  appellant
    on the topic of  how  she  had  reacted  to  the  threatening  messages
    apparently triggered by her blog post of 16 June 2017.  She at no point
    said that she had temporarily deleted the blog.  She did say,  however,
    that she had deleted her telephone number. I also reviewed the  Judge's
    manuscript record of proceedings, but I was unable  to  ascertain  from
    them what, if anything, the appellant had said on  this  topic  in  her
    oral evidence.

25. Mr Walker conceded that an error of law was made out on the ground that
    the Judge had been mistaken about the evidence  and/or  on  the  ground
    that she had not given adequate consideration to the issue of  risk  on
    return, having regard to HJ (Iran). In the light of this concession,  I
    held that an error of law was  made  out,  but  after  hearing  further
    submissions from both representatives,  I  reserved  on  the  issue  of
    whether the appeal should be retained by the Upper Tribunal or remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal, and I also reserved my decision on  whether
    the Judge's positive credibility findings should be preserved.

Discussion

26. With regard to Ground 1 (alleged mistake of fact), I consider that  the
    evidence is unsatisfactory and I find that it does not  establish  that
    the Judge either misunderstood  or  misrepresented  the  oral  evidence
    given by the appellant at the hearing.

27. Firstly, the solicitor who appeared for the appellant  at  the  hearing
    before Judge Henderson has not  produced  her  note  of  the  evidence.
    Secondly,  as  I  have  already  indicated,  the  Judge's   record   of
    proceedings does not cast light on the issue  one  way  or  the  other.
    Insofar as I could decipher the Judge's manuscript record, I could find
    no reference to the blog being de-activated.   But,  equally,  I  could
    find no reference to the blog being temporarily de-activated  and  then
    re-activated a month later.

28. Thirdly, on a  careful  reading  of  the  permission  application,  the
    mistake of fact allegation seems to be largely, if  not  wholly,  based
    upon ex post facto rationalisation.  For example, as  Mr  Allison  also
    highlighted in his oral submissions, the untranslated  series  of  blog
    posts in the Home Office bundle, running from D1 to D29, all contain in
    the top right hand corner the date of  20/11/2017.   These  blog  posts
    include the blog post of 16 June 2017, and so, the argument runs: "This
    blog post must have been on the website on 20 November 2017 in order to
    be downloaded from the website on that date."

29. There is one exception to this, which is the blog post at D1-D3,  which
    was apparently downloaded on 20 June 2017.  This  has  the  appellant's
    telephone number on it,  whereas  all  the  subsequent  blogs  from  D4
    onwards only have her email address.

30. While I accept that the documentary evidence is supportive of the  case
    of re-activation of the offending blog, the fact remains that it is not
    clearly demonstrated that the Judge was wrong to  understand  from  the
    appellant's oral evidence that the blog had been permanently deleted.

31. But even if there was a mistake of fact by  the  judge  for  which  the
    appellant  or  the  legal  representative  at  the  hearing   was   not
    responsible, it is necessary to consider whether the mistake of fact is
    material.

32. It is strongly arguable that the risk on return is objectively reduced,
    rather than increased, by the offending post being  re-activated  after
    only one month. For despite it being in  the  public  domain  all  this
    time, on the appellant's case there have been no further threats to her
    by email or any further threats made to her father in Sulaymaniyah.

33. For the above reasons, I am not persuaded that an error of law is  made
    out under Ground 1.  However, an error of law is made out under  Ground
    2.  This is because the Judge  failed  to  engage  with  the  objective
    evidence in the appellant's main  bundle  to  the  effect  that,  while
    generally a person will not be at risk of serious harm  or  persecution
    on the basis of political activity within the Kurdistan region of Iraq,
    decision-makers must consider that those most likely at  risk  of  such
    treatment include journalists, media workers and human rights defenders
    -  particularly  those  who  write  about  certain  subjects  including
    corruption, the lack of human rights in the region, women's rights, and
    anything that could be construed as endangering  the  security  of  the
    region or public morality.

34. The Judge failed to ask herself  the  question  whether  the  appellant
    would be able to maintain her blog  on  return  to  her  home  country,
    and/or to post further  blogs,  without  engendering  a  real  risk  of
    persecution.  Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must
    be set aside and remade.

Future Disposal

35. I have given careful consideration as to whether  this  is  a  suitable
    case for retention by the Upper Tribunal, and I answer the question  in
    the negative.  It was  never  in  dispute  that  the  appellant  was  a
    blogger.  The  core  issue  was,  and  remains,  whether  her  blogging
    activity is such to engender a real risk of persecution  on  return  to
    the KRG at the hands of state or non-state  actors.   I  consider  that
    this issue partially turns on background evidence, but it also requires
    a careful evaluation of the nature and content of the appellant's  blog
    posts thus far, including whether they contain information  already  in
    the public domain or whether they make what  can  be  characterised  as
    "new" allegations against prominent politicians in the KRG, the  extent
    of publication (i.e. the number of hits on the  blog),  the  degree  of
    accessibility (i.e. how easily the blog is found by entering key  words
    into a search engine), and  on  the  appellant's  general  credibility.
    While I accept that the Judge found the appellant mostly  credible,  he
    did not find her credible on all matters.

36. For the above reasons, I consider that  the  extensive  judicial  fact-
    finding that will be required to remake the decision means that the re-
    making is an exercise that would be more  appropriately  undertaken  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  As there is no cross-appeal by the respondent
    in respect of the positive credibility findings made by the  Judge,  it
    will be open to the First-tier Tribunal to take  these  findings  as  a
    starting point, following Devaseelan. But equally it will  be  open  to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  to  take  the  Judge's  negative  credibility
    findings as a starting point, following Devaseelan.  Hence,  procedural
    fairness requires that none of the Judge's findings of fact  should  be
    formally preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law such  that
the decision must be set aside and remade.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor  House  for  a
fresh hearing (Judge Nicholson incompatible) with none of  the  findings  of
fact made by the previous Tribunal being preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 12  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 October 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

