
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00980/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2018                          |On 6 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               AA (SRI lANKA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Loshana & Co Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Herbert sitting at Taylor House on  26  July
    2017) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to recognise him as a political refugee.





The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. Permission to appeal was an initially refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Page on 30 November 2017 for the following reasons:

         "The Judge has reached conclusions that are properly  open  to  the
         Judge  to  reach  on  the  evidence  at  paragraphs   22-24   after
         considering all of  the  evidence.   The  Judge  did  not  find  it
         credible that the appellant was at risk in Sri Lanka as the  result
         of canvassing and campaigning on behalf of  his  father,  when  his
         father was an electoral candidate in the district council  in  2013
         but had retired peacefully without any  threats  or  violence  ever
         being directed at him.  The Judge concluded that if the appellant's
         father was not at risk, then the appellant would not  be  at  risk.
         Upon that finding the asylum could only be dismissed.  The  grounds
         of appeal ran to nearly 4 pages of disagreement with what the Judge
         concluded dressed up as legal argument  to  assert  that  different
         conclusions should have been reached.  It was not an error  of  law
         to find the appellant's claim lacking in credibility."

 3. Following a renewed application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge  King  gave  his  reasons  for  granting
    permission to appeal on 21 December 2017:

         "The determination is very short and arguably has  conflated  [the]
         issues.

         Was the appellant the subject of arrest and torture in 2013 and  if
         so is he at risk now?

         The point made as to the father in the determination seems at first
         sight to be a good one but does not refer  to  a  letter  from  the
         father of 26 July 2017 which says to the  contrary.   The  father's
         evidence itself may need to be evaluated.  The  certification  from
         the District Secretariat [potentially  confirms]  what  he  had  to
         say."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 4. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Bandegani, who did not appear below, developed three arguments.
     The first and principal one was that, on the risk on return, the Judge
    had not considered the ramifications of the appellant being accepted to
    be a low level supporter of  the  TGTE  since  being  in  the  UK.   At
    paragraph 30  of  the  refusal  decision,  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant was a low level supporter of the TGTE.  This is  one  of  the
    groups which is still proscribed by the Sri Lankan Government.

 5. Paragraph 6.2.2 of the Home Office's  Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note on Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism, dated June 2017,  cited  a  letter
    from the British High Commission in Colombo which said that  membership
    of, or affiliation to, the de-proscribed groups was no longer  regarded
    by the Government of Sri Lanka as terrorism or terrorist activity.  The
    members of those groups, whether active or lay, had no reason  to  fear
    persecution as a consequence of their affiliation to the  de-proscribed
    groups from the Government of Sri Lanka.

 6. Mr Bandegani submitted that by implication the appellant's  affiliation
    to the TGTE, a  proscribed  Tamil  group,  would  be  regarded  by  the
    Government of Sri Lanka as terrorism or terrorist  activity,  and  this
    would have material bearing on the  risk  faced  by  the  appellant  on
    return.  However, the  Judge  had  not  taken  this  risk  factor  into
    account.

 7. Secondly, on the issue of past persecution, the  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider  that  the  scarring  report  of  Dr  Lingam  was   clinically
    corroborative of the appellant's scarring having  been  caused  in  the
    circumstances described by him.

 8. Thirdly, Mr Bandegani submitted that the Judge  had  misunderstood  the
    appellant's case.  On analysis there was no contradiction  between  the
    appellant's account of his own experiences in Sri Lanka and his account
    of what had happened to his father.   The  distinguishing  feature  was
    that the false case brought against the appellant had taken on  a  life
    of its own.

 9. After hearing Mr Bandegani's submissions, Mr Walker conceded  that  the
    decision was legally flawed and unsafe, and he agreed with Mr Bandegani
    that it should be set aside in its entirety and remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Discussion

10. The stance taken by Mr Walker is not determinative of the  question  of
    whether an error of law is made out.   However,  I  consider  that  the
    concession was one that was reasonably open to him.

11. I do not consider that there is any merit in the  argument  that  Judge
    Herbert fundamentally misunderstood the appellant's case.   Judge  King
    agreed that Judge Herbert's main reason for rejecting  the  core  claim
    was a good one, at least at first sight.

12. However, I accept that the other two arguments advanced by Mr Bandegani
    have merit, and I consider that they are sufficient to  establish  that
    the decision is flawed due to inadequate reasoning.

13. Judge Herbert characterised the medical evidence as being equivocal. He
    held that the three scars observed by Dr Lingam were only  "consistent"
    with his claimed history of being tortured and  then  hospitalised  for
    three days. However, Mr Walker accepted that the clinical finding of Dr
    Lingam was that the scars were "highly consistent" with  the  mechanism
    of injury described by the appellant.  Accordingly, the scarring report
    had greater independent probative value than  was  assigned  to  it  by
    Judge Herbert.

14. At paragraph [24], the Judge drew an adverse credibility inference from
    the fact that there were a number  of  internal  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's account, including the fact that he initially said  he  was
    detained for seven days, and he then said that he had been detained for
    14 days.  However, Dr Dhumad had provided a psychiatric report in which
    he opined that the appellant was suffering from PTSD, and that he might
    as a result come across as vague and inconsistent in his recall of some
    of the events, which is a common presentation in those  suffering  from
    PTSD.  The Judge made no reference  to  Dr  Dhumad's  evidence  in  his
    findings of fact, and so he does not appear to have taken into  account
    that the discrepancies in  the  account  may  be  attributable  to  the
    appellant's PTSD.

15. On the issue of risk on return, the Judge did not refer at any point to
    the concession of fact made in the refusal letter  that  the  appellant
    had shown himself to be a low-level supporter of the TGTE.  The failure
    by the Judge to address the ramifications of this concession as part of
    his assessment of risk amounts to an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision must be set aside and re-made.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor  House  for  a
fresh hearing, with none of the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  previous
Tribunal being preserved.

My time estimate for the fresh hearing is three hours.

A Tamil Interpreter will be required.


Signed                              Date 27 February 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

















