
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00284/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                     H N
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J. Martin, Counsel, instructed by Direct Access
For the respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was born on 23 June 1987.
         The appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom in 2010,  according
         to an answer he gave in interview, obtaining entry  unlawfully  and
         thereafter remaining without any substantive right  to  do  so.  He
         worked illegally. He came to the attention of the authorities  when
         he was arrested for  the  offence  of  which  he  was  subsequently
         convicted on 8 August 2014. He had been found in a cannabis factory
         and was convicted  for  taking  part  in  its  production.  He  was
         sentenced to 10 months imprisonment. The respondent made a decision
         to deport the appellant on  the  basis  that  his  deportation  was
         conducive to the public good in accordance with s. 3(5)(a) and s. 5
         (1) of the Immigration Act 1971 on the basis of his conviction.

      2. The appellant sought to avoid the effect of the  deportation  order
         by claiming asylum and by asserting that his removal would  violate
         the private and family life that he had acquired since his  arrival
         in 2010 or perhaps 2009. His asylum claim was lawfully rejected  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Jackson in a determination promulgated on
         17 September 2015. No challenge is made to  the  dismissal  of  the
         asylum appeal.

      3. The challenge to the Judge's determination is focussed  exclusively
         in her treatment of the Article 8 claim.   It  should  be  recalled
         that the Judge was required to  consider  this  claim  through  the
         prism of the Immigration Rules and, in particular, paragraphs  398,
         399 and 399A.  In doing so, the Secretary of State  had  determined
         that the appellant's deportation was conducive to the public  good,
         the public interest in deportation only being outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

      4. In the respondent's decision, the Secretary of State concluded that
         the appellant's  deportation  was  conducive  to  the  public  good
         because the appellant was involved in the production of  prohibited
         drugs, an offence which had caused  serious  harm  ('the  conducive
         ground').  No challenge is made to the conducive  ground  on  which
         the  Secretary  of   State   relied.    Hence,   the   respondent's
         consideration was restricted to the exceptions found in  paras  399
         and 399A, none of which applied.  Once again,  there  is  no  issue
         that the appellant was not able to meet the exceptions in either of
         those paragraphs.  Hence the appellant  as  a  matter  of  law  was
         forced  to  fall  back  on  arguing  his  case  upon  whether  very
         compelling circumstances had been established.  It is,  of  course,
         apparent that the current legislative framework sets  a  very  high
         threshold  when  an  appellant  seeks  to  avoid   deportation   in
         circumstances such as this.

      5. This is made clear by the Immigration Rules which provide

             'Deportation and Article 8


             398. Where a person claims that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

             ...

                  (c)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                  conducive to the public good and in  the  public  interest
                  because, in the view of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
                  offending has caused serious harm ...,  the  Secretary  of
                  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider  whether
                  paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does  not,  the
                  public interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by
                  other   factors   where   there   are   very    compelling
                  circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs
                  399 and 399A.

             399. This paragraph applies where paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
             applies if -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                      (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                      (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for
                      at least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date
                      of the immigration decision; and in either case

                           (a)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                           live in the country to which the person is to  be
                           deported; and

                           (b)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                           remain in the UK without the person who is to  be
                           deported;...'

      6. Note that there are now two limbs to the 'unduly harsh' test,  both
         of which have to be satisfied: unduly harsh for the child  to  live
         with the appellant in a different country and unduly harsh for  the
         child to remain in the UK without the appellant.  Neither of  these
         limbs applies unless the appellant first establishes the  child  is
         British or has spent the relevant seven-year period in the UK.   It
         follows that if a child is under 7 neither limb of the unduly harsh
         test has any application.

      7. Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act,  2002
         as inserted by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014 as Part  V  to  the
         Act ('Part V') provides a mandatory duty  placed  on  a  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge to have regard to a number of criteria:

             'Article  8  additional  considerations  in  cases   involving
             foreign criminals.

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

             [By s.117D the appellant fell  to  be  treated  as  a  foreign
             criminal because of the Secretary of State's reliance upon the
             conducive ground.

             Further, a "qualifying child" means a person who is under  the
             age of 18 and who-

                  (a)  is a British citizen, or

                  (b)  has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of seven years or more ...]'

      8. The appellant formed a relationship with a girlfriend, MN, in 2012.
          MN has settled status in the United Kingdom.  She has a  daughter,
         ATN, born 10 May 2009 and is now aged six.  Both  are  citizens  of
         Vietnam. At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  MN
         was pregnant with the appellant's child.  She is due to give  birth
         a few days hence.  The Secretary of State did not accept  that  the
         appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  ATN  but
         the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  rejected  that  and  substituted  a
         finding of fact that there was such a  relationship.   Importantly,
         however, the Secretary of State said on  page  13  of  the  refusal
         letter [O.14]:

             'It is accepted that it would be unduly harsh for ATN to  live
             in Vietnam. We have taken this view as ATN was born and raised
             in the UK; her mother, a recognised refugee  in  the  UK,  has
             evidently been her primary carer and as she is now at  an  age
             where she is likely to be attending school. If ATN was to live
             in Vietnam, her mother would not be able to follow  suit,  and
             as she would  be  unaware  of  the  linguistic,  cultural  and
             societal norms of Vietnam, her integration to life in  Vietnam
             would most likely be challenging. The foreseeable  deprivation
             of her primary carer and sole responsible parent  as  well  as
             the social and cultural norms to which she is  accustomed  and
             is visibly integrated, has been deemed by us unduly harsh.'

      9. At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer, Mr Little,  adopted  a  different  approach  as
         recorded in paragraph 56  of  the  determination.  Mr  Little  then
         submitted that MN's previous asylum claim had been advanced on  the
         basis that she would be returning to Vietnam as a single mother and
         as a minor. Neither of those factors applied by  the  date  of  the
         hearing. MN remains  a  Vietnamese  citizen,  her  daughter  speaks
         Vietnamese and the family would be returning together as  a  single
         unit if they chose to do so. Inevitably, it would be  in  the  best
         interests of ATN to remain with her mother. Whilst in  the  refusal
         letter, the decision that it would be unduly harsh to  require  ATN
         to leave the United Kingdom was predicated on her  being  separated
         from her  mother,  which  would  be  unquestionably  unduly  harsh,
         different considerations would operate if return was predicated  on
         the nuclear family remaining intact.

     10. It is unclear what Mr Martin, who appeared  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge as he did before me, made of this. As  a  matter  of
         law, a concession made by an official of the Secretary of State can
         be withdrawn but it is axiomatic that such a withdrawal must permit
         the appellant a proper  opportunity  of  responding  to  the  fresh
         argument. The  determination  does  not  make  clear  whether  this
         ambiguity was resolved. Mr Martin told me that he is likely to have
         referred the Judge to the contents of the refusal letter and, as an
         experienced practitioner, I consider this very likely.   The  Judge
         knew the earlier stance adopted by the Secretary of  State  because
         she made specific reference to the passage  I  have  cited  in  the
         refusal letter in paragraph 30 of her determination.  Had  it  been
         argued that the Secretary of State was not, as  a  matter  of  law,
         permitted to remodel her approach to  whether  removal  to  Vietnam
         would be unduly harsh for ATN, I would have expected this  to  have
         been made the  subject  of  specific  argument  and  a  preliminary
         ruling.  I would have thought that it was a fresh argument  capable
         of being dealt with by both sides  without  an  adjournment.    The
         grounds of appeal do not claim that the Judge was not permitted  to
         go behind the concession as a matter of law.  Rather,  they  assert
         there was no reason to do so but that is factually incorrect as the
         reasons for doing so were  clearly  set  out  in  the  respondent's
         submissions  to  that  effect  set  out  in  paragraph  56  of  the
         determination which I have summarised in paragraph 10 above.

     11. What, however, is clear from paragraph 81 of the  determination  is
         that Mr Martin accepted the appellant did not fall  within  any  of
         the exceptions in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration  Rules
         and therefore there had to be very  compelling  circumstances  over
         and above those described in paragraphs 399 an 399A to outweigh the
         public interest in favour of deportation.  That concession  has  to
         be correct.  First, ATN is not a British citizen.  She is now  aged
         six.  Hence, she is not a qualifying child for the purposes of  the
         Immigration Rules or Part V.   As  the  'unduly  harsh'  test  only
         applies to children who meet  the  qualifying  conditions,  whether
         removal would be unduly harsh was not the ultimate  issue.   Whilst
         the  consequences  of  removal  will  always   be   material   when
         considering  the  application  of  the  combined  effect   of   the
         Immigration  Rules/Part  V,   the   test   was   'very   compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and
         399A' (that is, over  and  above  the  fact  that  there  would  be
         consequences found to be unduly harsh).   Absent  a  finding  as  a
         starting-point that the consequences would  be  unduly  harsh,  the
         very compelling circumstances test finds no traction  because  that
         test kicks in at a point over and above the  criteria  set  out  in
         paragraphs 399 an 399A (which includes the 'unduly harsh' criterion
         but only in the case of a child that qualifies).

     12. In granting permission to appeal against First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Jackson's  determination,  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Nicholson
         treated the concession made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
         refusal letter that it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to  be
         removed to Vietnam as preventing  the  Judge  from  reopening  that
         issue. That was not a ground advanced in  the  grounds  of  appeal.
         For the reasons that I have already given, it is permissible for  a
         concession  to  be  withdrawn  provided  that,  in  doing  so,  the
         appellant is provided a sufficient opportunity  to  deal  with  the
         respondent's remodelled case. I am not satisfied that Judge Jackson
         acted unfairly in dealing with the  respondent's  submissions  that
         the decision maker in the refusal letter had previously found  that
         it was unduly harsh principally because he treated MN as a  refugee
         who could not be returned  but  circumstances  had  since  changed;
         since her recognition as a refugee was made on the basis  that  she
         was a single mother and a  minor,  her  refugee  status  no  longer
         prevented her returning as part of the family unit.  That, however,
         was not the central issue.

     13.  Having  decided  the  respondent  could  not  resile   from   that
         concession, Judge Nicholson granted permission as  a  result  of  a
         single sentence in paragraph 88 of the determination.   I  set  out
         the entire contents of paragraph 88, underlining the material part:



             "In circumstances where it is clearly in the best interest  of
             the appellant's partner's daughter to remain with  her  mother
             and  only  some  factors  pointing  to   her   maintaining   a
             relationship with the appellant, I do not find that the effect
             of the appellant's deportation on the child  would  be  unduly
             harsh if she and her mother chose  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  This is particularly so when I do not consider  that
             it would be unreasonable, if they wish to maintain family life
             as it is now,  for  them  to  relocate  to  Vietnam  with  the
             appellant."

     14. Pausing there, it was undoubtedly open to  the  Judge  to  conclude
         that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant to  be  removed
         notwithstanding the effect this would have on the relationship with
         ATN, were she to remain here with her mother. The  Judge  supported
         this reasoning in paragraph 91 of the determination:

             "They are settled  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  appellant's
             partner is working and her daughter is in school  having  been
             born in the  United  Kingdom.  The  relationship  between  the
             appellant and his partner/daughter was formed at a  time  when
             his immigration status was not only precarious but he  was  in
             the United Kingdom illegally - a fact  which  the  appellant's
             partner  confirmed  that   she   knew   shortly   into   their
             relationship."

     15. The Judge might also have added that the appellant  never  advanced
         his case on the basis that he had any substantive right  to  remain
         in the United Kingdom either as a spouse or as a  fianc�  or  as  a
         partner. Not only  was  he  here  illegally,  but  he  was  working
         illegally. Not only was he working illegally but, in doing  so,  he
         committed a criminal offence. Not only was it a  criminal  offence,
         but it was a criminal offence that respondent  lawfully  determined
         caused   serious   harm.   There   were,   therefore,    compelling
         circumstances why the appellant, as a person with no right to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom should be  removed  notwithstanding
         the relationship he had developed over a relatively short period of
         time with MN and her daughter; a relationship formed at a time when
         both he and MN knew his status was 'precarious', a synonym for non-
         existent.

     16. What, therefore, was the basis upon which permission to appeal  was
         granted? It is based on the concluding words of paragraph 88:  This
         is particularly so  when  I  do  not  consider  that  it  would  be
         unreasonable, if they wish to maintain family life as  it  is  now,
         for them to relocate to Vietnam with the appellant.  On  its  face,
         this sentence makes no sense. Whether it is unduly  harsh  for  the
         child to remain in the United Kingdom  with  her  mother  when  the
         appellant is removed has nothing whatever  to  do  with  the  quite
         separate consideration  of  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  or,
         indeed, unduly harsh  for  the  family  to  re-locate  to  Vietnam.
         Neither one of  the  separate  considerations  is  strengthened  or
         weakened by the  other.   Neither  has  a  bearing  on  the  other.
         Paragraph 399 (ii) is a two-limbed test applying  an  unduly  harsh
         test in two distinct sets of circumstances: paragraph 399 (ii)  (a)
         and (b), set out  in  paragraph  5  above.   However,  in  granting
         permission Judge Nicholson treated it as arguable that  by  relying
         on  what  he  considered  the  impermissible  departure  from   the
         concession in the refusal letter, the Judge may  have  tainted  his
         decision on whether it was unduly harsh for the child to remain  in
         the United Kingdom without his mother.

             "It  is  arguable  in  the  circumstances  that  the   Judge's
             conclusion that it would be reasonable for the child  and  her
             mother to  relocate  to  Vietnam  with  the  appellant  was  a
             constituent part of the finding that it would  not  be  unduly
             harsh for them to remain in the United Kingdom without him."

     17. Having heard argument, I am satisfied that this approach is  wrong.
         First, the Judge reached a sustainable conclusion that it would not
         be unduly harsh for MN and ATN to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
         without the appellant.  Second, the words in paragraph 88 'This  is
         particularly  so  when  I  do  not  consider  that  it   would   be
         unreasonable, if they wish to maintain family life as it is now  on
         the them to relocate to Vietnam with the appellant' does not impact
         upon that finding. Third, neither paragraphs 399  or  399A  applied
         as, in the context of ATN, she was not a qualifying child.  Fourth,
         the test was not whether it was unduly  harsh  but  the  much  more
         stringent test of very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
         those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A. Finally, (although this
         is not crucial to the determination), the grant of  permission  was
         predicated on a misconception  about  the  binding  nature  of  the
         'concession' made in relation to one  of  the  limbs  of  paragraph
         399(ii), namely that the Secretary of State was  not  permitted  to
         resile from the stance adopted in the refusal  letter.   I  am  not
         satisfied that it was unfair to depart from the approach adopted by
         the respondent in the refusal letter.  If it was  not  unfair,  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  reasons  for  departing   from   the
         respondent's original approach are sound.

     18. It is in paragraph 92 of the determination that the  Judge  finally
         turned to the issue that was crucial to the  determination  of  the
         appeal  when  she  found  that  there  were  no   very   compelling
         circumstances outweighing the public interest in deportation. As  a
         simple matter of fact, no circumstances - far less very  compelling
         circumstances - were  advanced  over  and  above  consideration  of
         whether it would be unduly harsh. Even if the Judge had found  that
         it would be unduly harsh (which she had, of course,  rejected)  the
         case was still bound to fail, absent very compelling  circumstances
         identified in the  evidence  and  established  to  the  appropriate
         standard.

     19. For the sake  of  completeness,  I  shall  deal  briefly  with  the
         consequences of MN's pregnancy.  Once the child is born, he or  she
         will become  a  British  citizen  and  also  an  EU  citizen.   The
         consequences of this are for  the  future  and  were  not  for  the
         determination of the First-tier Tribunal  or  the  Upper  Tribunal.
         Section 55 does not apply to an unborn child.  It is  premature  to
         speak of there being any Article 8 rights engaged.  That said,  the
         fact that a male appellant in the full knowledge  that  he  has  no
         status in the United Kingdom fathers a child who becomes  a  United
         Kingdom citizen would not, without more, prevent his removal.   The
         child's birth was a choice made on the part of the parents and does
         not bind the hand of the Secretary of State. If there is  to  be  a
         later claim made by the appellant that the  birth  of  his  British
         child alters the Article 8 assessment, this can only be made in the
         context of a fresh claim.  It is for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         consider  and  decide  upon  the  effect  this  may  have  on   the
         appellant's  immigration   status.    There   are   a   number   of
         discretionary elements that may come into play.   It is not for the
         Tribunal at first instance. It can have no bearing on an  error  of
         law jurisdiction.

DECISION

         The Judge made no  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  the  original
         determination of the appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                              6 January 2016
