
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00100/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Working Remotely by Skype for        |                                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 25 March 2021                     |On 12 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     DAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Quadi instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who comes from Mogadishu.  He was
    born in 1987.  He claims to have left Somalia  on  9  May  2005  before
    travelling to, and living or spending time in, Italy,  Holland,  France
    and Germany.  On 12  September  2017,  the  appellant  claims  that  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely by lorry.

 3. The appellant claimed asylum on 15 September 2017.  The  basis  of  his
    claim was that he feared Al-Shabab who, in particular, had enlisted him
    and trained him before he escaped from a training camp in 2005.

 4. On 18 December 2019, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.



The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 23 March 2020, Judge G Solly dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    on all grounds.

 6. First, although the judge accepted the appellant's account  of   having
    been trained by, and escaped from Al-Shabab, the judge found  that  the
    appellant would not now be at risk from Al-Shabab in Mogadishu.

 7. Secondly, the judge found that the appellant had not established an Art
    15(c) risk in Mogadishu.

 8. Finally, applying MOJ & Ors (Return to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]
    UKUT 442 (IAC), the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    destitute on return to Mogadishu as he would have financial support  by
    virtue of remittances from family in the UK, Norway  and  the  USA  and
    support from family in Mogadishu (where he had an  uncle  and  brother)
    who could provide him with accommodation at least  in  the  short  term
    before he took advantage of the economic boom in Mogadishu and obtained
    work for himself.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    three grounds.

10. Ground 1 challenged the judge's  adverse  finding,  in  particular  her
    conclusion on the appellant's credibility, and  her  rejection  of  his
    claim that he would be destitute on  return  to  Mogadishu.   Ground  2
    related to his claim based on being a minority clan member.   Ground  3
    challenged the adverse finding in relation to Art 15(c).

11. Initially, the appellant  was  refused  permission  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  However, on 16 July 2020 the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  Blundell)
    granted the appellant permission limited to Ground 1.   Permission  was
    refused on Grounds 2 and 3.

12. Subsequently, in response to directions issued by the UT, the appellant
    made further submissions dated 23 October 2020 seeking an oral hearing.
     The respondent filed a rule 24 notice dated 28 October 2020 seeking to
    uphold the judge's decision.

13. On 2 December 2020, UTJ Mandalia directed a  remote,  oral  hearing  by
    Skype for Business in order to decide the error of law issue.

14. The appeal was listed before me on 25 March 2021 at the  Cardiff  Civil
    Justice  Centre  working  remotely.   Ms  Quadi,  who  represented  the
    appellant, and Mr McVeety, who  represented  the  Secretary  of  State,
    joined the hearing remotely by Skype for Business.

The Submissions

15. Permission to appeal  was  only  granted  on  Ground  1.   That  ground
    challenges the judge's adverse credibility finding, in  particular  the
    judge's  rejection  of  the  appellant's  claim  that  if  returned  to
    Mogadishu he would be forced to live  in  circumstances  falling  below
    "acceptable  humanitarian  standards"  because   he   would   have   no
    accommodation or financial support from his relatives abroad and  would
    be forced to live in an IDP camp.

16. Judge Solly did not accept that would be the case.   She  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence in that regard and also written evidence  provided
    by the appellant's brothers in the UK ("Y") and in Norway ("L")  and  a
    cousin in the USA that they would not  be  able  to  provide  financial
    support despite it having been stated in a  visa  application  in  2012
    made by the appellant that all three had provided  the  appellant  with
    financial support.  The judge also concluded that the appellant  had  a
    brother and uncle in Mogadishu who could provide accommodation at least
    until the appellant obtained work in Mogadishu which, the judge  found,
    the appellant would be capable of doing.  In reaching  those  findings,
    the judge applied paras [407(h)] and [408] of MOJ & Ors which  set  out
    factors which the UT stated were relevant in deciding whether a  person
    on return to Mogadishu would be living in circumstances "falling  below
    that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms".

17. Ground 1, which was developed by Ms  Quadi  in  her  oral  submissions,
    challenges the judge's findings on a number of points.

18. First, in finding that the appellant's brother  in  the  UK  (Y)  would
    continue to provide financial support, the judge failed to have  regard
    to the fact that this had been said in a visa application in  2012  and
    that his brother's circumstances had changed significantly since  then.
    In particular, his brother now had five children,  was  separated  from
    his wife and had lost his job.

19. Secondly, the judge had found, based  upon  the  appellant's  evidence,
    that he was born in 1987 (rather than 1991 which had been his  date  of
    birth given when dealing with other EU Member States' authorities)  and
    it was unclear how this had led the judge to reject the plausibility of
    the appellant's account.

20. Thirdly, the judge, in  finding  that  the  appellant  would  be  in  a
    position to work, had given  no  clear  reason  for  that  finding,  in
    particular she had been wrong to state that the appellant had said that
    he had never worked during his lifetime.

21. Fourthly, the judge had failed to take  into  account  the  appellant's
    evidence why it was that he had not pursued, having initially  made,  a
    claim for asylum in Italy.  The judge had been wrong simply to focus on
    the appellant saying that it was "cold in Italy" when he had  explained
    the difficulties he had faced living temporarily with a Somali  family.



22. Finally, the judge had failed  properly  to  consider  the  documentary
    evidence submitted, in particular the evidence of  Y,  upon  which  the
    judge placed no weight,  wrongly  stating  that  "none  of  the  family
    members who have provided letters before me have  provided  any  formal
    ID".  Ms Quadi pointed out that a photocopy  of  Y's  passport  was  at
    Annex E of the respondent's bundle.

23. In response, Mr McVeety submitted that, with the exception of it  being
    factually inaccurate that no ID had been provided, at least by  Y,  the
    judge's decision was entirely correct.  As regards the remittances from
    abroad, the judge had inconsistent evidence which was set out at  paras
    40-46 of the determination and she was entitled to  conclude  that  the
    evidence established that there had previously  been  remittances  from
    the appellant's family and it was properly open to the  judge  to  find
    that those remittances  could  continue.   In  any  event,  Mr  McVeety
    submitted that, as regards the written evidence  from  the  appellant's
    family, given that none attended the hearing the judge was entitled  to
    treat their evidence with caution.

24. As regards the appellant's claim in Italy, Mr McVeety submitted that it
    was open to the judge to take into account that the appellant  had  not
    pursued his claim  in  Italy  (or  indeed  in  a  number  of  other  EU
    countries) and to apply s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 as that conduct was potentially  damaging  of
    the appellant's credibility.

25. Applying MOJ & Ors, Mr McVeety submitted that the judge was entitled to
    find that the appellant would have short term  financial  support  from
    his family abroad; he would have family in Mogadishu to support him and
    he would be able to take advantage of  the  economic  boom  and  obtain
    work.   As  a  consequence,  this  not  being  a  case  where  internal
    relocation arose, the judge was entitled to find that the appellant had
    not established that his circumstances in return would breach Art 3  of
    the ECHR.

Discussion

26. In reaching her decision, the judge applied paras [407(h)] and [408] of
    MOJ & Ors which are in the following terms:

         "407.


         .....


         h.   If it is accepted that a person facing a return  to  Mogadishu
             after a period of absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all
             of the circumstances. These considerations will  include,  but
             are not limited to:


             (i)        circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;


             (ii)       length of absence from Mogadishu;


             (iii)      family  or  clan  associations  to  call  upon  in
                  Mogadishu;


             (iv)      access to financial resources;


             (v)       prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be
                  employment or self employment;


             (vi)      availability of remittances from abroad;


             (vii)     means of support during the time spent in the United
                  Kingdom;


             (viii)   why his ability to fund the journey to  the  West  no
                  longer enables an appellant to secure financial support on
                  return.


             Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
             Mogadishu to explain why he would not be able  to  access  the
             economic  opportunities  that  have  been  produced   by   the
             "economic boom", especially as there is evidence to the effect
             that returnees are taking jobs at the  expense  of  those  who
             have never been away.


         408. It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms."


27. It was accepted before me that the appellant was not seeking  to  argue
    that internal relocation to Mogadishu was unduly harsh or unreasonable.
     This is because the appellant comes from Mogadishu and therefore  that
    is his home area.  The factors set out in paras [407(h)] and [408]  are
    directed principally to the issue of internal relocation.  They do not,
    in themselves, establish a claim under Art 3 of the ECHR.  The Court of
    Appeal made that plain in SSHD v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442  (Christopher
    Clarke, Sharp and Burnett LJJ).  Burnett LJ (as he then was) said  this
    (at [26]-[28]):

         "26. Paragraph 407(a) to (e) [of MOJ  &Ors]  are  directed  to  the
             issue that arises under article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
             Directive. Sub-paragraphs (f) and (g) establish  the  role  of
             clan membership in today's Mogadishu, and the current  absence
             of risk from belonging to a minority clan.  Sub-paragraph  (h)
             and paragraph 408 are concerned,  in  broad  terms,  with  the
             ability of a returning Somali national to support himself. The
             conclusion at the end of paragraph 408 raises the  possibility
             of a person's circumstances felling below what "is  acceptable
             in  humanitarian  protection  terms."  It  is,  with  respect,
             unclear whether that is a reference back to the definition  of
             "humanitarian protection"  arising  from  article  15  of  the
             Qualification Directive. These factors do not go to inform any
             question under article 15(c). Nor does it chime  with  article
             15(b), which draws  on  the  language  of  article  3  of  the
             Convention, because the fact that a person might  be  returned
             to very deprived living conditions, could not (save in extreme
             cases) lead to a conclusion that removal would violate article
             3.


          1.  The  Luxembourg  Court   considered   article   15   of   the
             Qualification Directive in Elgafaji  v  Staatssecretaris  van
             Justitie [2009] 1 WLR 2100 and in particular whether article
             15(c) provided protection beyond that afforded by article 3 of
             the  Convention.  The  answer  was  yes,  but  in  passing  it
             confirmed that article 15(b) was a restatement of  article  3.
             At para [28] it said:


                  "In that regard, while the  fundamental  right  guaranteed
                  under Article 3 of the ECHR  forms  part  of  the  general
                  principles  of  Community  law,  observance  of  which  is
                  ensured by the  Court,  and  while  the  case-law  of  the
                  European Court of Human Rights is taken into consideration
                  in interpreting the scope of that right in  the  Community
                  legal  order,  it  is,  however,  Article  15(b)  of   the
                  Directive which corresponds, in essence, to Article  3  of
                  the ECHR. By contrast, Article 15(c) of the Directive is a
                  provision, the content of which is different from that  of
                  Article 3 of the ECHR, and  the  interpretation  of  which
                  must, therefore, be carried  out  independently,  although
                  with due  regard  for  fundamental  rights,  as  they  are
                  guaranteed under the ECHR."


          1.  In  view  of  the  reference  in  the  paragraph  immediately
             preceding para 407 to the UNHCR evidence, the factors in paras
             407(h)  and  408  are  likely  to  have  been  introduced   in
             connection  with  internal  flight  or   internal   relocation
             arguments, which was a factor identified in para 1 setting out
             the scope of the issues before UTIAC.  Whilst  they  may  have
             some relevance in a search for whether a  removal  to  Somalia
             would give rise to a violation of article 3 of the Convention,
             they cannot be understood as a surrogate for an examination of
             the circumstances to determine whether  such  a  breach  would
             occur. I am unable to accept that if a  Somali  national  were
             able to bring himself within the rubric of para 408, he  would
             have established that his  removal  to  Somalia  would  breach
             article 3  of  the  Convention.  Such  an  approach  would  be
             inconsistent with the domestic  and  Convention  jurisprudence
             which at para 34  UTIAC  expressly  understood  itself  to  be
             following."


28. At [31], Burnett LJ observed that the issue of Art 3 was  not  resolved
    simply by asking whether the individual would be required to live in an
    IDP camp on return.  Approving what was said by the UT at  para  [422],
    each  case  must  be  decided  after  a  careful  assessment   of   the
    individual's circumstances and having regard to the Strasbourg  Court's
    jurisprudence on return to impoverished conditions:

         "I entirely accept that some of the observations made in the course
         of the discussion of IDP camps may be taken to suggest  that  if  a
         returning Somali national can show that he  is  likely  to  end  up
         having  to  establish  himself  in  an  IDP  camp,  that  would  be
         sufficient to engage the protection of article 3. Yet such a  stark
         proposition of cause and effect  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
         article  3  jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  Court  and  binding
         authority of the domestic courts. In my judgment  the  position  is
         accurately stated in para 422.  That  draws  a  proper  distinction
         between humanitarian protection and article 3 and  recognises  that
         the individual  circumstances  of  the  person  concerned  must  be
         considered. An appeal to article 3 which suggests that  the  person
         concerned would face impoverished conditions of living  on  removal
         to Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated  in Sufi  and
         Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to  the  test  in  the N
         case. Impoverished conditions which  were  the  direct  result  of
         violent activities may be viewed differently as would  cases  where
         the risk suggested is of direct violence itself."


29. Subsequently, in SSHD v MS (Somalia) [2019] EWCA Civ  1345  (Underhill,
    Hamblen and Newey LJJ), the Court of Appeal, applying what was said  in
    Said, concluded that the  UT  had  applied  the  wrong  legal  test  in
    determining whether there was a breach of Art 3 of the ECHR by  relying
    upon paras [407(h)] and [408] of MOJ & Ors (see [76] per Hamblen LJ).

30. In this appeal, it was accepted in the course of submissions  that  the
    judge's decision, applying MOJ & Ors, could only be  explained  on  the
    basis of determining the issue of whether a breach of Art 3 of the ECHR
    was established.  Neither representative referred to the  decisions  in
    Said and MS.  Had the judge found in the appellant's  favour,  applying
    MOJ & Ors, it would be very difficult not to reach the same  conclusion
    as reached by the Court of Appeal in MS that, without reference to  the
    high threshold to establish a breach of Art 3, merely establishing some
    or all of the factors in para [407(h)] would result in  an  application
    of the wrong legal test (see, e.g. SB (refugee revocation;  IDP  camps)
    Somalia [2019] UKUT 358 (IAC) especially at [49], and  [55]-[58]).   Of
    course, if the judge's factual findings are sustainable then,  even  if
    the higher test demanded by Art 3 and recognised in Said had  not  been
    applied, that would not be material as the judge's findings resulted in
    an adverse decision even applying, without the benefit of what was said
    in Said, paras [407(h)] and [408] of MOJ & Ors.

31. In my judgment, the appellant has not established that the judge  erred
    in law in reaching her adverse factual findings.

32. First, as drafted, Ground  1  criticises  the  judge  in  reaching  her
    adverse decision that the appellant's brother in the UK (in  particular
    Y) would be able to provide support  to  him  on  return  to  Mogadishu
    because the judge failed to take into account the  evidence  (including
    from Y himself) that his position  had  changed  since  the  2012  visa
    application.  As I pointed out  to  Ms  Quadi  in  the  course  of  her
    submissions, the judge was well aware of that evidence  which  she  set
    out at para 40 of her determination.  There, the judge said this:

         "40. He has a brother in the UK called [Y] (A E25) who has signed a
             letter this is undated.  He says he has no job and is not in a
             position to help his brother.  It  was  this  brother  he  was
             going to meet if his visa  was  granted  in  2012.   The  visa
             application said he gave  the  appellant  200  a  month.   The
             appellant identifies him then as being a British citizen.   In
             oral evidence the appellant gave  conflicting  evidence  about
             whether this brother had given him money - initially in cross-
             examination he said not, then he said this brother helped  him
             financially when he was travelling in  Europe,  in  Syria  and
             when he came to the UK he allowed him to stay  and  eat  meals
             with him but refused to give him any cash for pocket money and
             told him to go to NASS.  It was put to him that [he] could get
             support from this brother given he had supported him according
             to the appellant's visa application.  The  appellant  said  he
             would not provide support in Somalia  or  now  because  he  is
             separating from his wife and five children who is no longer in
             the country.  He does not fund the brother and uncle currently
             in Somalia".

33. It cannot be said, therefore, that the judge was unaware  of  what  the
    appellant's case was on the difference between 2012 and now as  regards
    any financial support from Y. As drafted, there  is  no  merit  in  the
    contention that the judge failed to take this  evidence  into  account.
    She simply did not accept it (see below).

34. Further, at paras 41-45, the  judge  set  out  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant's other relatives as follows:

         "41. He has a brother in Norway, [L], who has provided a letter  at
             A E19 dated 4 March 2020.  He says he is a  Norwegian  citizen
             with a permanent job, a wife and children.  He says he  cannot
             financially afford to support his brother and he explains that
             Somalia is not safe.  The visa application said  he  gave  the
             appellant 200 a month.  In oral evidence  the  appellant  said
             this brother would not support him and has never supported him
             or anyone in Somalia.

         42.  He produces an undated letter from his brother [S] (A E21) who
             is in Mogadishu where he works as a port  cleaner.   [S]  says
             his salary is not enough for his wife and four  children,  one
             of whom is  disabled.   He  says  he  always  receives  threat
             messages from Al-Shabab and once  survived  an  assassination.
             In oral evidence the appellant said  this  brother  wanted  to
             leave for Kenya and for the appellant to support him.

         43.  He has an uncle in Mogadishu and told me  that  he  was  being
             cared for by another family and was elderly.  They helped  the
             uncle because of his age and would not be  able  to  help  him
             because he was young and fit.  I have no direct evidence  from
             this uncle and the information is  based  on  the  appellant's
             account.

         44.  There is a cousin in the USA.  The visa  application  said  he
             gave the appellant 100 a month however his evidence before  me
             was of no support and he lost contact with this  cousin  years
             ago.

         45.  When asked in cross-examination about  the  entries  made  for
             financial support in the visa application the  appellant  said
             that if he had had this amount of money, he  would  have  been
             able to stay in Italy.  The appellant confirmed to me that  in
             2012 he was able to speak and  write  a  bit  of  English,  he
             understood the form in terms of his name and date of birth but
             did not understand the financial details on the form".

35. Having set out that evidence, at para 46 the judge noted:

         "46. None of the family members who have provided letters before me
             have provided any formal ID.  The appellant has not  explained
             when he received these documents or produced envelopes  saying
             where they came from".

36. The judge then went on to cite Tanveer  Ahmed  and  TK  (Burundi),  and
    stated that assessing the appellant's credibility it was relevant  that
    there was a "lack of an explanation or documents supporting the  origin
    of the family's statements and ID".

37. In fact, as Mr McVeety acknowledged, there is a photocopy, which is not
    very easy to read given its  quality,  that  appears  to  relate  to  Y
    showing him to be a British citizen.

38. At para 74 the judge said this:

         "74. I therefore turn to the evidence of his siblings.   Given  the
             lack of ID, lack of documentation to explain how the appellant
             came by the handwritten letters, the absence of dates  and  my
             concern about the appellant's credibility I give no weight  to
             their evidence".

39. At least as regards Y, the absence of ID was not  correct.   (There  is
    also a very poor quality photocopy of  a  document  which  may  be  L's
    passport but it wholly unclear whether it is.)  It is not clear whether
    the photocopy of Y's passport was drawn to the judge's  attention  and,
    as I have said, the quality of photocopying makes it very difficult  to
    read.  But, that was, in any event, only one of  the  reasons  why  the
    judge considered that she would not  give  weight  to  the  handwritten
    letters  from  the  appellant's  family.   The  statements  are  brief,
    handwritten notes.  None gave evidence before the  judge.   Of  course,
    apart from Y, the other  family  members  were  not  in  the  UK.   The
    appellant said that Y was  no  longer  in  the  UK  but  there  was  no
    independent evidence of that.  I accept Mr McVeety's  submission  that,
    given the nature of the handwritten evidence, and that it was not  (nor
    in some cases could it) be tested in cross-examination, the  judge  was
    reasonably and rationally entitled to give it little or no credence  as
    supporting the appellant's claim that none of his family would  provide
    any financial support.  As the judge pointed out  in  relation  to  the
    2012 visa application, the appellant's  evidence  concerning  this  was
    "conflicting".  Neither brief written statement by Y or L (at  E19  and
    E25 of the appellant's bundle) suggested that they had  not  previously
    provided the appellant  with  support  as  the  2012  visa  application
    stated.  There was also, in relation to that visa application, evidence
    that the appellant's relative in the USA had also provided support. The
    judge was entitled not to accept the appellant's evidence that  he  did
    not know what  was  in  the  application  given  his  facility  (albeit
    limited) in English at the time.  Whether  or  not  the  appellant  was
    aware of what was in his 2012 visa application, the fact remained  that
    it was consistent with previous support from his relatives unless  what
    was said was taken to be dishonest and misleading. The judge  correctly
    took  into  account  the  conflicting  and  contradictory  evidence  in
    assessing whether she accepted what the appellant now said would be his
    financial position on return to Mogadishu.

40. Secondly, as regards the point made  in  Ground  1  about  the  judge's
    acceptance of the appellant's evidence before her that he was  born  in
    1987 (see paras 47-49), it is difficult to understand what impact  that
    had upon the judge's factual findings.  In  particular,  it  is  wholly
    unclear from para 7 of the grounds why it is said that having  accepted
    the appellant's evidence it is "unclear how and why  [the  judge]  then
    went on to reject the plausibility of his account, particularly in  the
    absence of any evidential basis for that finding".  The difficulty with
    this point is that the judge did not reject  the  plausibility  of  the
    appellant's account.  As regards his asylum claim, the  judge  accepted
    the plausibility of his account but found that, nevertheless, he  would
    not be at risk on return now, time having  passed,  from  Al-Shabab  in
    Mogadishu.

41. It may be that the point relates to what the judge said in para 49 that
    she did not accept "as plausible that the  Italian  authorities  simply
    told him he looked younger than having been born in 1987 and gave him a
    later date of birth".  She then went on to say: "Should  I  not  accept
    him as credible then a plausible reason for him giving a different date
    of birth in Italy would be to enable him to be then under  the  age  of
    18".     Whatever the foundation for that conjecture, I do not see  any
    basis for concluding that it had any impact upon the  judge's  findings
    that followed thereafter in relation to the appellant's evidence  about
    what, if any, support and accommodation he  would  have  on  return  to
    Mogadishu.

42. Thirdly, in relation to the appellant's failure to pursue his claim  in
    Italy and the judge's rejection of his reasoning that he did so because
    it was "very cold" in Italy (see para 71), Ms  Quadi  relied  upon,  in
    particular, the appellant's witness statement at A1-A2 of  the  bundle,
    in which he sets out that he lived with Somalis in a  house  in  Turin,
    having been released from an underage camp having claimed asylum, where
    there was no light and it was "very  very  cold".   A  slightly  longer
    explanation is given in answer to question 143 of his asylum interview.
     The fact of the matter is  that  the  appellant  passed  through,  and
    indeed claimed asylum in, a number of  EU  countries  including  Italy,
    Holland, Germany and France.  At para 41 of her  determination,  having
    set out the effect of s.8(4) of the 2004  Act  of  a  failure  to  make
    (and/or pursue) an asylum claim in a safe, EU country, the  judge  said
    this:

         "41. He has claimed asylum in several  [EU]  countries.   The  copy
             paperwork as provided strongly  suggest  he  had  a  residence
             permit in Italy from February 2011 to 2014  and  then  19  May
             2014 to 18 May 2019, (E6) although later in  2014  he  was  in
             Germany where he claimed asylum.   There  is  no  evidence  to
             suggest the appellant has been granted  asylum  elsewhere.   I
             find on the evidence that the appellant has not  attended  his
             asylum interview in Italy and other countries having generally
             suggested he is returned to Italy.  He  does  not  provide  an
             acceptable answer for not continuing with his  Italian  asylum
             claim and in particular his reason that it was cold  in  Italy
             is inadequate.  Furthermore, a  genuine  asylum  seeker  would
             have pursued these many asylum claims having  reached  a  safe
             country  made  rather  than  moving  through  Europe   without
             adequate reason as the appellant has done for thirteen years".



43. Section 8, in particular  s.8(4),  of  the  2004  Act  applied  to  the
    appellant's  claim  and  so  resulted  in  potentially   damaging   his
    credibility.  His conduct was potentially damaging of his  credibility.
    The judge correctly directed herself in that regard.   While  she  only
    made reference to the explanation of it being "cold" in Italy as  being
    inadequate, the fact of the matter is  that  the  appellant  failed  to
    pursue his asylum claim in a number of safe EU countries.   Whilst  the
    judge did not set out the full explanation given by  the  appellant  in
    his witness statement and in answer  to  question  143  of  his  asylum
    interview, there is no reason to consider that she  did  not  have  the
    totality of his explanation in mind  and  regarded  it  as  inadequate,
    particularly given the number of safe EU countries through which he had
    passed over an extended period of time and in which he had not  pursued
    his asylum claim to fruition.  To the extent, therefore, that the judge
    took into account  as  potentially  damaging  of  his  credibility  his
    conduct falling within the 2004 Act, I am not persuaded that the  judge
    erred in law in doing so.

44. Fourthly, the final issue raised in the  appellant's  grounds  concerns
    the judge's statement in para 49 of her determination that she did  not
    find it plausible that he had never worked in his  life  save  for  six
    months in Italy.  The grounds contend that this was not the appellant's
    evidence.  He had not said that he had "never worked during his  life".
    The judge also comments that  it  is  "common  knowledge"  that  asylum
    seekers are able to work in Germany where the appellant lived with  his
    wife and two children.  The difficulty with this argument  is  that  it
    takes the appellant's case that the judge erred in her finding that the
    appellant would be able to take  advantage  of  the  economic  boom  in
    Mogadishu nowhere.  If it was not the appellant's evidence that he  had
    never worked, apart from the six months which he accepted he worked  in
    Italy, it is impossible to see how the  judge  can  be  criticised  for
    concluding that the appellant would reasonably likely be able  to  work
    on return to Mogadishu taking advantage of the economic boom recognised
    in para [408] of MOJ & Ors.  The appellant was 31 or 32 years of age at
    the date of the hearing.  The judge noted in para 81 that the appellant
    was educated at least to primary level and had expressed a  willingness
    to undertake any type of work.   Whilst  he  has  been  receiving  NASS
    support in the UK, and so far as I can tell has not worked in  the  UK,
    it is unclear upon what basis the judge is  criticised  for  concluding
    that as a fit and well young man, who speaks Somali  and  would  be  at
    31/32 years old on return to Mogadishu where he has  family,  would  be
    unable to obtain work albeit, as the judge found, perhaps not initially
    but during which time he could be  supported  by  his  family  both  in
    Somalia and abroad.

45. The finding in para 81 was as follows:

         "81. Given his education I consider it likely he will  be  able  to
             take advantage of the resurgence of the economy  in  Mogadishu
             in due course to support himself although he will  be  reliant
             on remittances from abroad and  support  from  his  family  in
             Mogadishu at least to start".

46. That finding, together with a finding in para  82  that  the  appellant
    would be able to obtain financial and other support from Mogadishu  and
    abroad particularly his brother in the UK and family members he  is  in
    contact with, were  findings,  in  my  judgment,  both  rationally  and
    reasonably open to the judge on the evidence for the reasons she  gave.



47. Those findings, even if the judge had considered the approach  set  out
    by the Court of Appeal in Said on the relevance of paras  [407(h)]  and
    [408] of MOJ & Ors, could only have led  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's claim for humanitarian protection or under  Art  3  of  the
    ECHR must fail.

48. For all these reasons, I reject the points relied upon by Ms  Quadi  in
    Ground 1 seeking  to  challenge  the  judge's  adverse  findings.   The
    judge's decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds,
    therefore, stands.

Decision

49. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal on  all  grounds  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision stands.

50. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               31 March 2021



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

It follows that Judge Solly's decision not to make a fee award also  stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                               Andrew  Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               31 March 2021


