
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00443/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 22 May 2017                      |On 5 June 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                              mr Mohamed SOHEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hembrough  promulgated  on  14   February   2017
    dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  of  4  January
    2017 to refuse his claim for asylum.

The Appellant's Case

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 1996 with leave to enter
    as a visitor.  He has remained here since.  An application for leave to
    remain on compassionate grounds was refused on 29 January with no right
    of appeal and on 24 September 2016 he was  encountered  whilst  working
    illegally, arrested and subsequently claimed asylum.   That  claim  was
    refused on 4 January 2017.

 3. The appellant's case is that he is at risk on return to  Bangladesh  on
    account of his political opinion as a former member of the BNP  and  on
    account of being a gay man.  His case is that he is a member of the BNP
    since 1991, having helped organise demonstrations, and,  being  between
    1992 and 1996 a publicity secretary. In 1995 he  was  attacked  in  his
    local bazaars by members of the Awami League and beaten; as a result he
    was hospitalised for six days.  His father reported the matter  to  the
    police but they refused to take any action.   He  was  also,  he  says,
    threatened by members of the Awami League between ten and twelve  times
    during  the  1996  election  campaign  and  that  he  fears  return  to
    Bangladesh and that he would be targeted  by  a  member  of  the  Awami
    League who are now in power.

 4. The appellant states that he realised he was gay around 1995  and  that
    his relationship with a friend, Bilal, was discovered  by  his  family.
    The appellant  has  not  had  any  same  sex  relationships  either  in
    Bangladesh with anyone else or in the United Kingdom and fears that  if
    returned to Bangladesh he would not be able to live  openly  as  a  gay
    man.

 5. The appellant also stated that he was at  risk  on  from  an  agent  in
    Bangladesh to whom he owed money.

 6. The respondent did not accept the appellant's case either to have  been
    involved with the BNP nor did she accept that the appellant is gay nor,
    for that matter did she accept that the appellant was at risk  from  an
    agent who had brought him to the United Kingdom and  to  whom  he  owed
    money.

 7.  When  the  matter  came  before  Judge   Hembrough   the   appellant's
    representatives requested that the matter be  adjourned  on  the  basis
    that a witness  might  be  available  who  would  have  access  to  the
    appellant's BNP membership card and medical evidence confirming that he
    had been ill-treated by members of the Awami League in 1995.  The judge
    rejected that application, noting that the appellant has had ample time
    to prepare his case and that the documents that  he  sought  to  adduce
    would not assist in assessing the risk on return.

 8. The judge found that: -

      i) taking the appellant's claim at its highest,  he  was  a  low-level
         member of the BNP in his local area  [39];  did  not  come  to  the
         adverse attention of the authorities whilst living  in  Bangladesh;
         had not  had  any  significant  profile  with  the  BNP;  and,  the
         repercussions  of  his  claimed  involvement  in  one  incident  of
         violence did not extend beyond its immediate aftermath [41];

     ii) appellant had not engaged in  any  political  activity  since  1996
         indicating a lack  of  ongoing  commitment  to  the  BNP  cause  or
         continuing interest in Bangladeshi politics;

    iii) having had regard to the  appellant's  profile  and  conduct  since
         coming to the United Kingdom, that he would engage in  activity  on
         return to Bangladesh which would create a real risk of  him  coming
         to the adverse attention of the authorities [42];

     iv) even were he to have difficulties with  the  Awami  League  in  his
         local area he could avoid that by relocation within Bangladesh  and
         it would not be unduly harsh to expect him to do so [43];

      v) he was not satisfied that the appellant is a gay  man  [49],  given
         [50] the failure to provide a clear and  coherent  account  of  the
         realisation of his sexuality; that he could  not  remember  Bilal's
         surname and had made no inquiries about what happened to him  after
         he had been thrown out of the house [51]; that he was not satisfied
         by the appellant's explanation that he had not taken any  steps  to
         express his claimed sexuality in the United Kingdom since  1996  as
         being due to his concerns that news might get  back  to  Bangladesh
         given that his family already knew that  he  was  gay  having  been
         caught in the past and having been ridiculed within  the  community
         [53]; but

     vi) even if he were a gay man, it was clear that he had lived his  life
         in the United Kingdom privately not out of fear of persecution  but
         because of his natural disposition [ 54];

    vii) he was not satisfied by the appellant's account that he was at risk
         from an agent, given. findings on credibility [55];

   viii) Article 8 had not been pursued at the hearing [60].

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred: -

      i) in failing  to  adjourn  the  case  when  additional  evidence  was
         available [8];

     ii) that there was an inconsistency between the judge's  self-direction
         [45] that an  appellant's  sexuality  cannot  be  determined  by  a
         checklist of factors such as an active sex life, attendance at  gay
         bars, subscription to gay media, etc., the judge had at [53]  erred
         by rejecting the appellant's case on the  basis  that  he  had  not
         taken steps to express his claimed sexuality;

    iii) that the judge had erred in failing  properly  to  follow  HJ  Iran
         [2012] UKSC 38 in finding that the appellant could conduct  himself
         as he had done in the United Kingdom so that  he  would  not  be  a
         risk, the appellant's claim always having been that  he  could  not
         return to Bangladesh because he could  not  express  himself  as  a
         homosexual and could not be expected to hide his sexuality;

     iv) that the judge had failed to have proper regard to  material  which
         confirmed his case and that he would be at risk of  persecution  on
         return [7].

10. On 23 March 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane granted permission  to
    appeal.

The Hearing

11. Mr Wilford, relying on his speaking note, sought  permission  to  amend
    the grounds of appeal to challenge the decision on two new grounds: -

      i) that the judge had not properly taken into account a letter from  a
         lawyer in Bangladesh contained within  the  appellant's  bundle  at
         page 113; and,

     ii) that  the  judge  had  erred  in  not  addressing  Article  8,  the
         appellant's  representative  having  informed  the  Tribunal   that
         submissions would not be made in respect of Article 8 because  this
         was not covered by funding to cover representations in  respect  of
         Article 8; and, under the issue of Article 8, given  the  appellant
         had been resident in the United Kingdom since 1996,  was  "Robinson
         obvious".

12. Mr Wilford accepted that it was necessary to  obtain  an  amendment  of
    these grounds to advance these points given that they were not  covered
    by the existing grounds of appeal.

13. I refused permission to amend the grounds for reasons which I now give.



14. The proposed amendments were being brought at the last minute  and  was
    not as a result of matters which  had  recently  come  to  light.   The
    application was not made on notice to the respondent and no good reason
    was advanced as to why this has not been done before.  Further, and  in
    any event, for the reasons set out below, they are without merit.

15. Turning  to  the  first  proposed  additional  ground,  as  Mr  Wilford
    accepted, the date of the letter is unclear.  It  cannot  therefore  be
    said that a letter from a lawyer which in part confirms the appellant's
    activity in Bangladesh before he left is relevant to the assessment  of
    risk on return, given that it mentions no dates after 1996, that  being
    the date at which the appellant's father contacted him.  The letter  is
    at best a confirmation of what the appellant's father told to a  lawyer
    on an unknown date.  In the light of that, it could not be argued  that
    the judge failed to give proper weight to a document of which there  is
    no indication it was expressly drawn to his attention and  upon  which,
    given that it is undated, little  weight  could  properly  be  attached
    thereto.  Thus, even were I to permit the amendment, it cannot be shown
    that the judge's approach to the letter involved the making of an error
    of law.

16. Turning to the second proposed additional ground, a claimed failure  on
    the part of the judge to take into account Article 8.  It was  accepted
    by Mr Wilford that Article 8 had not been  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  He also accepted that other than an
    oblique reference to the length of time  that  he  had  lived  here  at
    paragraph [4] of his witness statement, there was  no  indication  that
    this issue was pursued in any way.

17. I accept that legal aid funding may be restricted to  cover  a  refugee
    and/or Article 3 claim, but there is no evidence that  this  point  was
    put to the judge as an explanation for not  pursuing  article  8.  When
    asked,  Mr  Wilford  was  unable   to   provide   evidence   that   the
    representative had made this clear to the judge.  There is no note from
    her, nor is there any indication in the judge's decision that that  was
    the point made to him.

18. Article 8 was not raised in the grounds  of  appeal  and  there  is  no
    indication that any application  was  made  to  amend  the  grounds  to
    include Article 8 prior to the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  In  the
    circumstances it was open to the judge not to address Article 8 in  his
    findings given that it had not been raised as a ground of  appeal,  and
    had not been pursued before him and, in any event, it is  difficult  to
    see how had it been advanced, it would have assisted the appellant.

19. On his own evidence  his  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  had  been
    unlawful and at the  very  least  precarious  for  a  very  substantial
    period.  It is not suggested by him that he  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE or any other part of the  Immigration  Rules  or  that
    there are any exceptional circumstances, both  of  which  were  matters
    raised in the refusal letter, yet he chose not to address these  either
    in the grounds or in his statement.  Given that by operation of Section
    117B of the 2002 Act little weight could  have  been  attached  to  the
    Article 8 case, it is difficult to see how it could have  succeeded  in
    any event and certainly not on the very limited evidence produced.

20. It cannot, in these circumstances, be said that article 8 was  Robinson
    obvious, or that the judge  otherwise  erred  in  not  taking  it  into
    account.

21. For these reasons I am not satisfied that it would be in the  interests
    of justice to permit the appellant to amend his grounds  and,  for  the
    reasons given, even had he done so I would have concluded that  neither
    of the proposed grounds demonstrated that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier tribunal involved the making of an error of law.

22. I am not satisfied that the judge  erred  in  failing  to  adjourn  the
    hearing.  As Mr Wilford accepted, the judge had then gone  on  to  take
    the appellant's case at its highest - see paragraphs [39] to [43]. The
    evidence now produced is limited to events in Bangladesh prior  to  the
    appellant's departure, and confirms he had been  attacked  and  beaten,
    matters which the judge had accepted;  it  does  not  confirm  material
    aspects of the case beyond that which the judge had  accepted.  It  was
    open to the judge to conclude in the  circumstances  that  the  witness
    statement which was awaited (and which has been produced to me),  would
    not assist and I consider that he was right to do so.

23.  In the circumstances it cannot be argued that the failure  to  adjourn
    the proceedings created any unfairness  given  the  evidence  that  was
    sought to be adduced did not advance the case,

24. Mr Wilford had no submissions  to  make  about  the  other  grounds  of
    appeal.  I consider that they are without merit.  It was open  to  the
    judge to reject the appellant's explanation for not taking any steps to
    express his sexuality.  It cannot be argued that  the  judge  here  was
    inconsistent with the self-direction at [45] in that he  did  not  draw
    inferences adverse to the appellant failing to have an active sex  life
    or attend gay bars or subscribe to gay friendly media, so on but rather
    that it was the explanation for not doing so that was not credible.  It
    was open to him to note that the appellant  had  already  said  in  his
    evidence that his sexuality had come to the adverse  attention  of  his
    family and the wider community.  It therefore made  little  sense  that
    the fear of this coming to the notice of people in Bangladesh  is  what
    prevented him from expressing his  sexuality  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    There is thus no merit in that ground.

25. There is no merit in the challenge to the judge's findings at paragraph
    [54].  This is a consideration taken in the alternative.  Given that it
    had been open to the judge  and  he  had  given  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the appellant was not a gay man, then  any  issue  of  him
    concealing his sexuality is not a material error.

26. For these reasons I  consider  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date 1 June 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


