
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00929/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th April 2019                            |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               Umaeaswary [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Allen of Counsel, instructed by Krisinth
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Hussain made
following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 19th October 2018.

The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [~] 1976.  She has a
complex immigration history but suffice it to say that she applied for
asylum in the UK  and was refused on 4th January 2018.

The judge did not accept that she would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka
and dismissed the appeal.  In doing so, he took into account medical
evidence, including a report by a Dr Goldwyn.  The judge said that the
medical report stated that the appellant's injuries and scars were
consistent with her account.

The appellant sought permission to appeal, primarily on the grounds that
the judge had materially erred in his assessment of the medical evidence
concerning the appellant's scarring.  He stated twice that the expert
report assesses that the scarring was consistent with the appellant's
claims, which is incorrect.  In fact, Dr Goldwyn identifies a number of
scars as being typical of cigarette burns, highly consistent with further
cigarette burns and concludes that her scarring and mental state together
were diagnostic of the torture events claimed.

Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Kelly on 29th January 2019.

At the hearing before me Ms Jones for the Secretary of State accepted that
the decision could not stand.

The decision is set aside.  The judge erred in law.  He did not accurately
characterise the medical report at paragraph 52 of the determination, and a
failure to assess the evidence is an error of law.  The decision will have
to be remade by a judge other than Judge Hussain.  It should be relisted at
Hatton Cross with a Tamil interpreter at the next available date.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 19 April 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

