
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00435/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2019                  |On 12 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HP
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsey, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Youssefian, Counsel, instructed by Polpitiya &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1.  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department   (hereafter
         appellant) appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal P  J  M  Hollingworth  (the  judge)  who,  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 4 July 2019, allowed the human rights appeal  of  HP
         (hereafter respondent)  against  the  appellant's  decision  of  17
         December 2018 to refuse his  protection  and  human  rights  claims
         following the making of a deportation order under s.32  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007 on 15 December 2018.

Background

      2. The respondent is a national of Iraq, born in 1992. He entered  the
         UK in 2008 and subsequently claimed asylum based on a fear that  he
         would be captured and held to ransom or  conscripted  by  insurgent
         groups and because of the lack of general  security  in  Iraq.  The
         asylum claim was refused and  an  appeal  dismissed  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Miles in a decision promulgated on 8  January  2009.
         Judge Miles found the respondent had not given a  credible  account
         of events in Iraq but did accept his claimed  age.  The  respondent
         was granted Discretionary Leave until  21  September  2009.  On  28
         January 2016 the respondent was granted Indefinite Leave to  Remain
         (ILR) outside the immigration rules.

      3. The respondent claimed to have commenced a relationship with KP,  a
         British citizen, and that they began to cohabit  around  2011.  The
         respondent has a daughter, AP, born to KP in December 2012.

      4. From 9 August 2010 to 23 March  2018  the  respondent  received  15
         convictions in respect  of  23  offences.  On  23  March  2018  the
         respondent was convicted on a guilty plea of one count of supplying
         a Class B controlled drug and 2  counts  of  supplying  a  Class  A
         controlled drug and sentenced to 2 years and 9 months imprisonment.



      5. Having been notified that the appellant was  considering  making  a
         deportation order the respondent made representations as to why  he
         should not be deported. The appellant  found  that  the  respondent
         posed a danger to the community and issued a certificate under s.72
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  appellant
         considered the respondents claim  that,  as  a  Sunni  Muslim  from
         Kirkuk, he feared that his life would be in danger  from  ISIS  and
         Shia  militia.  The  respondent  claimed  to  have  no  friends  or
         relatives in Iraq and no support network.  The  appellant  rejected
         the respondents claim to hail from Kirkuk as a previously  provided
         identity document had been confirmed by the National  Documentation
         Fraud Unit as being  counterfeit.  The  appellant  noted  that  the
         respondent's account had been rejected by Judge Miles in 2009  and,
         in reliance on extracts of  background  evidence,  considered  that
         Sunni Muslims were not a persecuted religious  group  in  Iraq  and
         that internal relocation was available. The appellant rejected  the
         respondent's claim to have no family in  Iraq.  The  appellant  was
         satisfied the respondent would be able to return to his home  area,
         whether this was in the Iraqi government controlled part of Iraq or
         in the Kurdish Region of Iraq, by being met by  family  members  or
         friends at the  airport  of  return.  The  appellant  rejected  the
         respondent's  claim  to  be  entitled  to  refugee  protection   or
         Humanitarian Protection.

      6. The appellant also  rejected  the  respondent's  claim  to  have  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his  child  and
         with KP. Although  the  appellant  acknowledged  the  existence  of
         records showing that AP had visited the respondent in prison, there
         was no other evidence of any significant and meaningful involvement
         by him in AP's life. The appellant found that  the  respondent  had
         been separated from KP since 2015. Whilst  the  appellant  accepted
         that it would be unduly harsh to expect both AP and KP to  relocate
         to Iraq, it was not unduly harsh to separate the respondent from AP
         and KP.

      7. The respondent exercised his right of  appeal  under  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      8. The judge set out the oral evidence given by the  respondent  ([10]
         to [16] and [20] to [21]) and KP ([18] to [19] and  [22])  and  the
         submissions made by the representatives ([23] to  [24]).   At  [25]
         the judge found that the respondent failed to rebut the presumption
         under s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that
         he constituted a  danger  to  the  community.  There  has  been  no
         challenge to this finding.

      9. At [26] the judge approached the determination of  Judge  Miles  as
         his starting point, including  Judge  Mile's  acceptance  that  the
         respondent came from Kirkuk. The judge referred to  photographs  he
         saw during the hearing that were contained  in  KP's  phone.  There
         were three photographs, one of which showed the respondent  on  the
         right of a group of people, the reference being "Sulaymaniyah  trip
         in 2016". This photograph  could  not  be  found  after  the  judge
         retired in order for it to be forwarded to the  Tribunal,  but  two
         other photographs were provided, each showing the respondent and KP
         with other people, and  they  were  marked  "Sulaymaniyah  12  Sept
         2016". The judge noted that the respondent had  travelled  to  Iran
         using his Travel Document containing an Iranian visa valid  from  5
         September 2016 to 4 December 2016. Based on this evidence the judge
         found that the respondent had travelled from Iran  to  Sulaymaniyah
         and that he was therefore able to enter the Kurdish Region of  Iraq
         and had no fear of  return.  At  [27]  the  judge  found  that  the
         respondent did have family members or friends in Iraq who would  be
         able to verify his identity and  sponsor  him  and  assist  him  in
         obtaining a CSID. The judge concluded that it would be feasible for
         the respondent to return to either Baghdad or Sulaymaniyah or  both
         and that if difficulty  arose  in  obtaining  CSID  there  was  the
         (National Status) Court in Baghdad that could deal with the issues.
         the judge concluded that the presence of family or friends in  Iraq
         was sufficient to obviate the problem of establishing his  identity
         in relation to official checkpoints.

     10. At [28] the judge referred to inconsistent evidence  given  by  the
         respondent and KP in respect of whether there had been a  break  in
         their relationship (in his oral evidence the respondent said  there
         had been a break, whereas KP claimed there had never been a break).
         The judge concluded  that  there  was  no  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship between the respondent and KP.

     11. The judge then considered the respondent's  relationship  with  AP.
         The judge referred to documentary evidence that AP had visited  the
         respondent  when  he  was  detained.  The  judge  found  that   the
         respondent had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
         AP prior to losing his liberty and that the relationship  had  been
         maintained as a result of AP's visits. Having noted the appellant's
         view,  expressed  in  the  refusal  letter,  that  a  genuine   and
         subsisting relationship meant more than a  biological  relationship
         and more than presence in a child's life and  that  it  required  a
         significant and meaningful positive involvement, the judge stated,

             "I have been provided with medical evidence in relation to the
             [respondent's] partner. I refer to this below. In the light of
             this evidence and the factors to which I have referred I  find
             that a genuine and subsisting parental relationship does exist
             between  the  [respondent]  and   his   daughter   given   the
             significance of his role as a father of the role played by the
             [respondent's] partner  in  relation  to  the  life  of  their
             daughter."

     12. The judge continued,

             "The medical evidence  to  which  I  have  referred  has  been
             provided  by  Dr  Sethi  and  is  dated  23  June  2016.   The
             [respondent's] partner is  registered  at  the  practice.  The
             [respondent's]  partner  suffers  from   adjustment   disorder
             complicated by bipolar depression. She has  been  reviewed  by
             the mental health team  and  was  on  medication.  She  had  a
             significant history of relapses that  can  distract  her  from
             completing already booked tasks. I find in the  light  of  the
             content of this letter from Dr Sethi to which I refer that the
             effect of the [respondent's] removal  would  be  unduly  harsh
             given the clear impact of her  conditions  and  the  increased
             significance thereby  of  the  role  of  the  [respondent]  in
             providing care and support for his daughter. I find  that  the
             importance of the [respondent] in relation to the contribution
             which he can make to his daughter's life  and  upbringing  has
             increased to a degree which equates  on  the  footing  of  his
             absence to the impact of undue harshness on his daughter."

     13. The judge concluded that the public interest did  not  require  the
         respondent's deportation as the impact on  his  daughter  would  be
         unduly harsh. The judge then considered the appeal under Article  8
         as a freestanding right applying the authorities of  Razgar  [2004]
         UKHL 27 and Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and making reference  to  "Section
         117" (the judge is likely to have meant sections 117A  to  117D  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as section 117  is
         of no relevance and has, in any event, been repealed). Having found
         that the immigration rules were met the judge  concluded  that  the
         public interest did not require the respondent's removal. The judge
         subsequently allowed the appeal rights grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     14. The grounds contend that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons
         for finding that  the  respondent  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship. He failed to take  into  account  his  other
         adverse credibility findings, including his finding that there  was
         no genuine and subsisting relationship between the  respondent  and
         KP. Nor was  there  any  third-party  documentation  detailing  the
         respondent's parental role.  Nor  had  the  judge  considered  KP's
         evidence that her parents supported her and  that  when  KP  worked
         night shifts it was her mother who looked after AP.

     15. It was argued in the alternative that  the  judge  failed  to  give
         clear reasons as  to  how  the  high  threshold  of  "unduly  harsh
         consequences" were met, with reference to KO (Nigeria) [2018]  UKSC
         53 and RA  (s.117C:  "unduly  harsh";  offence:  seriousness)  Iraq
         [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC). The judge  failed  to  identify  what  the
         unduly harsh consequences would be, and his reasoning at  [28]  was
         insufficient to support a finding of unduly harsh consequences. The
         report from Dr Sethi did not show  that  the  respondent's  absence
         would  lead  to  a  collapse  in   the   physical,   emotional   or
         psychological welfare of AP, and the report was now 3 years old. In
         finding that the respondent played a role of increased significance
         the judge failed to consider KP's evidence that it was  her  mother
         who looked after the child when she worked night shifts, or that KP
         had sole responsibility  for  the  child  during  the  respondent's
         incarceration.  Nor  had  any  consideration  being  given  to  the
         possibility of KP accessing assistance from other agencies if  this
         was required.

     16. Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Macdonald  found  that  the
         grounds disclosed arguable errors of law and granted permission.

The error of law hearing

     17. At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  Mr  Youssefian  applied  for  an
         adjournment in order to make an application to appeal  the  judge's
         finding in respect of the Article 3 protection claim.  He  accepted
         that any such application would be out of time but  submitted  that
         the appellant would not be disadvantaged and that it was clear that
         the judge erred in concluding that the respondent would be able  to
         obtain a CSID given that he came from Kirkuk.

     18. I refused the application to adjourn the hearing. It  was  open  to
         the respondent to have challenged the judge's findings  in  respect
         of his protection claim but he failed to do so. As acknowledged  by
         Mr Youssefian, there was no explanation for this failure. Any cross
         appeal would now be significantly out of time.  In  any  event,  at
         [26] the judge specifically considered the  arguments  advanced  on
         behalf of the respondent that his lack of a CSID card meant that he
         would be at risk of harm on return to Iraq and internal  relocation
         to either Baghdad or the Kurdish Region of Iraq was not  available.
         The judge however  found  that  the  respondent  had  travelled  to
         Sulaymaniyah in September 2016, that he did have friends or  family
         in Iraq and that he would, with the assistance of his  friends  and
         family, be able to obtain a valid CSID through the  Baghdad  Court.
         This was a finding rationally open to the judge on the basis of the
         evidence before him and for the reasons given. Having regard to the
         approach to delays established in SSHD v SS (Congo)  &  Ors  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 387 and Hysaj [2014] EWCA Civ  1633  I  did  not  consider
         there to be any merit were a cross appeal to be lodged out of  time
         and it was not therefore in the interests of justice, having regard
         to the overriding interests in rule 2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, to adjourn the hearing.

     19. Mr Lindsey expanded upon the written grounds of  appeal  contending
         that the judge failed to factor in his adverse credibility findings
         when assessing whether a parental relationship existed.  There  was
         no independent evidence of the respondent's  relationship  with  AP
         other than the prison visit records. Both  the  respondent  and  KP
         claimed such a relationship existed they had both been found to  be
         incredible witnesses in relation to other aspects  of  the  appeal.
         The  letter  from  Dr  Sethi  did  not  describe  the  respondent's
         relationship with his daughter and the judge  failed  to  give  any
         reasons how this letter  supported  his  finding  that  a  parental
         relationship existed. Nor was there any specific evidence  that  KP
         was unable to care for AP if the respondent was deported. This  was
         relevant to the finding that the  impact  on  KP  would  be  unduly
         harsh.

     20. Mr Youssefian submitted that the appellant's grounds amounted to  a
         disagreement with factual findings the judge was entitled to  make.
         It would be hugely surprising if the judge had failed  to  consider
         his  negative  credibility  findings  when  assessing  whether  the
         respondent  had  a  parental  relationship  with  AP.  The  judge's
         reference to the various visits by AP to the respondent when he was
         incarcerated was sufficient to  support  the  judge's  finding.  My
         attention was brought to the authority of SSHD v AB  (Jamaica)  and
         AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661 (AB  (Jamaica))  which  considered
         the issue of parental responsibility.

     21. Mr Youssefian accepted  that  there  was  no  independent  evidence
         before the judge of the impact of his deportation on  AP,  but  the
         judge was entitled to  attach  weight  to  the  evidence  from  the
         respondent and KP concerning KP's ability to look after their child
         if there was a relapse.

     22. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     23.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  respondent  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental  relationship  with  his  daughter.  The  judge
         supported this finding by reference to  the  Visit  History  for  a
         Prisoner records in the bundle prepared for the First-tier Tribunal
         hearing and the letter from Dr Sethi. The records  do  indeed  show
         visits by the respondent's daughter. Other than the  assertions  by
         the respondent and KP in their written and oral evidence  that  the
         respondent had a parental relationship with AP, there was no  other
         independent evidence of such a relationship.  The  letter  from  Dr
         Sethi, which I will consider in more detail later,  does  not  make
         any mention of the respondent's relationship  with  AP.  The  judge
         acknowledged a submission made in the skeleton argument  on  behalf
         of the respondent that he had been residing with  KP  when  he  was
         arrested. The judge does not however make any specific  finding  in
         respect of this submission. Although the judge found that, prior to
         losing his liberty, the respondent had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental  relationship  with  his   daughter,   this   finding   is
         unreasoned.

     24. In AB (Jamaica) Lord Justice Singh agreed with  what  was  said  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in the case of SR (Subsisting Parental
         Relationship -  s117B(6))  Pakistan  [2018]  UKUT  00334  (IAC)  at
         paragraph 39,

             "There are likely to be many cases in which both parents  play
             an important role in their child's  life  and  therefore  both
             have subsisting parental relationships with  the  child,  even
             though the child resides with one parent and  not  the  other.
             There are also cases where the nature and  extent  of  contact
             and any break in  contact  is  such  that  although  there  is
             contact, a subsisting parental relationship cannot be said  to
             have been formed. Each case turns on its own facts."

     25. Whilst the judge did have before him evidence  of  contact  between
         the respondent and his daughter at a time when the  respondent  was
         incarcerated, there was limited independent evidence of the  nature
         and extent of his relationship with  her.  The  judge  had  already
         found that the respondent  and  KP  did  not  have  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship and this finding has not  been  challenged.
         The mere fact of some direct contact could not,  in  my  judgement,
         support  the  judge's  finding  that  there  existed   a   parental
         relationship.

     26. The judge found that the respondent's  deportation  would  have  an
         unduly harsh impact on AP. The meaning of "unduly harsh"  has  been
         considered in several authorities. In MK Sierra Leone  [2015]  UKUT
         00223 (IAC) it was noted at paragraph 46 that "unduly  harsh"  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient or merely difficult ...
         "harsh" in this context, denotes something severe, or bleak ... the
         addition of the adverb "unduly" raises an already elevated standard
         higher. This was approved  in  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53.  At
         paragraph 23 the Supreme Court observed that one is looking for  "a
         degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved
         for any child faced with the deportation of a parent" (see also the
         decision in RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness)  Iraq
         [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC)).

     27. In concluding that the impact of the  respondent's  deportation  on
         his child would be unduly  harsh  the  judge  attached  significant
         weight to a letter from Dr dated 23 June  2016.  The  was  a  brief
         letter indeed. It read,

             "This is to confirm that [KP] is registered at our practice.

             She suffers from Adjustment disorder  complicated  by  Bipolar
             depression.

             She has been reviewed by mental health team and on medication.

             She has significant history of relapses that can distract  her
             from completing already booked tasks.

             If you have any query please do not hesitate to contact me."

     28. The letter makes no mention of AP. The letter does not describe the
         degree and extent of KP's mental health diagnoses. The letter  does
         not describe the impact that KP's mental health  condition  has  or
         can have on AP, or how a relapse, resulting in KP being  distracted
         from completing  her  "already  booked  tasks",  would  affect  her
         ability to care for her daughter. The letter was written  almost  3
         years before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  Other  than  the
         assertions of the respondent and KP as to her ability to  care  for
         AP if the respondent was deported (both of whom were  found  to  be
         incredible in relation to other aspects of the appeal),  there  was
         no other independent evidence  of  the  impact  of  deportation  on
         either KP or AP. Nor does  the  judge  appear  to  have  considered
         either the possibility that KP's mother  could  assist  in  looking
         after AP (as she did when KP worked night shifts) or any assistance
         that may be available from social services.  For  these  reasons  I
         find that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
         conclusion that the impact of the respondent's  deportation  on  AP
         would be unduly harsh.

     29. The judge purported to then  apply  Article  8  as  a  freestanding
         right. In concluding that the  respondent's  deportation  would  be
         disproportionate the judge relied on  the  respondent  meeting  the
         immigration rules. I have however found that the  judge's  approach
         under immigration rules relating to  undue  harshness  contain  the
         making of an ever on of law. In any event, to the extent  that  the
         judge considered that it was appropriate to look beyond  the  "very
         compelling circumstances" test as outlined in s.117C(6),  he  erred
         in law (see NE-A (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2017] EWCA Civ 239, at [14] and [15]).

     30. In the absence of legally adequate reasons I am satisfied that  the
         decision, so far as it relates to Article 8 considerations, must be
         set  aside.  Having  heard  submissions  from  both  parties  I  am
         satisfied it is appropriate to remit the case back  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal to determine a fresh the issue  of  the  respondent's
         relationship with his daughter and the impact  of  the  deportation
         decision on her. This  is  because  the  respondent  has  now  been
         released from detention and Mr Youssefian informs me that there  is
         likely to be further evidence going to the issues  identified.  The
         judge's decision in respect of the protection (Article  3)  element
         of the appeal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an  error  on  a  point  of  law
requiring it to be set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, before a  judge  other
than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth, to  determine  the
Article 8 aspect of the appeal relating  to  the  relationship  between  the
respondent and his daughter.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum                                  5 September 2019

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
