


                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00974/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Royal Courts of Justice               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 15 May 2017                        |On 24 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                 Minh Oh Le
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms A Smith of Counsel, instructed by Wilsons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant challenges  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Kainth  dismissing  his  appeal  on  asylum,  human  rights  and
      humanitarian protection grounds. He is a Vietnamese national born on 1
      January 1989 and was encountered by the police in the UK on  14  March
      2015, having arrived illegally. He then claimed asylum. Previously  he
      had been in Lithuania and claimed to have been  returned  to  Vietnam.
      The appellant maintained that he feared money lenders if  he  returned
      to Vietnam. He then absconded and his  asylum  claim  was  treated  as
      withdrawn. On 29 November 2016, he was re-arrested and detained. On  8
      December he made a further asylum claim but this time maintained  that
      he feared the authorities because he was a Catholic and because he and
      his family had supported the Viet Tan Party.  He claimed to have  been
      beaten by the police. He claimed his father had been killed by  police
      in 2011. He conceded that his first claim was untrue  and  claimed  to
      have been afraid and confused at the time he had made it.  The present
      claim was refused on 25 January 2017.


   2. The appellant's appeal came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  21
      February 2017. It was dismissed. The appellant  sought  permission  to
      appeal and that was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  on  31
      March 2017.


         The Hearing


   3. At the hearing before me on 15 May 2017, I heard submissions from  the
      parties.


   4.  Ms  Smith  argued  that  there  were  two  errors  in   the   judge's
      determination. The first was that he had erred in his consideration of
      the country material and the second  that  he  had  failed  to  accord
      weight to the Rule 35 report.


   5. Ms Smith submitted that the judge  had  cited  extracts  from  country
      material in his determination but failed to provide any references and
      the content was at odds with what was contained in the COIS  guidance.
      She submitted that the latter material supported his claim  to  be  at
      risk because of involvement in the VT Party and  had  not  been  taken
      into account. With respect to the  second  complaint,  she  maintained
      that the judge had erred in  his  approach.  She  submitted  that  the
      doctor's conclusions were not undermined  by  taking  the  appellant's
      account at face value and that some weight should have been  given  to
      the report.


   6. In response, Mr Clarke submitted that the grounds  were  misconceived.
      The judge had properly directed  himself.  He  pointed  out  that  the
      country material referred to in submissions contained a caveat in that
      it was said that the risk for political involvement  "may"  extend  to
      family  members.  He  submitted  that  the  judge   had   taken   that
      qualification into account when assessing the risk to  the  appellant.
      With respect to the issue of Catholicism, he submitted  that  all  the
      evidence had to be  considered  in  the  round.  He  referred  to  the
      evidence cited in the decision letter and pointed out  that  any  risk
      largely involved political activists of unregistered religious groups.
      He submitted that it was  not  true  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
      consider the evidence. The fact was  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
      member of a non registered religious group and  he  had  no  political
      profile. On that basis, the judge's findings were sustainable. On  the
      Rule 35 issue, Mr Clarke submitted that the submissions  had  departed
      from the grounds which had maintained that no weight had been given to
      the report. In fact, the judge accorded it little weight and  for  the
      reasons given in the determination he was entitled to do so.


   7. Ms Smith replied. She maintained that it was incorrect to  claim  that
      only unregistered religious group members were targeted. The  evidence
      showed that Catholics were at risk despite being a  registered  group.
      The judge had failed to properly consider the evidence.


   8. Both parties agreed that if errors of law were found, the matter would
      have to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for fresh fact finding.




   9. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which  I
      now give.


      Findings and conclusions

  10. The judge commenced his  findings  at  paragraph  40  having  properly
      directed himself as to the law and the approach to be taken in  asylum
      cases at paragraphs 37-39. The judge was plainly concerned  about  the
      complete change in the basis of the appellant's asylum  claim  between
      2015 and 2016. Whilst his initial claim had been based on  a  fear  of
      money lenders  and  he  had  denied  ever  having  been  arrested  and
      detained, his second claim was on the  basis  of  his  faith  and  the
      political involvement of his family and an  account  of  detention.  A
      different date of birth had also been  provided.  The  judge  did  not
      accept the explanation that the appellant was confused and afraid.  He
      was of the view that as the first claim had been made soon  after  the
      alleged events, the appellant would not have forgotten to mention  his
      ill treatment and fear of the authorities had that  claim  been  true.
      That was a finding entirely open to him to make. Ms Smith did not seek
      to make any submissions on the serious discrepancies between  the  two
      claims and no explanation was offered.


  11. The judge also took account of the  appellant's  conduct.  He  arrived
      illegally, made an asylum claim after his arrest  and  then  absconded
      and failed to comply with reporting  conditions.  The  judge  did  not
      accept that the appellant's explanation that he had got lost. He noted
      that the appellant had had the services of  an  interpreter  and  that
      reporting conditions would have been explained to him. He  noted  that
      when he was re-arrested, the appellant had been working at a nail bar.
      The judge also  noted  that  under  cross-examination,  the  appellant
      stated that he had left Vietnam in order to seek  a  better  life  and
      that he had not had any problems at the time of his departure in 2012.




  12. The judge then takes account of the country material and assesses  the
      appellant's claim in that context. He also considers the letter from a
      pastor and gives reasons for rejecting its reliability  (at  paragraph
      44). At  paragraph  48,  the  judge  further  considered  the  country
      material he was referred to and to which reference was made before me.
      He noted that the appellant himself had never claimed to have  been  a
      member of the VT Party and he did not accept that he would be a person
      of interest to the authorities. He noted that even taking the claim at
      its highest, there was a lengthy period without any difficulties  from
      the authorities. The judge was entitled to conclude that this did  not
      accord with the appellant's claim that he was wanted  by  the  police.
      The matter is further considered at paragraphs 46 and  53.  The  judge
      pointed out inconsistencies in the appellant's accounts with regard to
      the alleged ill  treatment  he  suffered.  No  explanation  for  these
      discrepancies is offered.


  13. The judge noted that the appellant's claim that he was a Catholic  had
      not been challenged. He took account of the  evidence  before  him  on
      religious minority groups in Vietnam, noting that 7% of the population
      was Catholic; some 6 million adherents  all  across  the  country  and
      increasing. He noted that Catholicism was a registered and  recognized
      religion and that religious freedom was enshrined in the constitution.
      It was on that basis that he made the statement at paragraph 52  which
      has been given such emphasis in the grounds. It was, however, entirely
      open to the judge to find  that  Catholicism  was  an  integrated  and
      growing faith. It is disingenuous to complain that  no  references  to
      this citation of evidence was given when  it  plainly  refers  to  the
      report the  judge  cited  at  paragraph  50.  Certainly,  the  country
      evidence does not suggest that all 6 million Catholics in Vietnam  are
      at risk or that they are targeted by the authorities. If the complaint
      is against the judge's finding that the authorities tend to  focus  on
      political activists of unregistered political  groups,  that  is  also
      without justification as the Country Information and  Guidance  report
      supports such a conclusion (at 2.2.2  and  2.2.5).  Whilst  I  do  not
      condone the actions of the authorities towards  members  of  religious
      minorities, it should  be  noted  that  the  number  of  prisoners  of
      conscience are a tiny proportion of the total number of  adherents  to
      other faiths (2.2.3).


  14. The judge was also criticised with respect to the Rule 35  report.  It
      was maintained in the grounds that he had erred in not  giving  weight
      to the report. In submissions, Ms Smith argued that he had  not  given
      enough weight to it. The weight to be accorded to evidence is a matter
      for the judge. He took account of the fact that the  medical  examiner
      had accepted the appellant's claim at face value but it is  misleading
      to assert that was the only reason for rejecting it. As is plain  from
      paragraph 45, the judge also noted that the examiner made no reference
      to other possible causes.


  15. The appellant's claim must be assessed in the round and that  is  what
      the judge did. His late claim for asylum, his previous absconding, the
      complete change in the basis of his claim and the discrepancies in his
      accounts must all be considered. Sections of the country evidence  and
      the rule 35 report cannot be read in isolation.


  16. Having considered all the evidence and  the  submissions  made,  I  am
      satisfied that the judge did not make errors of law when assessing the
      appellant's claim. The challenge to his determination is not made  out
      and his decision is sustainable.


  17. Decision


  18. The decision does not contain any errors of law.


  19. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


  20. Anonymity


  21. There was no request for an anonymity order and I  see  no  reason  to
      make one.


    Signed



       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 23 May 2017








