

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: PA/00645/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 June 2017                      |On 8 June 2017                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     SAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Iengar instructed by Malik & Malik Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Tarlow Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        LK Gibbs promulgated on 20  March  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
        Taylor House, in which the Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
        on asylum and human rights grounds.
     2. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  it  was
        arguable that the evidence of two  witnesses  had  not  been  fully
        considered.
     3. As the respondent had not had sight of the  decision  the  Rule  24
        reply did not set out to the Secretary of State's case, leading  to
        Mr Tarlow to invite Ms Iengar to outline her position, after  which
        he would indicate his view on the matter.
     4. Accordingly, Ms Iengar  made  such  submissions  referring  to  the
        grounds asserting a flawed approach in relation to the evidence  of
        witnesses, the failure to make proper findings of fact on  material
        issues, the deprivation of positive  evidence  in  the  appellant's
        favour,  a  misunderstanding  of  submissions  made,   failure   to
        adequately reason why the Judge gave no weight to a letter from  an
        NGO, and making perverse findings in relation to article 8 ECHR.
     5. The alleged failure of the Judge in relation  to  the  evidence  of
        witnesses in producing a decision which seems to rest wholly on the
        appellant's evidence, without cross-referencing or having regard to
        the detailed oral evidence of the appellant's  partner  or  friend,
        stands not only as an allegation of legal error in relation to  the
        treatment of that evidence  in  isolation  but  also  its  knock-on
        effect in relation to  the  article  8  assessment  of  family  and
        private life.
     6. Having heard the submissions Mr Tarlow accepted  that  legal  error
        had been made out specifically in relation to Ground 1 relating  to
        the approach by the Judge to the evidence of the witnesses and  the
        failure of the Judge to apply the relevant country guidance to  the
        protection element  of  the  appeal.  The  appellant's  grounds  in
        relation to article 8 were  also  accepted  as  being  infected  by
        arguable legal error, leading to the conclusion that the  decision,
        as a whole, was poor.
     7. I find it has been made out for the reasons set out in the  grounds
        seeking  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the
        positional statements by both advocates before this tribunal,  that
        the approach taken by the Judge is infected by arguable legal error
        such that the determination dismissing the  appeal  is  unsafe  and
        cannot stand.
     8. It was agreed that the appropriate way forward,  in  light  of  the
        extent of the errors, is for the decision  to  be  set  aside  with
        there being no preserved findings and for the matter to be remitted
        to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House to be reheard by a judge
        other than Judge Gibbs.


Decision

     9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to the First-
        tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be heard afresh by a judge
        of that tribunal other than Judge L K Gibbs.


   Anonymity.


    10. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  I make
        such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
        Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7 June 2017
