
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00505/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On April 27, 2017                   |On May 4, 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                           MR IZZEDINE N M DEGHLES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Palestinian Authority.  He arrived in
    this country on September 29, 2015 and claimed asylum at  the  airport.
    The respondent refused his application for asylum on January 7, 2016.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on January 19, 2016 under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. His appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Herwald
    (hereinafter called the Judge) on September 16, 2016 and in a  decision
    promulgated on September 29, 2016 the Judge  refused  his  appeal.   He
    appealed that decision on October 10, 2016 but permission to appeal was
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wellesley-Cole  on  January
    9, 2017. The appellant renewed his  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan granted permission to  appeal
    finding it arguable the Judge failed to consider material evidence that
    was produced to support his father's and brother's claims to have  been
    arrested and detained.

 4. I do not make an anonymity order in this case.

    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Mr Hussain indicated that the specific ground upon which Upper Tribunal
    Judge Canavan had granted permission was not being pursued  because  he
    accepted the Judge had considered this  evidence  in  his  decision  at
    paragraph 14(b) of his decision. However,  he  stated  he  intended  to
    argue that paragraph 5 of his grounds demonstrated an error in law.  He
    argued that the Judge in paragraphs 14(e) and (f) of his decision  made
    speculative  findings  and  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest   his
    conclusions were correct.

 6. Mr Harrison relied on the Rule 24  letter  dated  March  29,  2017  and
    submitted that with regard to the only ground pursued  the  Judge  made
    findings open to him. Mr Hussain had suggested the appellant would have
    been allowed to leave as that would remove a  trouble  maker  from  the
    area but he submitted nothing to support this claim had  been  adduced.
    The Judge concluded that he was of no interest otherwise he would  have
    been detained. This finding was open to him.

    FINDINGS

 7. The appellant  claimed  asylum  based  on  his  activities  within  the
    Palestinian Authority controlled areas. He feared both the Palestinians
    and the Israelis.

 8. The Judge dismissed his claim and although the main ground  of  appeal,
    upon which permission to appeal had been granted, was not pursued I was
    asked to consider the amended grounds of appeal that were submitted  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 9. The Judge found the appellant's evidence to either lack credibility  or
    be muddled and gave reasons for this in  his  decision.  One  of  those
    reasons was his ability  to  leave  the  area  undetected  on  his  own
    documents. The Judge  noted  that  his  father  and  brother  had  been
    detained but found there was nothing to link him to their  detentions-a
    fact accepted by Mr Hussain  when  he  abandoned  that  aspect  of  the
    appeal.

10. Today Mr Hussain argued that the Judge's finding "there was nothing  in
    the objective evidence to support his claim  the  Authorities  arrested
    the wrong person or they came to arrest him after he had left" to  lack
    credibility. The Judge made this finding because the appellant left the
    West Bank on his own passport and it was open  to  the  authorities  to
    check his papers when he passed through the checkpoint.

11. Mr Hussain's submission is made without  reference  to  any  supporting
    evidence and the Judge was entitled to find that if the  appellant  was
    wanted and had left on his own passport then it was  reasonably  likely
    he would  have  been  detained.  Mr  Hussain's  submission  is  a  mere
    disagreement with the decision and does not amount to an error in law.

    DECISION

12. There is no error in law. The original decision is upheld.



Signed                              Date     April 27, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

As the appeal was dismissed no fee award is made.


Signed                              Date     April 27, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
