
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00029/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 February 2019                     |On 04 March 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AAR
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. On 26 September 2016 First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  allowed  the
       appellant's appeal to the extent it  was  said  he  was  entitled  to
       discretionary leave to remain as  an  unaccompanied  minor  for  whom
       there were no adequate reception facilities in Afghanistan.

    2. Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant  on  the  basis  the
       Judge dismissed the appeal on protection grounds albeit allowing  the
       appeal to the extent set out above.

    3. Permission to appeal was refused by a Designated Judge of the  First-
       Tier Tribunal on 21 October 2016 on the basis no arguable legal error
       had been made out. The appellant renewed his application to the Upper
       Tribunal who noted the appellant's challenges is in the nature of  an
       upgrade appeal and that since the Judge directed  that  discretionary
       leave should be granted there was presently no risk to the  appellant
       as he will not be returned to Afghanistan until such  leave  expires.
       It was found the Judge's decision is in line with the findings in  AA
       (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16  (IAC)  and  that
       the appellant's grounds do not identify any arguable error of law  in
       the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

    4. The  appellant  applied  for  permission  to  judicially  review  the
       decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  to  the  High  Court  as  a  'Cart'
       challenge where permission was refused. That decision was  challenged
       by application to the Court of Appeal which succeeded resulting in an
       order by His Honour Judge Cooke,  sitting  as  a  Deputy  High  Court
       Judge, granting permission to appeal.

    5. The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal today in light of an order
       of Mr C.M.G Ockelton, Vice President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  of  27
       November 2018 who granted permission  to  appeal  for  the  following
       reasons "permission is granted for the reasons given by Leggett LJ in
       the Order of the Court of  Appeal  in  this  case.  The  parties  are
       reminded that the Upper Tribunal's task is that set out  in  s.12  of
       the 2007 Act."

Background

    6. The appellant was born on 2 January 2003 and is now aged 16. He is  a
       national of Afghanistan. The Judge noted he arrived in the UK  on  18
       May 2015 claiming asylum on 17 June 2015.

    7. The Judge did not hear oral evidence from the  appellant,  which  was
       understandable  in  light  of  his  age,  and  the   advocates   made
       submissions.

    8. The Judge summarises the appellant's case from his witness statements
       in the following terms:

           "11.    In  summary  the  Appellant's  case  from  his   witness
                statement is that his father was a  police  officer  in  the
                local force  who  worked  with  the  Afghan  government  and
                Americans. Their problems started when he arrested  a  young
                couple trying to run away and resisted efforts to hand  them
                over to the local community rather than the authorities. His
                father shot 2 villagers, escaped and was then  arrested  for
                not carrying out his duty. The Taliban came and killed 2  of
                his sisters when the Appellant was not at home.

           12.    The Appellant gave a different account in his  interview,
                the boy had come to kidnapped girls and was arrested by  the
                Appellants father, in the village his father was  unable  to
                resist the locals and the boy and a girl was shot, for  this
                his father was arrested."

Error of law

    9. Mr Bates had not seen the order of the Court of Appeal prior  to  the
       hearing but was able to study the same after having been  provided  a
       copy by Mr Bedford. Permission to bring judicial review,  the  effect
       of the challenge to the Court of Appeal, was  granted  on  the  basis
       that the First-tier Tribunal even if it was satisfied  the  appellant
       was entitled to a grant of  discretionary  leave  should  have  still
       considered the merits of the protection claim  to  ascertain  whether
       the appellant was entitled to the grant of refugee protection sought.
       It was found the failure of the First-Tier Tribunal to do  more  than
       it did and the failure to properly determine all issues warranted the
       claim before the Court of Appeal succeeding.

   10. Mr Bates was asked during the hearing whether  he  accepted  that  in
       light of the order of the Court of Appeal the First-Tier Tribunal had
       erred in law in a manner material to the  decision  under  challenge.
       After further consideration Mr Bates accepted that the  Judge  should
       have done more than he did, as identified by the Court of Appeal, and
       that his failure to do so did amount to legal error.

   11. That properly reflects the position in law for the Judge  had  before
       him an appeal against  the  respondent's  refusal  to  recognise  the
       appellant as a refugee which should have been determined irrespective
       of whether the appellant was entitled to  a  grant  of  discretionary
       leave.

   12. Mr Bedford submitted that such error is  material  for  even  on  the
       findings  made  by  the  Judge  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  be
       recognised as a refugee.

   13. There was some discussion, as a result of a lack of adequate headings
       in the decision, as to exactly where the findings of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge began in the determination  under  challenge.  It  was
       eventually agreed that it is more likely than not to be at from [22].
       Mr Bedford's submission is based on the findings at [22 - 25] and [31
       - 32] which are in the following terms:

           "22.   Dealing with that last point first it is surprising  that
                the Appellant was able to maintain contact with  his  mother
                in  Afghanistan  by  phone  until  shortly  before  he   was
                interviewed. That would suggest that his family  might  have
                been contactable but it is clear that his  immediate  family
                have not been traced by the Home Office.

           23.    The claim that the Appellant can return to Afghanistan as
                there are adequate reception  facilities  simply  cannot  be
                maintained. The evidence of the contact with the Appellant's
                uncle, Nazir Khan, is contained in a fax of 8  August  2016.
                Phone conversation took place on the 1 December 2015.

           24.    The fax shows that his uncle stated that they were  about
                to leave the area due to the situation  (it  is  not  stated
                which area this was or where  it  was  in  relation  to  the
                Appellant's home area). They were going from the fighting to
                a safe haven in the mountains, his eldest son  was  disabled
                and  his  father  was  in  poor  health  sometimes  using  a
                wheelchair, he could not provide any  contact  details.  The
                Appellant's uncle finally confirmed that he had  cousins  in
                the UK but did not know where they lived or contact numbers.
                The Appellant's name does not appear anywhere in the  record
                of the conversation.

           25.    As the record shows that the Appellant's uncle was  about
                to move within Afghanistan, and it was not known  where  to,
                with there being no mention of the  Appellant  there  is  no
                basis for suggesting that his uncle will be in a position to
                receive the  Appellant  if  he  were  to  be  returned.  The
                consequences  of  the  failure  to   grant   the   Appellant
                discretionary leave are considered below.

           ...

           31.    The Appellant's family have  not  been  located  and  the
                contact with his cousin's father is  clearly  inadequate  to
                justify finding  that  the  Appellant  would  have  adequate
                reception facilities. I cannot find that the  Appellant  has
                done all he reasonably could to  assist  in  family  tracing
                given the evidence and the findings made above.

           32.    In the circumstances and with  there  being  no  adequate
                reception facilities the Appellant is entitled to be granted
                leave in line with the policy that applies to  unaccompanied
                minors. On that basis there is no question that he  will  be
                returned to Afghanistan and so no question arises about  the
                prospects on return. On that basis risk on return  does  not
                arise  and,   with   the   appellant   being   entitled   to
                discretionary Article 8 does not arise."

   14. In LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT  00005
       the judge accepted that the Appellant was an orphan, that there would
       be inadequate reception arrangements for him on return and  that,  in
       the light of expert evidence, he would  be  at  risk.   There  was  a
       general acceptance that an orphan could be at  risk  as  a  minor  on
       return.

   15. In DS(Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 305 it was accepted on  the
       basis of the Tribunal's findings, that the Appellant was a member  of
       the social group identified by the Tribunal  in  LQ  (Age:  immutable
       characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005 and was at risk in the
       absence of adequate reception facilities on a return  to  Afghanistan
       and even if he was not a member of the social group, so that  he  was
       not eligible for asylum, the need for humanitarian protection for  an
       unaccompanied minor  on  return  to  Afghanistan  would  need  to  be
       considered.

   16.  In ZK (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2010] EWCA Civ 749 the Court of Appeal  upheld  LQ  (Age:  immutable
       characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005 and said that, on  the
       basis of the country information evidence presented  the  Immigration
       Judge had been entitled to find that, by virtue of being a minor aged
       16 and having lost contact with all family  members  in  Afghanistan,
       the Claimant  would  be  at  risk  of  severe  harm  if  returned  to
       Afghanistan.

   17. In AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  00016  (IAC)
       the Tribunal held that (i) The evidence before the Tribunal does  not
       alter  the  position  as  described  in  HK  and  Others  (minors   -
       indiscriminate violence - forced recruitment  by  Taliban  -  contact
       with family members) Afghanistan CG [2010]  UKUT  378  (IAC),  namely
       that  when  considering  the  question  of   whether   children   are
       disproportionately affected by the consequences of the armed conflict
       in Afghanistan, a distinction has to be drawn  between  children  who
       were living with a family and those who are  not.   That  distinction
       has been reinforced by the additional material before this  Tribunal.
       Whilst it is recognised that there are some risks to  which  children
       who will have the protection of the family are nevertheless  subject,
       in  particular  the  risk  of  landmines  and  the  risks  of   being
       trafficked, they are not of such a level as to lead to the conclusion
       that all children would qualify  for  international  protection.   In
       arriving at this conclusion, account has been taken of the  necessity
       to have regard to  the  best  interests  of  children.  However,  the
       background evidence demonstrates that unattached children returned to
       Afghanistan, depending upon their individual  circumstances  and  the
       location to which they are  returned,  may  be  exposed  to  risk  of
       serious  harm,  inter  alia  from  indiscriminate  violence,   forced
       recruitment, sexual violence, trafficking  and  a  lack  of  adequate
       arrangements for child protection.  Such risks will have to be  taken
       into account when addressing the question of whether a return  is  in
       the child's best interests, a primary consideration when  determining
       a claim to humanitarian protection.

   18. The appellant clearly falls within a Particular  Social  Group  as  a
       minor. The findings of the Judge that the  appellant  has  no  family
       available to him will mean that if he is returned to  Afghanistan  he
       will returned as an unaccompanied child with  no  adequate  reception
       facilities exposing him to a  real  risk  of  exploitation  and  harm
       sufficient to amount  to  persecution  by  virtue  of  his  immutable
       characteristic  from  which  the  State  will  provide  no   adequate
       protection.

   19. In relation to internal relocation as  return  is  likely  to  be  to
       Kabul, in AS (safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018]  UKUT  00118  it
       was  held  that  having  regard  to  the  security  and  humanitarian
       situation  in  Kabul  as  well  as  the  difficulties  faced  by  the
       population living there (primarily the urban poor but also  IDPs  and
       other returnees, which are not dissimilar  to  the  conditions  faced
       throughout may other parts of Afghanistan); it will not,  in  general
       be unreasonable or unduly harsh for  a  single  adult  male  in  good
       health to relocate to Kabul even if he does  not  have  any  specific
       connections or support network in  Kabul.   However,  the  particular
       circumstances of an individual applicant must be taken  into  account
       in the context of conditions in the place of relocation, including  a
       person's age, nature and quality of support network/connections  with
       Kabul/Afghanistan,  their  physical  and  mental  health,  and  their
       language, education and vocational skills when determining whether  a
       person falls within that general position.  A person with  a  support
       network or specific connections in Kabul is likely to be  in  a  more
       advantageous position on  return,  which  may  counter  a  particular
       vulnerability of an individual on return.  The guidance in AK(Article
       15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163(IAC) in relation to  internal
       relocation for certain categories of women remains unaffected by  the
       decision as does the guidance in AA (unattended children) Afghanistan
       CG [2012] UKUT 00016.

   20. The appellant is not an adult and, as noted above, the guidance in AA
       (unattended children) is not affected by the decision in AS.

   21. It was accepted by Mr Bates that  there  is  merit  in  Mr  Bedford's
       submissions in light of the findings made by the Judge in relation to
       real risk to the appellant on return and lack of  adequate  reception
       facilities.  It was also accepted the appellant  is  entitled  to  be
       recognised as a refugee on the basis of such findings.

   22. I substitute  a  decision  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Refugee
       Convention.

Decision

   23. The First-tier Judge  materially  erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the
       decision of the original Judge. I remake  the  decision  as  follows.
       This appeal is allowed.

  Anonymity.

   24. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson     Dated the 28 February 2019

