
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00416/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice|Decision and Reasons            |
|                                |Promulgated                     |
|On 7th August 2017              |On 30th August 2017             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                    [S M]
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, instructed by Taj Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal asserted that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge expressed his own  personal  view  in  relation  to  the
    asylum claim and at the outset of the hearing made prejudicial comments
    which deprived the Appellant of  a  fair  hearing.   According  to  the
    appellant's representative the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  remarks  to
    the appellant's legal representative at the hearing were as follows;-

           'Everyone come  to  Harmondsworth  become  homosexual  and  make
           asylum claim which I deal with mainly on day by day basis.  Mr S
           does your client have anything new for his asylum claim'.

 2. There were further grounds added to the challenge to the decision  such
    that (ii) the judge placed  too  much  weight  on  the  letter  of  the
    appellant's wife particularly as she was not present at  court.     The
    judge failed to appreciate and give weight to the  consistency  of  the
    appellant's evidence and failed to appreciate that  the  appellant  had
    'never wanted to live a gay life and always wanted  to  reconcile  with
    his wife as a last try' (iii) The judge erred in his assessment  of the
    second witness, and  uncle  of  the  appellant  who  was  found  to  be
    credible; his evidence was merely  dismissed  as  being  'hearsay'  and
    'from third parties' and therefore it was 'possible that he has  simply
    been duped' (iv) the judge applied the  wrong  standard  of  proof  and
    ignored the Home Office policy guidance as  to  how  to  approach  such
    claims.

 3. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh and he claimed he  could  not
    return to Bangladesh on the basis of his homosexuality.  He entered the
    UK with entry clearance as the spouse of a British citizen  in  October
    2012.  In December 2012 the spouse informed the Home  Office  that  the
    appellant  had  left  her  and  the  marriage  had  broken  down.   The
    appellant's leave was curtailed in 2013.  On 28th January the appellant
    applied for leave to remain in the UK asserting  that  there  had  been
    some misunderstandings. The application was refused on 16th March  2015
    with no right of appeal.  On  16th  November  2016  the  appellant  was
    encountered by the police as  an  overstayer,  detained  and  again  he
    stated that he wished to reconcile with his wife and could  not  return
    because of his poverty.  On 22nd November 2016 he claimed asylum.

 4. In a determination dated 17th February 2017 the Judge of the First Tier
    Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  who
    noted that it was arguable that the comments made by the judge  at  the
    hearing gave rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias.   The judge was
    invited to submit his comments.  The representative at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was also invited to submit a witness statement.

 6. Accordingly Mr S withdrew from representation and submitted  a  witness
    statement confirming that the judge made the comments outlined above at
    the outset of the hearing.  Mr S confirmed that  he  did  not  make  an
    application to the court to disqualify the First-tier Tribunal Judge on
    the same grounds as 'this was because the  FtJ  immediately  after  the
    above comments informed me that it was his general observation of  this
    type of cases as he deals with them on daily basis (sic)'.

 7. The judge was invited to comment on this application and  I  record  in
    full his remarks regarding bias

           'Thank you for your letter of 19 June 2017  and  enclosures.   I
           regret that  I  have  little  independent  recollection  of  the
           hearing beyond what is noted in the record of proceedings  which
           is reasonably detailed.

           I can however say with absolute certainty that I  did  not  make
           the specific comment attributed to me by Mr S.  For one thing it
           displays a poor grasp of English which is my native language and
           more importantly I accept that such a comment  would  inevitably
           lead to a perception of bias.

           That being said it is my general  practice  to  conduct  a  pre-
           hearing introduction  in  each  case  where  I  explain  to  the
           Appellant my function and the independence, introduced the  Home
           Office Presenting Officer and outline the issues arising in  the
           case having agreed the same with the representatives.   Although
           it is not set out in full in the record there is a note  at  the
           beginning which suggests that this is what I did here.

           Where an Appellant's sexual orientation is in  issue  I  usually
           explain to the Appellant where the burden of proof lies and that
           he/she may be asked some personal questions.  I also alluded  to
           the difficulty involved in  determining  an  appellant's  sexual
           orientation in effect paraphrasing  some  of  what  is  said  at
           paragraphs 62 to 65  of  my  decision  and  explaining  that  my
           ultimate decision will turn on an assessment of the  Appellant's
           overall credibility.

           Whilst I have no specific recollection it is likely that I would
           have discussed at the  outset  some  of  the  evidential  issues
           arising  in  this  appeal.   Here  the  appellant  had  made   2
           settlement applications as  a  spouse  and  a  leave  to  remain
           application in the same category and when encountered by  police
           as an overstayer had told them that he was seeking to  reconcile
           with his wife.  He made no reference to  being  gay.   He  first
           advanced his claimed based on sexuality only after he  had  been
           detained.

           It is the case in that in the context of my  opening  remarks  I
           often make reference to the prevalence of  opportunistic  claims
           as I do in paragraph 65 of my decision.  I therefore accept that
           in the course of my introduction in this  appeal  it  is  likely
           that I would have made  reference  to  the  prevalence  of  such
           claims arising at Harmondsworth where I sit on a regular  basis.
           However for obvious reasons  I  always  preface  my  remarks  by
           stating that I am not  suggesting  that  this  is  such  a  case
           but...'

           It is unfortunate if my opening remarks have  given  rise  to  a
           perception of bias however practice ahs never been  the  subject
           of any previous complaint and I note that no complaint was  made
           by Mr S in the  course  of  the  hearing  or  in  its  immediate
           aftermath.  His recollection of my precise  remarks  is  however
           faulty'.




 8. The notes from the judge then proceed to  address  a  presumption  that
    the application for permission to the First-tier Tribunal asserted that
    the judge entered into the arena with regard cross-examination.

 9. At  the  hearing  before  me  the  contemporaneous  notes  of  the  two
    representatives at the First-tier Tribunal Judge were submitted.  Ms  I
    drew my attention to page 9 of Mr S notes.  There  is  a  reference  at
    question 8 of the judge's questions where he states

          'I am not making  any  finding  I  see  people  every  week  from
          Pakistan/Bangladesh and  they  say  gay/when  in  detention   Why
          should I believe you lied in 2014  applications.   The  Dec  2014
          application'

10. Ms Iqbal submitted that overall there could have been a  perception  of
    bias. She cited the notes of Mr S  and  made  the  point  that  he  was
    recording a matter in shorthand  at  the  hearing.    That  was  not  a
    reflection of the judge's English.  She  also  relied  on  the  further
    grounds of appeal particularly that the judge failed to  give  adequate
    reasoning when rejecting the evidence of the uncle who was  a  witness.
     There was a complete section of judge's questions in the record of  Mr
    S notes from which question 8 above was extracted.

Conclusions

11. Although the copy of notes from Home Officer  Presenting  Officer  were
    made available to me at the hearing those notes shed no light  on  this
    matter.  The ground relating to the judge's questioning or  'descending
    into the arena'  did not appear to be part of the grounds or grant  for
    permission.

12. The President of the Upper Tribunal has  set  out  some  guidance  with
    respect  to  the  approach  in  cases  asserting  bias,  in  Sivapatham
    (Appearance of Bias) [2017] UKUT 00293 (IAC) as follows

           '(i) Indications of a closed judicial mind, a pre-determined
           outcome, engage the appearance of bias principle and are likely
           to render a hearing unfair.

           (ii) Provisional or preliminary judicial views are permissible,
           provided that an open mind is maintained.


           (iii) An appellant  does  not  require  the  permission  of  the
           tribunal to give evidence. This does not prevent the application
           of fair and sensible case management and, further, is subject to
           the doctrine of misuse of the tribunal's process'.

13. In the decision under challenge is clear that  the  judge  embarked  at
    paragraphs 62 to 65 on some general observations in relation to  asylum
    claims. The judge gives his views on statistics of homosexual people in
    any given country as being the same, he adds that sexuality  cannot  be
    determined by reference to a checklist of factors and that  it  is  not
    always appropriate to invoke delay in claiming asylum as the basis  for
    undermining the  credibility  of  an  appellant's  claim  because  'for
    cultural reasons many appellants are likely to be reluctant to  discuss
    their sexual orientation and sexual behaviour openly with others'.

14. The judge then, however, proceeded at paragraph 65

           'Equally  my  experience  indicates  that  a  corollary  of  the
           persecution of sexual minorities in some countries has  been  an
           increase in opportunistic asylum  claims  in  the  UK  based  on
           claimed sexual orientation'.

15. This comment was made immediately  prior  to  the  adverse  credibility
    finding that the appellant was not a gay man [66].

16. This application for permission to appeal signals the dangers of making
    general observations and comments at the outset of any hearing  and  at
    the outset of deliberations in a determination.  It is  one  thing  for
    the judge to explain procedure or to identify areas of the  appellant's
    evidence which needs exploration, and, for the judge to  question,  for
    the purposes of clarification, but general statements as to  statistics
    and the types of appeal before a judge, and  personal  observations  of
    the nature highlighted in this appeal, even if  they  do  not  indicate
    obvious bias, raise the notion that the judge has  taken  into  account
    irrelevant matters  rather  than  concentrating  on  the  specific  and
    individual circumstances of the case.  The opportunistic  and  previous
    claims of other appellants are not  relevant.  It  is  this  individual
    appellant's evidence which is relevant.

17. At this point it is helpful to  identify  what  are  considered  to  be
    errors of law as set out by the Court of  appeal  in  R  (Iran)  v  The
    Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at paragraph 9.

        '...It may be convenient to give a brief summary of the  points  of
        law that will most frequently be encountered in practice:


        i) Making perverse or irrational findings on a  matter  or  matters
           that were material to the outcome ("material matters");


       ii) Failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons for findings  on
           material matters;


      iii) Failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of fact or
           opinion  on material matters;


       iv) Giving weight to immaterial matters;


        v) Making a material misdirection of law on any material matter;


       vi) Committing or permitting  a  procedural  or  other  irregularity
           capable of making a material difference to the  outcome  or  the
           fairness of the proceedings;


        (vii)Making a mistake  as  to  a  material  fact  which  could   be
        established by objective  and  uncontentious  evidence,  where  the
        appellant and/or his advisers were not responsible for the mistake,
        and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a  mistake  was
        made'.


18. I note Mr S acceptance that he did  not  object  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing and the notes refer only  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  to
    'matters discussed'; there is no reference to the comment cited in  the
    witness statement.  Rather than a finding of bias,  I conclude that the
    judge has erred in giving weight to immaterial matters,  which  he  has
    referred to at the outset of his deliberations and in his own decision.
     Although the judge has gone on to  make  relevant  criticisms  of  the
    appellant's  evidence  those  findings  might  appear  to   have   been
    influenced or  tainted  by  irrelevant  matters.   As  such  I  find  a
    procedural irregularity capable of making a material difference to  the
    outcome  or  the  fairness  of  the  proceedings,  an  error  which  is
    identified as an error of law in R (Iran).  Owing  to  my  findings  in
    this regard it is unnecessary  to  consider  the  further  two  alleged
    errors of law.

19. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

20. The matter should be returned to the First Tier Tribunal for a  hearing
    de novo.


Signed      Helen Rimington             Date 7th August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington








