
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00268/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 January 2017                            |On 2 February 2017            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                    MS AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Hulse of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Brocklesby-Weller, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify the appellant or any member of her family.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 28th September 1979. The
    appellant entered the UK on 25 September 2009 on a  student  visa.  Her
    leave was subsequently extended on a number of occasions and was due to
    expire on 19th March 2016. However, on 9th  June  2015  the  respondent
    decided to curtail her leave because the appellant  had  been  expelled
    from the London School of Business and Finance. Leave was curtailed  to
    8th August 2015.

 3. The appellant was married in Pakistan  but  subsequently  divorced  her
    husband, a Pakistan national ('WH').  The  marriage  was  dissolved  in
    Pakistan, through court proceedings, in July 2003. The appellant and WH
    had a daughter. The appellant has sole legal custody  of  her  daughter
    (obtained through the courts in Pakistan). Her daughter,  aged  15,  is
    also in the UK as her dependant. The appellant's daughter  was  granted
    entry to the UK in January 2013 to join her mother.  The appellant  re-
    married a Pakistani ('SM') national in the UK on 12 November 2014. That
    marriage subsequently broke down.

 4. In February 2015 WH was killed in a road traffic accident.

 5. On 28th February 2015 the appellant  travelled  to  Pakistan  with  her
    daughter, returning on 18th March 2015. The appellant formally  claimed
    asylum on 2nd September 2015 having contacted the UKBA  on  6th  August
    2015. The claim was based on fear of persecution from the family of  WH
    who she claims want to kill and/or harm her  and  her  daughter  and/or
    want to forcibly marry her daughter to their son. The appellant  claims
    that WH left all his property to her daughter. Her former in-laws  want
    to obtain possession of the property. The appellant  also  claims  that
    she would be at risk because she married SM contrary  to  her  parent's
    wishes and that she would not be able to obtain any  support  from  her
    family as a result.

 6. On 16th December 2015 the respondent refused the appellant's claim  for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and on Human Rights grounds.

    The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In  a  decision  promulgated  on  1  August  2016  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Whitcombe dismissed the appellant's appeal. The First-
    tier Tribunal did not find that the appellant's  account  was  credible
    and therefore found that she was not at risk from her  former  in-laws.
    The First-tier Tribunal also found that neither the appellant  nor  her
    daughter would be at risk if they  returned  to  Pakistan  without  the
    support of family (i.e.  as  a  single  lone  parent).  The  First-tier
    Tribunal found that the appellant and her daughter  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and that  the
    best interests of the appellant's daughter lay in  her  remaining  with
    her mother either in Pakistan or the UK.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On  2  September  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   O'Garro   refused
    permission to appeal. The appellant renewed her application  and  on  9
    December  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  granted  the   appellant
    permission to appeal. Thus, the appeal came before me.

    The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 9. At the commencement of the hearing Ms Hulse asked for a short 30 minute
    adjournment to take further instructions from her client. I  granted  a
    short adjournment. When the hearing  re-commenced  Ms  Hulse  requested
    permission to hand up a letter from the appellant's daughter. Ms  Hulse
    indicated that the letter set out  the  appellant's  daughter's  wishes
    which was relevant to the determination of her  best  interests.  There
    was no reason given as to why this had not previously been submitted in
    accordance with the directions sent to the  parties  on  29th  December
    2016. When asked how this letter was  relevant  to  the  error  of  law
    hearing Ms Hulse indicated that  it  showed  that  the  judge  had  not
    ascertained the child's wishes as required to. I refused to  admit  the
    letter indicating that it could only be relevant if an error of law was
    found.

10. Ms Hulse relied on the grounds of appeal  and  made  oral  submissions.
    Three grounds of appeal were advanced - credibility, risk and article 8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.

    Credibility

11. In the written grounds it was submitted that the judge was incorrect in
    finding that the appellant was still in contact with  her  parents.  Ms
    Hulse submitted that the judge repeatedly says that the appellant is in
    contact with her parents - this was a factual error of law.  There  was
    limited contact and then it completely  stopped.  When  asked  when  it
    completely stopped Ms Hulse said  that  it  was  when  the  appellant's
    brothers wrote to her - which was  before  the  asylum  interview.  Her
    family considered that she  had  behaved  improperly.  Subsequently  Ms
    Hulse submitted that there was a clear indication that the contact  was
    limited and that the judge should have evaluated  the  quality  of  the
    contact.

12. The grounds set out that the judge was wrong to  require  corroborative
    evidence, that disproportionate weight was placed on  the  judge's  own
    perceptions of what  is  reasonable  behaviour  and  that  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant's parents would be  unwilling  to  give  her
    assistance was at odds with the judge's assumptions that the  appellant
    could have obtained corroborative evidence from them. Ms Hulse summited
    there was no reason to assume that the appellant's  parents  still  had
    the documents evidencing transfer of property.

13. The appellant had previously recorded an incident with the  police  and
    no action was taken. It  was  not,  therefore,  unreasonable  that  the
    appellant did not return to the police station after being told to come
    back the following day on this occasion. After  her  complaint  to  the
    police the appellant had gone to her cousin's house to stay and did not
    return to her parent's home. Ms Hulse referred to paragraph 72  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision asserting that it is clear that the  judge
    did not accept the appellant's claim because of lack  of  corroborative
    documentary evidence and based on what his  perception  is  of  what  a
    rationale person would do.

14. The grounds set out that simply because there has been  media  coverage
    of immigration and asylum matters it does not follow that the appellant
    would have been aware of this.

    Risk

15. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  account
    of the case of SM (Lone women-ostracism) Pakistan CG ('MS') [2016] UKUT
    67 when assessing risk.  Reference  is  made  to  paragraph  8  of  the
    headnote. Ms Husle submitted that in SM the Upper Tribunal  found  that
    in general it is not possible for a single woman  to  live  in  another
    part of Pakistan without the support of family or a male member of  the
    household. Where a person is educated and independent there  can  be  a
    possibility of relocation but only where the person has the support  of
    family. She referred to the headnote of SM at 2, 5, 6 and 8. The  judge
    had failed to look at the individual circumstances of this case  -  the
    appellant would be returning without the support  of  her  family.  She
    asserted that the judge was wrong just to say that he  did  not  accept
    that the in-laws would pursue the appellant in Pakistan.  He  ought  to
    have  considered  that  if  he  was  wrong  the  situation   would   be
    catastrophic for the appellant and her daughter. Further, there was  no
    assessment of the appellant's character and ability to cope. It is  not
    enough to be educated the appellant would need to be able to cope  with
    the ostracism and discrimination she would face in Pakistan as a single
    female with a child. She referred to various paragraphs of the skeleton
    argument that was before the First-tier  Tribunal  where  the  risk  to
    single women was set out with reference to objective evidence.  KA  was
    referred  to  that  identified  a  risk  of  honour  killing  which  is
    widespread and no  longer  considered  to  be  confined  to  restricted
    geographical areas in Pakistan.

    Article 8

16. Ms Hulse confirmed that it is not suggested that the appellant  or  her
    daughter fall within the Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as  amended).  She
    submitted that the appellant has lived in  the  UK  for  just  under  7
    years. She can support herself and has obtained qualifications in  this
    country. She submitted that the appellant and her daughter enjoy family
    life in the UK.

17. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal has failed to carry out
    an appropriate assessment of the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    daughter under s55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.
    There is a need to carry out a two stage assessment in accordance  with
    MK (best interests  of  the  child:  India)  [2011]  UKUT  475  and  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The first stage is to assess whether
    it is in the  best  interests  of  the  child  to  remain  in  the  UK,
    consideration of the best interests of the child requires the  weighing
    up of various diverse  factors.  Secondly,  to  consider  if  the  best
    interests of the child are outweighed by  the  importance  of  maitning
    immigration control. It is asserted that the judge failed  to  consider
    the various diverse factors. In particular  the  country  guidance  and
    findings in the expert's report of Uzma Moeen (18 July  2016)  that  it
    would not be in the appellant's daughter's best interests to return  to
    Pakistan. In particular the conclusion  of  Ms  Moeen  at  page  76  is
    referred to - 'It is highly likely that [X] would be  taken  away  from
    the appellant through the courts due to her love marriage to  SM'.  The
    judge failed to engage with the expert's report.

18. Ms Hulse submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  make
    itself aware of the wishes of the appellant's daughter contrary to  the
    authority of JO and that the judge was required, regardless of what  is
    raised at an appeal, to make enquiries into the best interests  of  the
    child. She submitted that  the  judge  dismissed  the  expert's  report
    because he did not accept her expertise and places  no  weight  on  the
    report. The judge has not  taken  into  account  that  the  appellant's
    daughter could be forced into marriage and would be at risk from her in-
    laws. The judge has not given any real  consideration  to  the  child's
    best interests. He did not consider the  dispution  to  her  education.
    Failure to consider the extent of disruption was an error of  law.  The
    judge failed to consider the impact of moving from being the child of a
    single parent in the UK  where  there  was  no  discrimination  to  the
    reality of living without the protection of family in Pakistan.

19. Ms Brockelsby Weller submitted  that  the  mistake  of  fact  regarding
    contact has not been made out. The judge referred to questions  44  and
    77 of the asylum interview where the answers of the appellant  made  it
    clear that there was contact. She submitted that  the  finding  of  the
    judge with regard to obtaining documents was one that was open to  him.
    There has been no assertion that there was any attempt by the appellant
    to obtain the documents. She submitted that the judge  had  not  simply
    relied on his own assumptions or perceptions as the judge  undertook  a
    full consideration of the evidence. With regard to  risk  she  asserted
    that the judge had given anxious scrutiny to the claim. The  judge  had
    given due regard to the  expert  report  setting  out  in  considerable
    details the key findings of the expert.  However,  the  judge  did  not
    consider that he should depart from SM which is a very  recent  country
    guidance  case.  She  submitted  that  SM  is  not  authority  for  the
    proposition that it cannot be safe for a lone female  to  live  without
    family support in Pakistan. She referred to the headnote at  iii)  -iv)
    of SM and submitted that the judge had adopted the correct approach  by
    considering the individual circumstances of the appellant.  The  judge,
    having rejected the claim that the appellant would be at risk from  her
    in-laws and in accepting that the appellant would not get support  from
    her parents, considered the risk to her as a lone single parent without
    support. The judge took into account that  she  is  well  educated  and
    likely to  find  employment  and  accommodation.  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
    relied on paragraphs 67-72 of SM.

20. Regarding article 8 she invited me to note that at paragraph 82 of  the
    decision it was accepted that the appellant  and  her  daughter  cannot
    meet paragraph 276ADE and submitted that there is no appeal against the
    findings in this regard. She referred to paragraphs 82-83 of the First-
    tier Tribunal decision and submitted that the judge had considered  the
    best interests of the child. The appellant's daughter has only been  in
    the UK for 4 years and came on the basis of a temporary stay whilst her
    mother was a student. She is not a  qualifying  child.  The  judge  had
    rejected the claim that her father's family are pursuing her  or  would
    be likely to be able to do so if the appellant relocated so the risk of
    forced marriage falls away and it was not an error of law for the judge
    to fail to factor this in when assessing her best interests. The  judge
    considered that the appellant would be able to provide for her daughter
    in Pakistan.

    Discussion

    Credibility

21. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant was in touch with  her
    parents. This is recorded at paragraphs 30, 63 and 69.  The  the  judge
    refers to the answers to questions 44, and 77 of the appellant's asylum
    interview record. Ms Hulse pursued this point with some vigour  at  the
    hearing but was unable to demonstrate that there  was  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal that all communication had ceased. Her  initial
    submission was that it had ceased at the time the appellant's  brothers
    wrote to her. These letters were  received  in  June  2015  before  the
    asylum interview which took place in  November  2015.  The  submissions
    then became focussed on the limited nature of  the  communication.  The
    interview record contains the following:

         Q7 are you in contact with them - Very limited.  My  brothers  have
         asked them not to have any contact with me

         Q 44 have you been in contact with them since - Very limited. Yes

         Q54 Have your parents returned to their home  -  yes  those  people
         attacked my house again on 1st August...

         Q76 Even about 2 weeks ago my mum told me the  Police  are  looking
         for me...

         Q77 They don't contact me, it is me who contact them (why  do  they
         still speak to  you).  Because  it  is  blood  relation,  they  are
         parents.

22. The First-tier Tribunal's finding that the  appellant  was  in  contact
    with her parents was not  factually  incorrect  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before it.

23. The First-tier Tribunal set out at paragraphs  54-59  the  approach  to
    credibility. At paragraph 55 - 56 the judge set out:

         '55.  While  the  appellant's  account  is  not   corroborated   by
         independent witnesses I am well aware  that  corroboration  is  not
         necessarily required in order for an account to be  found  credible
         and that asylum seekers will often find  it  difficult  to  provide
         independent corroborative evidence.

         56. That said, it might  undermine  credibility  if  evidence  that
         could have supported an account is not obtained or even sought when
         it might reasonably have been sought or obtained (ST (Corroboration
         - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119, Gedow [2006] EWCA Civ  1342,
         TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40.'

24. When considering documentary evidence, at paragraph 63, the  judge  set
    out:

         '63. The appellant has failed to provide any  documentary  evidence
         at all of the transfer of property from [WH] to  her  daughter,  or
         even that [WH] is dead....On the  appellant's  case,  formal  legal
         documents of some sort exist and were  delivered  to  her  parents'
         house in Pakistan. The Appellant  is  still  in  contact  with  her
         parents (see AIR Qs 44 and 77). It is surprising that the Appellant
         did not take immediate possession of the transfer documents, or  at
         least take a copy, given how important they  were.  It  is  equally
         surprising that no efforts  at  all,  let  alone  successful  ones,
         appear to have been made to obtain the documents since returning to
         the UK...There has been ample time in which to obtain the documents
         if they exist, and the Appellant's credibility is  undermined  both
         by the failure to obtain them and also by the apparent  failure  to
         try to obtain them'

25. As the First-tier Tribunal correctly pointed out there was  ample  time
    for the appellant to have attempted to obtain documents to support  the
    core of her claim. A finding that  the  appellant's  parents  would  be
    unwilling to offer much assistance in relation to consideration of risk
    on return  to  Pakistan  is  not  at  odds  with  a  criticism  of  the
    appellant's failure to even attempt to obtain documents. Nor is  it  at
    odds with the finding that the appellant had not obtained evidence,  or
    given a satisfactory explanation for its absence, from her  parents  or
    her cousin who were present during the incident. It is  submitted  that
    it is entirely plausible that her family would be unwilling to  forward
    documents or provide statements  in  support.  There  was  no  evidence
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  family  had  expressed  any
    unwillingness - the point made by the First-tier Tribunal was that  the
    appellant had not even attempted to  obtain  evidence  to  support  her
    claim. She clearly was in contact with her parents who  were  still  in
    their home in November 2015. The finding of the First-tier Tribunal was
    one that was open to it.

26. It is argued that in reaching the conclusions at paragraphs 66, 68  and
    71 the First-tier Tribunal placed a disproportionate amount  of  weight
    on its own perceptions of what is reasonable. With regard to  reporting
    to the police the First-tier Tribunal recorded:

         '66. In my judgment the failure to make a complaint to  the  police
         has not been satisfactorily explained. Even if  the  appellant  had
         had unsatisfactory experiences of the police  in  Pakistan  in  the
         past, she might still be expected to make a formal complaint to the
         police and to attempt to gain their help  and  protection.  On  her
         case, the Appellant had been subject to new  threats  and  violence
         and serious threats had been made regarding her daughter. In  those
         circumstances the failure to go back  to  the  police  station  the
         following  day  and  to  attempt  to  engage  them  undermines  the
         Appellant's credibility. She might have been pessimistic about  the
         prospects of effective police intervention but she had  nothing  to
         lose by trying.'

27. A judge is not required  to  simply  accept  an  explanation  but  must
    evaluate whether the account is credible in light  of  the  appellant's
    claim,  her  particular  circumstances,  the  culture   and   situation
    pertaining in Pakistan. The appellant's case was that both she and  her
    parents had lodged a complaint to  the  police  (Paragraph  8  skeleton
    argument - 'parents tried to  lodge  complaint  with  the  police'  and
    paragraph 19 of the appellant's witness statement, 'my  parents  and  I
    tried to lodge a police complaint.'). She was told  to  return  another
    time with the names of the perpetrators. The  judge  acknowledged  that
    she had previously had unsatisfactory experiences of the police in  the
    past. I accept that it might appear that the judge had applied his  own
    perception as to what was reasonable if taken in isolation. However, in
    the context of the credibility of the claim as a whole it was a finding
    that was open to the judge given the very serious nature of the threats
    alleged to have been made.

28. The judge found that the timing of the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum
    undermined her credibility. The appellant returned  to  the  UK  on  18
    March 2015. In June 2015 the respondent  curtailed  her  leave  to  8th
    August 2015. She failed to claim asylum until 6th August  2015  some  2
    days before her curtailed leave expired. The judge did not  accept  the
    explanation for her failure to claim when she returned  from  Pakistan,
    namely, that she was unaware of asylum or that she could claim  asylum.
    The judge evaluated the likelihood of  that  explanation  in  light  of
    media attention focussed on migration and asylum and the fact that  the
    appellant is well educated and speaks English. The appellant  has  been
    in the UK since 2009. The finding of the judge was one that was open to
    him.

Risk

29. It was asserted by Ms Hulse that SM is authority  for  the  proposition
    that a single woman without support of family or a male cannot relocate
    within Pakistan. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal failed
    to take into account paragraph 8 (in fact reference is to  headnote  5)
    of the headnote in SM and that it failed to properly take into  account
    that the appellant and her daughter will be without the protection of a
    male in Pakistan. Ms Hulse relied on paragraphs 2, 5, 6 and  8  of  the
    headnote in SM.

30. In SM the following was set out in the headnote:

         1) Save as herein set out, the existing country guidance in SN and
         HM (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283
         and in KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on return) Pakistan
         CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) remains valid.


         (2) Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her home
         area for a single woman or a female head of household, there may be
         an internal relocation option to one of Pakistan's larger cities,
         depending on the family, social and educational situation of the
         woman in question.


         (3) It will not be normally be unduly harsh to expect a single
         woman or female head of household to relocate internally within
         Pakistan if she can access support from family members or a male
         guardian in the place of relocation.


         (4) It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,
         or older women to seek internal relocation to a city. It helps if a
         woman has qualifications enabling her to get well-paid employment
         and pay for accommodation and childcare if required.


         (5) Where a single woman, with or without children, is ostracised
         by family members and other sources of possible social support
         because she is in an irregular situation, internal relocation will
         be more difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will be a question
         of fact in each case.


         (6) A single woman or female head of household who has no male
         protector or social network may be able to use the state domestic
         violence shelters for a short time, but the focus of such shelters
         is on reconciling people with their family networks, and places are
         in short supply and time limited. Privately run shelters may be
         more flexible, providing longer term support while the woman
         regularises her social situation, but again, places are limited.


         (7) Domestic violence shelters are available for women at risk but
         where they are used by women with children, such shelters do not
         always allow older children to enter and stay with their mothers.
         The risk of temporary separation, and the proportionality of such
         separation, is likely to differ depending on the age and sex of a
         woman's children: male children may be removed from their mothers
         at the age of 5 and placed in an orphanage or a madrasa until the
         family situation has been regularised (see KA and Others (domestic
         violence risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC)). Such
         temporary separation will not always be disproportionate or unduly
         harsh: that is a question of fact in each case.


         (8) Women in Pakistan are legally permitted to divorce their
         husbands and may institute divorce proceedings from the country of
         refuge, via a third party and with the help of lawyers in Pakistan,
         reducing the risk of family reprisals. A woman who does so and
         returns with a new partner or husband will have access to male
         protection and is unlikely, outside her home area, to be at risk of
         ostracism, still less of persecution or serious harm.


31. At paragraph 72 the Tribunal concluded in respect of educated women:

         72. On the evidence before us, we  consider  that  educated  women,
         those with marketable employment skills, and older women, may  well
         be able to relocate to a city and live alone: the risk of ostracism
         leading to destitution is not the same in that  case.  It  is  more
         likely that those who reach the United Kingdom would fall into  the
         latter  category.  The   social   and   educational   status,   and
         vulnerability to family control, of an appellant will be a question
         of fact in each appeal.

32. The First-tier Tribunal considered the risk to the  appellant  'on  the
    basis that she would be returning as a lone parent'.  The  judge  found
    that the:

         76... 'evidence in this case, including the expert report,  is  not
         in my assessment a sufficient evidential basis for  departing  from
         it [SM]. In SM the Upper Tribunal recently carried out a review  of
         the available material and for the reasons set out above I  do  not
         think that Mrs Moeen's evidence is sufficient for me to  find  that
         SM should not be followed...

         77. Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her  home
         area for a single woman or female head of household, there  may  be
         an internal relocation option to one of Pakistan's  larger  cities,
         depending on the family, social and educational background  of  the
         woman concerned. It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated,
         better off, or older women to seek internal relocation to  a  city.
         It helps if a woman has qualifications enabling her  to  get  well-
         paid  employment  and  pay  for  accommodation  and  childcare   if
         required.

         78 I find the Appellant falls into  that  category.  She  is  well-
         educated and has experience of respected, well-paid employment. She
         is in a strong position to be able to find work and  accommodation.
         I am not  satisfied  that  a  great  deal  of  childcare  would  be
         necessary given that [her daughter] is now nearly 15,  but  to  the
         extent that it proves necessary I am satisfied that  the  Appellant
         is likely to be able to afford it.

         79. I therefore find that even without support from her parents  or
         a male relative, the Appellant would be able to  establish  herself
         in one of Pakistan's cities, either in her home city of  Lahore  or
         elsewhere. That would be realistic and would not be unreasonable or
         unduly harsh.'

33. I do not accept Ms Hulse's submission that it was found in  SM  that  a
    single woman or lone parent cannot relocate in Pakistan unless she  has
    family support. It is clear from SM (as set out in the extracts  above)
    that whether internal relocation is unduly harsh  will  depend  on  the
    family, social and educational situation of the woman in question.  For
    a woman  without  family  support  internal  relocation  will  be  more
    difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will be a question of fact  in
    each case. It will not normally be unduly harsh  for  educated,  better
    off, or older women to seek internal relocation to a city.

34. The First-tier Tribunal set out with clarity  the  relevant  principles
    from SM and  applied  them  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
    appellant. There was no error of law in the approach of the  First-tier
    Tribunal or on the application of the guidance provided by SM.

    Article 8

35. It is asserted that it is necessary to carry out a two stage assessment
    when determining the best interests of a  child.  It  is  necessary  to
    consider firstly if the best interests of a child are to remain in  the
    UK and secondly to consider whether the best interests of the child are
    outweighed by the importance of maintaining immigration control.

36. The First-tier Tribunal did not undertake an extensive enquiry into the
    best interests of the appellant's daughter. The judge when  considering
    Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules found:

         '82 ...Having rejected the factual basis of the protection  claims,
         I find that there  are  no  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  re-
         integration into Pakistan and that it would be reasonable to expect
         the Appellant's daughter to return there.  The  Appellant  and  her
         daughter both speak Urdu and have spent the majority of their lives
         in Pakistan.

         83. That outcome  takes  account  of  the  best  interests  of  the
         Appellant's 14 year old daughter. He (sic) best  interests  lie  in
         remaining with her mother, either in Pakistan or in the UK. If  the
         appellant is removed from the UK it would be reasonable  to  expect
         her daughter to go with her (Azimi Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC).'

37. Clearly this was not part of the proportionality balancing exercise  as
    the judge was at this  stage  considering  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    therefore was not weighing whether the best interests  were  outweighed
    by other factors. The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  consider  that  an
    assessment outside the Immigration Rules was required (although it  did
    set out what its conclusions would have been had it done so). There has
    not been an appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's findings  in  this
    regard or against the findings in respect of paragraph 276 ADE.

38. Ms Hulse submitted that the assessment was inadequate and that  it  was
    incumbent of the judge to have made further enquiries into the  child's
    circumstances in order to identify  her  best  interests  and  to  have
    ascertained the appellant's daughter's own wishes.

39. In MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the  application  of)  v  Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705  the  Upper
    Tribunal considered a similar submission finding:

         59.     This issue, and a number of related matters, were  explored
         at some depth in a thoughtful judgment of Mr Justice  McCloskey  in
         MK (Sierra Leone)) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2015] UKUT 223. He concluded, and I would accept,  as  indeed  did
         this court in SS (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2013] EWCA Civ 330, that whilst a  court  can  normally
         expect an applicant to provide the information required  to  enable
         the court to make the best interests assessment since the  onus  is
         on the applicant to prove any breach of section 55, there  will  be
         cases where the court will  have  to  make  enquiries  on  its  own
         initiative. The Court of Appeal in SS(Nigeria)  thought  that  this
         was likely to be very rare (and indeed Mann J  doubted  whether  it
         would ever arise) although I think it fair to say that  Mr  Justice
         McCloskey, drawing on his broad experience in this field,  believes
         that the situation will arise more frequently. No doubt the problem
         is more likely to occur with  litigants  in  person  who  will  not
         always appreciate what information is required to make  good  their
         case. In some circumstances it may  become  apparent  that  justice
         cannot be done without further material being obtained, either by a
         party or by the court using its case  management  powers.  I  would
         accept that it may, albeit very exceptionally, be an error  of  law
         for the court to fail to make further enquiries in such cases,  and
         this may involve the need to adjourn the hearing,  although  in  my
         view the failure to do so would only be an error of law  where  the
         refusal or failure to do so was Wednesbury unreasonable or resulted
         in unfairness... '

40. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  set  out  in  the
    headnote:

         (3) Although in some cases this may  require  a  judge  to  explore
         whether the duty requires further information  to  be  obtained  or
         inquiry to be made, the judge primarily acts on the evidence in the
         case. Where that evidence gives no hint of a  suggestion  that  the
         welfare of the child is threatened by the immigration  decision  in
         question,  or  that  the  child's  best  interests  are  undermined
         thereby, there is no basis for any further judicial exploration  or
         reasoned decision on the matter.

41. The main  submissions  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  best
    interests of the appellant's daughter focused on  the  risk  of  forced
    marriage and the separation  from  her  mother  as  a  result.  In  the
    skeleton argument it was argued that it was 'clear from CG that this is
    a rare occasion when it would be in the best  interest  of  the  second
    appellant to remain in the UK  because  of  the  risk  of  harm,  being
    removed from her mother and forced  into  marriage'.  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  691  was
    relied on in general terms as was the case of Azimi-Moayed  and  others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC)

42. There was no indication before the First-tier Tribunal that the welfare
    of the appellant's daughter was threatened by the removal to  Pakistan,
    or that her best interests were undermined (other than the argument  in
    relation to the protection claim). The First-tier  Tribunal  identified
    that the appellant's daughter's best interests were to remain with  her
    mother whether that was the UK or Pakistan. The judge  considered  that
    the appellant's daughter spoke Urdu and had spent the majority  of  her
    life in Pakistan. In the absence of any evidence or reasons provided to
    the judge, in a  case  where  the  appellant  was  legally  represented
    throughout, this is  a  case  where  the  judge  was  not  required  to
    undertake any further enquiries or to obtain any further information.

43. The appellant asserts that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  take  the
    expert report into account when assessing  the  appellant's  daughter's
    best interests. In particular reference is made to  the  conclusion  of
    the report that 'it is highly likely that (appellant's daughter)  would
    be taken away from the appellant through the courts  due  to  her  love
    marriage...' As I set out above this was the focus of the submission in
    the  skeleton  argument  on  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    daughter. This ground of appeal proceeds on  an  erroneous  basis.  The
    judge had rejected the protection claim. In rejecting that claim he had
    considered the expert report, the details of  which  were  set  out  at
    length in the decision. He accepted the expertise of Ms Moeen and  took
    her opinion into consideration. However, having rejected the protection
    claim there was no basis for the judge to consider  a  risk  of  forced
    marriage or separation from her mother when assessing  the  appellant's
    daughter's best interests. Although I accept that  the  judge  did  not
    undertake an extensive analysis  of  the  appellant's  daughter's  best
    interests, on  the  evidence  presented,  the  finding  that  her  best
    interests lay in remaining with her mother whether that was the  UK  or
    Pakistan was both an unavoidable and unremarkable finding. There was no
    material error of law in the judge's assessment and findings.

Notice of Decision


The appellant's appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  respondent  is
upheld.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 2 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

