
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00754/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 October 2016                       |On 26 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     N E
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Mughal of Counsel instructed by Montague
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Judge Andonian  in
    a decision promulgated  on  28  July  2016  whereby  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  that
    she was not entitled to asylum or humanitarian  protection  she  having
    arrived in this country in August 2015 and asserted that as a  Kurd  in
    Turkey she had been persecuted by the authorities.

2.   She was born on 15 June 1999 so that when she arrived in  this  country
    she was 16 years old and at the date of the hearing was 17 and thus had
    to be treated as a minor.  She had travelled on her own from Turkey  to
    North Cyprus and then on to this country with, it seems, the assistance
    of an agent and she claimed asylum  on  her  arrival  at  the  airport.
    Unfortunately, she told a pack of lies as to the basis of her claim for
    asylum.  She then asserted that she feared that she would be persecuted
    by her family and that  she  was  also  afraid  of  ISIS.   It  is  not
    necessary for us to go into the basis of that claim because, as we say,
    it was accepted that that was untrue.  In due course she made what  she
    said was a true claim for asylum and that was based upon the fact,  she
    said, that her family, particularly  her  father,  was  active  in  the
    Kurdish political parties, the two parties that is the BDP and the  HDP
    both of which are lawful, but it was alleged by the authorities that he
    was not only sympathetic to but involved with  the  PKK  which  is  not
    lawful and which has  been  responsible  in  Turkey  for  a  degree  of
    terrorist activity or what is alleged to be terrorist activity.

3.   She was asked about her knowledge of the two parties and was found  not
    to have the sort of knowledge that would be expected from  someone  who
    was herself involved with the parties and whose family was active.  She
    was unable to name her local MPs, to have any knowledge of whether  the
    BDP had  participated  in  elections  and  did  not  demonstrate  basic
    knowledge of the party she  allegedly  supported  and  had  distributed
    leaflets on behalf of that party and this led the Secretary of State to
    take the view that it was not accepted that she was indeed  politically
    active.  It was her political activity which she said had  led  to  her
    arrest.  There was a certain amount of confusion in the sense that  she
    was not entirely saying the same thing on occasions because it appeared
    that she was saying at one stage that she had been arrested once and at
    another that it had been twice and that on each occasion she  had  been
    physically assaulted by the police it being alleged  against  her  that
    she had been active on behalf of the PKK.  It follows clearly that  her
    claim was one which, on the  face  of  it,  faced  an  uphill  struggle
    because of her initial lies and of the discrepancies  and  difficulties
    she had in dealing with her knowledge of the two parties with which she
    said that she had been involved.

4.   The main basis though upon  which  leave  to  appeal  was  granted  was
    because it was alleged that the  First-tier  Judge  had  fallen  asleep
    during the course of the hearing and it  had  been  necessary  for  the
    representative to take steps to wake him up and it was said that in the
    circumstances he had not given a proper consideration to her  case  and
    it was in addition said  that  the  reasoning  that  he  relied  on  in
    dismissing the appeal was unsatisfactory.  Unfortunately, we  are  left
    insofar as that allegation is concerned, in a  position  where  we  are
    unable to decide whether he did fall asleep or if he did it meant  that
    he did not pay proper attention to the material that was put before him
    and the submissions made on behalf of the appellant.   Mrs  Mughal  who
    represented the appellant before the judge has asserted that he  indeed
    did fall asleep and it is said  in  her  grounds  of  appeal  that  the
    conduct of the judge gave grave concern which was noted by the advocate
    appearing for the  appellant  as  well  as  a  representative  for  the
    respondent.  However, in the Home Office response of 15 September 2016,
    it is noted that the Presenting Officer's hearing minute recorded  that
    "Mrs Mughal tried to ask me whether I had noticed the judge had  fallen
    asleep during her submissions.  The Immigration Judge  was  not  asleep
    during submissions, instead he was listening with so much interest that
    we [sic] was not writing everything straight away".  As we say there is
    thus an issue as to whether he did fall asleep and what was the  effect
    if he did.  We suggested to Mrs Mughal at the  outset  of  the  hearing
    before us that in the circumstances it was not  necessary  for  us,  or
    indeed desirable, to form any concluded view in relation to the judge's
    falling asleep.  What mattered was whether the reasons that he gave for
    dismissing the appeal could properly be said to  have  dealt  with  the
    submissions that were made before him and  the  evidence  given  before
    him.

5.   It was said in the grounds and indeed  the  judge  granting  permission
    said that there was a lack of distinction in the  reasoning  with  what
    appears to have been the respondent's case  and  what  amounts  to  the
    judge's own findings and there was an arguable lack of  cogent  reasons
    for dismissing it.  We pressed Mrs Mughal to  indicate  precisely  what
    she was relying on in this regard.  She submitted and indeed  that  was
    part of the appeal that the judge had not properly taken account of the
    fact that the appellant was a minor.  He certainly refers to that on  a
    number of occasions in the course of his  judgment  and  he  makes  the
    point which in our judgment is a perfectly valid point that albeit  she
    was under 18 the fact is that she had travelled on her own from  Turkey
    to this country, had made a claim for asylum, and had put it on a false
    basis because she said she thought that if she had told the  truth  she
    would not have achieved what she wanted.  That indicates  a  degree  of
    maturity and what is necessary when taking account  of  the  fact  that
    someone is under 18 will depend on all the circumstances of  the  case.
    The reality is that it was perfectly proper to find on the basis of the
    evidence and to accept the respondent's conclusion  that  she  had  not
    been active politically and it followed that she had not been  arrested
    and dealt with as she alleged and the fact that she told lies initially
    of course is a matter that can be properly taken into  account  against
    her.  The fact that she is a Kurd and if it were the case that she  was
    politically active in the proper way does not of itself give rise to  a
    conclusion that she might be persecuted and so entitled to asylum.

6.   It seems to us that the decision of the judge accepting as we  say  the
    conclusion reached by the respondent was one which cannot  be  said  in
    any way to have been wrong and in those circumstances we  dismiss  this
    appeal.  We would only add that it seems that the appellant has  now  a
    newborn child.  It is not for us to go into any matters that may  arise
    from that but it would seem to follow that it may  be  that  she  could
    have an Article 8 claim.  That is something which she must deal with as
    soon as possible.




Notice of Decision

The  appeal  is  dismissed   on   asylum   grounds/humanitarian   protection
grounds/human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2016

Mr Justice Collins



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2016

Mr Justice Collins


