
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/00638/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 January 2018                         |On 14 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                  Mr Z A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan who travelled to the  UK  as  a
    visitor, using his own passport, on 7 March 2005. He does not appear to
    have returned thereafter, and thus claimed protection as an  overstayer
    on 9 July 2016. That protection claim was refused on  6  January  2017.
    His appeal against that refusal came before the First-tier Tribunal  at
    Taylor House on 26 July 2017, when it was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Moore.  He dismissed the appeal on  all  grounds  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 8 August 2017.  The Appellant sought to  challenge  that
    decision, and his application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 31  October
    2017 on both the grounds advanced. Thus the matter comes before me.

 2. I propose to take the two grounds in reverse order  as  it  strikes  me
    that the second ground has the most merit, so I will look at the  first
    ground in the light of my conclusion in relation to the first.

 3. The second ground complains that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
    relevant country evidence that was placed  before  him  concerning  the
    United Kashmir People's National Party, in relation  to  the  risk  the
    Appellant would face upon return to Pakistan as  a  supporter  of  that
    party. The Judge accepted that the Appellant  was  the  subject  of  an
    attack in 1994 when he was singled out for physical attack by  a  group
    of men, who appear to have been religiously motivated because the Judge
    had accepted that they were led by local mullahs. The  occasion  was  a
    public speech attended by the Appellant and others as supporters of the
    UKPNP, who were accused of being anti-Islamic,  and  physically  beaten
    up.  The Judge further accepted that in 2003 the  Appellant  was  at  a
    shop owned by his brother in Hajira, when he was singled out for attack
    by members of a religious group from the local mosque. I use  the  term
    singled out, because the  evidence  did  not  suggest  that  any  other
    customer or member of staff was attacked, or, that any other  shop  was
    attacked.

 4. The Judge did not accept that  the  Appellant  had  been  targeted  and
    attacked in 2004 in addition to the 1994 and 2003 attacks, although  it
    is difficult to discern sound  reasons  for  that  distinction  in  the
    decision.  However even if the Judge was right to reject  the  evidence
    concerning the 2004 attack, his starting point for an assessment of the
    risk of harm that the Appellant faced upon return  to  Pakistan  should
    have been the two positive findings that he had made in relation to the
    1994 and 2003 attacks, coupled with the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    ongoing political beliefs and  activities  which  the  Judge  had  also
    accepted. That evidence would need to be considered in the  context  of
    the relevant country  materials.  The  evidence  which  the  Judge  had
    accepted in relation to the Appellant's political activities  was  that
    he had been a supporter  of  the  UKPNP  from  1989  to  date.  He  had
    continued his activities in relation to that party in the UK, his claim
    in this respect having been supported by credible evidence from  senior
    officers within the party.

 5. On any view these findings should have led the  Judge  to  question  in
    accordance with the guidance set  out  in  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC  31
    whether the Appellant would be minded to continue  with  his  political
    beliefs and  political  activities  in  the  event  of  his  return  to
    Pakistan, or, whether he would be likely to abandon those  beliefs  and
    activities for fear of harm.  There is no suggestion  in  the  decision
    that the  Judge  followed  that  line  of  enquiry,  or,  applied  that
    guidance.

 6. There is an additional problem in relation to the consideration of harm
    upon return which is put quite simply by Ms Benfield as  an  inadequate
    consideration of the available country  material  that  the  Judge  was
    taken through at the hearing concerning human rights violations in Azad
    Kashmir, and the attitude of those who favour an Islamic state  towards
    those who would favour a secular state either in that particular region
    or more  generally  across  Pakistan.   The  totality  of  the  judge's
    consideration of all of that material is to be found within  paragraphs
    22 and 23 of the decision.  Thus  the  existence  of  the  material  is
    acknowledged, but its content  is  not  analysed,  or  applied  to  the
    findings of primary fact the Judge made.  As  Ms  Benfield  argues  the
    Judge's approach amounts to no more than  a  simple  reference  to  the
    existence of the Country Policy and Information Note,  June  2017,  and
    the Human Rights Watch Pakistan "With Friends  Like  These..."  report.
    Thus she argues that the Judge has failed to engage  adequately  or  at
    all with the content of those reports.  I am satisfied  that  there  is
    merit in that argument because a proper consideration of  the  evidence
    would have required the Judge to consider whether an Appellant with the
    political links and activities that he had accepted would fall foul  of
    the secular/religious divide in the area that he called  home,  and  in
    that event whether internal relocation would be a sufficient answer  to
    that risk. There is no consideration of  the  possibility  of  internal
    relocation in this decision.  In my judgment therefore Ground 2 is well
    made out and the decision will have to  be  set  aside  on  that  basis
    alone.

 7. I turn then back to Ground 1.  This is a challenge to the  fairness  of
    the appeal process as a result of the Judge's  decision  to  refuse  to
    admit evidence that had been served late.  It is not disputed before me
    that the evidence had been served late.  Equally it was  not  suggested
    on behalf of the Home Office before the Judge  that  the  admission  of
    this  evidence  would  in  truth  have  caused  any  prejudice  to  the
    Presenting Officer's preparation of the appeal, or his ability to  make
    submissions upon it. The evidence in question consists in its  material
    aspect of a witness  statement  from  an  individual  said  to  be  the
    Appellant's brother. That statement confirmed not only incidents  which
    the Judge accepted had occurred but also confirmed, albeit without  any
    real detail, the incident in 2004 which the  Judge  had  rejected.  The
    statement also  suggested  that  there  was  an  ongoing  risk  to  the
    Appellant because those who had sought to attack him in the  past  were
    still making enquiries into his location and indeed had threatened  the
    maker of the statement, said to be his brother, as recently as  October
    2016. Given the way in which the appeal was presented, that was, in  my
    judgment, material and relevant evidence, albeit it  lacked  any  great
    detail.  The real question for the Judge was in reality not whether  to
    admit it, but what weight to  give  it.  Notwithstanding  that  it  had
    indeed been served late I can see no  good  reason  why  that  evidence
    should not simply have been admitted at the hearing and then given such
    weight as the Judge saw fit in the context of the rest of the  evidence
    before him.

 8. So on that basis I would also find that there is merit in Ground 1.  It
    is a matter of concern that the late evidence was said to have  sat  in
    the hands of the Appellant's solicitors for over three months prior  to
    the hearing without it having been served on the Respondent,  or  filed
    with the Tribunal. It appears to have been accepted  before  the  Judge
    that this was the result of human error for which the  Appellant  could
    not be held directly responsible. Ultimately the question for the Judge
    was one of fairness but, as conceded before me it is difficult  to  see
    that there could have been any real prejudice to the Respondent in  its
    admission, whereas there was obviously real prejudice to the  Appellant
    in the event of its exclusion.

 9. I turn then to the question of whether or  not  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted or whether the decision is capable of being remade  before  me
    today. Both parties urge me to remit. In circumstances where  it  would
    appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been  considered  by
    the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law  has  been  to
    deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his case  to  be  properly
    considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
    Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact
    finding  exercise  is  such  that  having  regard  to  the  over-riding
    objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the
    First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement  of  13
    November 2014. To that end I must remit the appeal for a fresh  hearing
    by a judge other than Judge Moore at the Taylor House Hearing Centre.

Notice of decision

10. The decision promulgated on 8 August 2017 did involve the making of  an
    error of law sufficient to require the decision to  be  set  aside  and
    reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing de novo with the directions set out above.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 16 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes


To the Respondent
Fee award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 16 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
