
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00900/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th  April 2016                          |On 09th May 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC



                                   Between

                              YOUNG YOON CHONG
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a determination  promulgated  on  28  October
    2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana.  The appellant claims to be  a
    citizen of Malaysia born on 9  December  1966  who  pursued  an  appeal
    following  the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  to  grant  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection, that decision being  communicated  on  9  June
    2015.

2.   The thrust  of  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection was put on the basis that he is a practising homosexual  and
    has a well-founded fear of  persecution  were  he  to  be  returned  to
    Malaysia.  This matter had been preceded by an earlier application  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection based upon a positive case  advanced
    by the appellant, then using  another  name,  that  he  was  a  Chinese
    national and a practising Christian and that he had a well-founded fear
    of persecution were he to be returned to China.

3.   In a thorough determination, the judge  reviewed  the  evidence  placed
    before her, comprising a lengthy witness statement from  the  appellant
    and his oral testimony given through a translator which was  tested  in
    cross-examination.  The judge came to the conclusion that the appellant
    was not a credible witness; that she was not satisfied that  he  was  a
    homosexual; and therefore there was no need to examine  in  any  detail
    whether there was a well-founded fear of prosecution on return.

4.   There are  two  written  grounds  of  appeal:  one  prepared  for  when
    permission was sought from the First-tier Tribunal and the second, in a
    revised form, filed when the application for permission was renewed  in
    the Upper Tribunal. Mr Bellara, who appears for  the  appellant  today,
    has advanced this appeal on more focused grounds and I am  grateful  to
    him for the clarity and economy of his well crafted submissions.

5.   He rightly draws attention to two  areas  where  the  drafting  of  the
    determination is infelicitous. The first is in relation to terminology:
    the judge states at paragraph 51 that the appellant's long and detailed
    witness statement "reads like a novel" and in paragraph  54  that  "the
    appellant's story reads much like a farce".  I agree  with  Mr  Bellara
    that these terms are not the most appropriate way of referring  to  the
    appellant's case or his evidence.  However those two  expressions  need
    to be read in the context of a thorough and detailed consideration.  As
    Mr Bellara properly conceded in the course of his  submissions,  whilst
    this represents an inelegant and inappropriate use  of  vocabulary,  it
    does not demonstrate an error of law sufficient to found an appeal.

6.   The second drafting matter is that on two occasions  the  judge  refers
    not to Malaysia as the country of return,  but  to  Pakistan  (once  in
    paragraph 48) to  Bangladesh  (once  in  paragraph  51).   It  is  poor
    practice to  make  errors  such  as  these  in  a  determination  where
    something as serious as asylum is at stake, but they must similarly  be
    read in context. I am satisfied as Mr Tarlow submits on  the  Secretary
    of State's behalf that those are merely typographical errors, the judge
    putting the wrong country into her determination. It is plain from  the
    determination as a wholly that she had fully in mind that Malaysia  was
    the country of return. Although they  are  regrettable  slips,  neither
    individually nor cumulatively do they amount to an error of law.

7.   Turning to be substantive grounds advanced by Mr  Bellara,  he  submits
    that the judge did not give  sufficient  reasons  for  her  credibility
    findings. He states that she took an adverse view  of  the  appellant's
    credibility  because,  as  is  recorded  in   paragraph   55   of   the
    determination, he did not give an explanation as  to  why  he  and  his
    alleged male partner chose to have sexual intercourse  one  Valentine's
    Day in an unlocked bedroom in the  partner's  matrimonial  home  (where
    they were disturbed).

8.   It is submitted that judge did not put that lack of explanation to  the
    appellant  and  therefore  did  not  afford  him  the  opportunity   of
    furnishing an explanation. As a consequence  of  what  is  said  to  be
    procedural unfairness, it is submitted that he  was  disadvantaged.  Mr
    Bellara very fairly conceded that he had  no  instructions  as  to  the
    positive  case  which  might  have  advanced  had  the  appellant  been
    questioned, although I am not sure much turns on this.

9.   Mr Bellara did not advance  the  ground  which  was  contained  in  the
    written application to the effect that no finding had been made by  the
    judge that the  appellant  was  a  homosexual.  That  would  have  been
    insupportable in the light of paragraph 56.  He emphasised that this is
    an asylum appeal where careful consideration and anxious scrutiny  must
    be given .

10.  In my judgment, paragraph 56 of the  determination  properly  sets  out
    the findings to which the judge came and to which he  was  entitled  to
    come. It reads as follows:

         "Apart from the appellant's own evidence, no credible evidence  has
         been provided. I place no reliance on the appellant's evidence that
         he is a homosexual. I find that the  appellant's  evidence  is  not
         credible, consistent and reliable. Considering all of the  evidence
         in the case as a whole, in the round, I do not find the appellant's
         evidence  to be credible in view of the matters  to  which  I  have
         referred. I find that  the  appellant's  evidence  about  a  police
         report filed against him in Malaysia by  his  father-in-law  is  an
         invention by the appellant. I am not satisfied, even to  the  lower
         burden of proof that applies in asylum cases, that the appellant is
         a homosexual, or that he fears persecution for this reason.  I find
         that the  appellant  is  an  economic  migrant  and  a  man  of  no
         credibility whatsoever."

11.  These are more than adequate reasons to come to  the  conclusion  which
    she did.  Matters of weight are entirely for First-tier Tribunal Judges
    to decide, being the primary fact finders. It is suggested that in this
    instance the judge may have given undue weight to the  previous  asylum
    claim based on a  very  different  factual  case,  as  I  have  already
    summarised.  She was perfectly entitled to place that  in  the  balance
    and to give it whatever level of weight she saw fit.  It  was  a  prior
    claim for asylum that was  roundly  rejected  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant could not be believed.  It was undoubtedly  relevant  to  the
    issue of credibility and the judge was entitled to have regard to it.

12.  I do not consider in  the  circumstances  of  this  case  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to make express enquiry of the appellant as to
    why there was no explanation for the Valentine's Day incident.  It  was
    for appellant to advance his case in whatever way he  saw  fit  and  to
    place whatever relevant evidence he wished before the  judge.  That  he
    chose within the context of a lengthy narrative to say nothing  on  the
    particular was his choice.  Even  if,  contrary  to  the  view  I  have
    expressed, there was an error of law in not giving him the  opportunity
    of addressing that matter, I do not consider it to be material  because
    the other factors which weighed heavily in the judge's mind  were  more
    than sufficient to enable her to come to the conclusion which she did.

13.  Criticism is also made of the judge for not considering the  degree  to
    which there may have been a well-founded fear of persecution.  I regard
    such criticism as misplaced. The judge had made an express finding that
    she had not been satisfied that the  appellant  was  a  homosexual.  In
    those circumstances it was  unnecessary  to  explore  the  hypothetical
    question of whether there would be a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    were he to return. I note, however, that even though such  enquiry  was
    unnecessary, the judge nonetheless did turn her mind to  it  and  in  a
    brief comment at paragraph 57 observed  from  the  background  evidence
    that there is a flourishing homosexual community in Malaysia.

14.  For all of those reasons I am satisfied that there  are  no  errors  of
    law apparent on the face of this determination. The  judge  turned  her
    mind to the evidence and given full consideration  to  the  appellant's
    case.  Whilst it was unfortunate she styled his  written  statement  as
    reading like a novel or being akin to  a  farce,  and  that  she  twice
    misstated the correct country of return, it is clear that she took  the
    totality of the appellant's evidence fully and carefully  into  account
    in reaching conclusions which were open to her on the evidence.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.




Signed   Mark Hill                               Date     4 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

