

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number PA/00492/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Newport
               Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 23rd February 2018
             On the 27th February 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                    M P B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr A Swain (Counsel, instructed by Kamaljit Sandhu
For the Respondent: M (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Iran. He arrived in the UK on the 4th of
   June 2016 and claimed asylum that day following which he went through a
   screening interview before the full interview and the Refusal Letter
   being sent out. That was dated the 6th of January 2017.

2. After the Refusal Letter had been sent the Appellant appealed by Notice
   and Grounds of Appeal of the 17th of January 2017. The appeal was listed
   quickly on the 16th of February 2017. The Appellant sought an adjournment
   to obtain legal representation and that was granted. Again the appeal was
   listed quickly being next arranged for the 1st of March 2017, the Notice
   of Hearing having been sent on the 16th of February 2017.

3. The Appellant attended the hearing on the 1st of March 2017 again
   without legal representation. The Appellant did not apply for an
   adjournment but the issue was considered by the Judge of his own volition
   in paragraphs 2 to 7 of the decision. The Judge acknowledged that in the
   relatively speedy listing and re-listing of the appeal the time had been
   limited. The Judge had regard to the Appellant's previous representation
   and the obscurity of why they had not been able to continue. In the
   circumstances the Judge continued with the hearing and in the course of
   doing read the Refusal Letter to the Appellant through the interpreter.
   That was the first time that the Appellant had had the Refusal Letter
   read to him in a language he understood. The Judge went on to dismiss the
   appeal for the reasons given in paragraphs 41 to 48 of the decision.


4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds but
   principally on the ground that it had been procedurally unfair to
   continue with the hearing and that an adjournment should have been
   granted to the Appellant to obtain legal representation. It is also
   argued that as he had only been made aware of the contents of the Refusal
   Letter at the hearing when it was summarised thorough the interpreter was
   insufficient to enable the Appellant to participate effectively in the
   hearing. Other grounds related to the emphasis on the contents of the
   Appellant's screening interview and his wife citing his conversion as a
   ground for divorce.


5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal in a decision of the
   28th of September 2017. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge
   Jackson was also sympathetic to the complaint that the Judge had placed
   too much weight on the Appellant's screening interview and the
   consideration of the Appellant's Christianity relied heavily on the
   earlier findings. The complaint with regard to the Appellant's divorce
   had less merit.


6. At the hearing Mr Swain maintained the grounds and relied on his
   skeleton argument. His focus was on the failure to adjourn and the
   consequent difficulties that that would have placed the Appellant in.
   There was a bundle that had been served which was not directly relevant
   to whether there had been an error but did indicate how the case would
   have been presented had the Appellant been represented.


7. The Home Office maintain that the decision is adequately reasoned and
   that the Judge was entitled to continue with the hearing having regard to
   the overriding objective. It was also argued that the other grounds were
   also without merit.


8. I have considerable sympathy with the Judge but with some hesitation
   have come to the conclusion that the failure to adjourn was a procedural
   error such that the decision cannot stand. Although the Judge was right
   to observe that the Appellant had had some 8 weeks since the date of the
   Refusal Letter to obtain representation the time period he was
   considering was actually much shorter. The Appellant was granted an
   adjournment on the 16th of February 2017 specifically to obtain legal
   representation but relisting took place within 14 days.


9. The difficulties that the Judge referred to pre-dated the adjournment on
   the 16th of February and which were the foundation on which the
   adjournment was granted. In reality the Judge was looking at the time
   that had arisen since the 16th of February, which was only 14 days of
   which there would have been 10 working days and an Appellant's bundle
   would have to be compiled and served 5 days before the hearing. The
   Appellant faced the additional handicap of not speaking English and
   needing a Farsi speaking interpreter. The solicitor previously identified
   had not assisted the Appellant and the Appellant had attended without a
   replacement then identified, if 6 weeks had been insufficient it is not
   clear why 2 with the limitations identified could be regarded as being
   so.


10. There are other factors to consider. The Appellant would have known
   that his claim had been refused but until the Refusal Letter was
   summarised to him would not have known what the objections were. The
   Judge rightly observed that the Appellant's credibility was central to
   the case but in Christian conversion cases there are the Darodian
   guidelines which he would not have been aware of and which the Judge does
   not appear to have had regard to.


11. If the re-listing had taken place after a longer period then the
   situation could have been very different. However as it was the Appellant
   had only 5 working days in which to obtain a solicitor who could speak
   his language or had the use of an interpreter, arrange a meeting to taken
   instructions including translating the Refusal Letter and then obtaining
   the required supporting evidence and serve it on the Home Office and
   Tribunal as required. In those circumstances I find that it was
   procedurally unfair for the Judge continue with the hearing without
   granting an adjournment and for a longer period of at least 4 weeks. On
   that basis the decision cannot stand but will have to be remade with no
   findings preserved.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, not to be heard by Judge
Loughridge.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In remitting this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal I make no fee award
which remains an issue for the First-tier Tribunal at the conclusion of the
appeal.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 23rd February 2018

