
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00009/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Rolls Building, London              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2018                          |On 27 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     MJA
                            (anonymity continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Jaquiss, instructed by Bespoke Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on [ ] 1985 and is a citizen of Bangladesh.

 2. On 26 May 2017, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal of  his  protection
    and human rights claim, dated 19 December  2016.   The  judge  did  not
    believe the appellant's claim to be gay and therefore did not find  him
    to have a well-founded fear of persecution if returned  to  Bangladesh.
    For similar reasons, the judge did not  find  the  appellant  benefited
    from humanitarian  protection  or  from  the  human  rights  convention
    (articles 2, 3 and  8  considered).   The  appellant  challenged  Judge
    Khan's decision.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 25
    October  2017  because  it  was  arguable  Judge  Khan's  findings   on
    credibility were not sound.

 4. After hearing from Ms Jaquiss and Mr Melvin, and having considered  the
    papers submitted regarding the appeal, I conclude  there  is  no  legal
    error in Judge Khan's decision and reasons statement.   My reasons will
    be apparent from what follows.

 5. I begin by discussing an issue that is not in the  grounds  of  appeal;
    Judge Khan gives no explanation why he permitted the respondent to rely
    on a bundle of unrelated  First-tier  Tribunal  decisions.   Mr  Melvin
    provided evidence that  Ms  Leyshon,  who  represented  the  respondent
    before Judge Khan, had applied for the decisions to  be  admitted  even
    though they are not reported decisions.

 6. After examining the appeal file, I retrieved the relevant  application;
    it was made under article 11(4)  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Directions 2014.  It was not  a  clear  application  from  the  papers,
    having been prepared  in  relation  to  a  different  case  and  having
    handwritten annotations.  On examination, and after hearing Mr Melvin's
    submissions, I was satisfied the document  represented  an  application
    made to Judge Khan.

 7. The decisions from other First-tier Tribunal judges were  submitted  to
    show that Mr Rashid, one of  the  appellant's  witnesses,  had  been  a
    witness in several similar appeals.  This was a  factor  on  which  the
    respondent wished to rely because it was argued Mr Rashid was a  "hired
    witness" rather than a witness of truth.  The only comment  I  make  is
    that it would  have  assisted  me  if  Judge  Khan  had  addressed  the
    application in his decision and reasons statement so that it was  clear
    to everyone why the decisions of other  judges  had  been  admitted  in
    evidence.

 8. I add one additional comment; I am  satisfied  that  in  admitting  the
    decisions of other judges, Judge Khan implicitly waived  the  anonymity
    directions contained therein for the purposes of this appeal.  In  case
    there is any doubt, those anonymity directions  were  waived  only  for
    this purpose, and for all other purposes remain in force.

 9. I move on to record the one issue that was conceded by  the  appellant.
    At paragraph 4 of the grounds of  application,  the  appellant  alleged
    that Judge Khan was  unclear  whether  he  accepted  the  appellant  is
    homosexual.  Ms Jaquiss conceded at the outset that this  was  not  the
    case because Judge Khan makes a clear finding at paragraph 45 that  the
    appellant is not homosexual.

10. The grounds that were pursued relate to the credibility  findings  made
    by Judge Khan.  The grounds allege that Judge  Khan  erred  in  several
    interconnected ways, which when considered as  a  whole  undermine  the
    finding that the appellant is not gay.  Ms Jaquiss provided me with the
    UNHCR Guidelines No 9  (Refugee  Status  bases  on  Sexual  Orientation
    and/or Gender Identity), the Home Office  API  (Sexual  Orientation  in
    Asylum Claims) and the CJEU's judgment in A, B, C v Staatsecretaris van
    Veiligheid en Justitie (Netherlands) (Case No C-148/13  and  others,  2
    December 2014).  As these  documents  are  well  known,  there  was  no
    objection to their admission.

11. In summary,  the  grounds  and  Ms  Jaquiss's  submissions,  argue  the
    following points.

      i) Judge Khan did not give  satisfactory  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         appellant's evidence regarding the delay in claiming  asylum.   The
         appellant had consistently stated he did not know  he  could  claim
         asylum based on his sexual orientation.

     ii)  Judge  Khan  did  not  have  proper  regard  to  the   appellant's
         vulnerabilities when assessing  the  veracity  of  his  statements,
         including his reluctance to  answer  some  questions.   Judge  Khan
         failed to have regard to the appellant's psychological history.

    iii) Judge Khan  failed  to  appreciate  that  the  appellant  had  been
         confused by the questions put to him about whether his family  were
         aware of his sexuality.  The  appellant's  answers  indicated  that
         whilst he thought his family knew about his sexual orientation when
         he was still living in Bangladesh, he did not tell them until after
         he had come to the UK.  There was  nothing  inconsistent  in  these
         accounts.

     iv) Judge Khan failed to give sufficient reasons for finding  that  the
         appellant's evidence was extremely vague and evasive.  The  mention
         at several junctures in parenthesis of "vague and evasive" was  not
         a clear finding.

      v) Judge Khan equates living  an  openly  gay  life  with  having  gay
         relationships, which shows a misunderstanding of  what  gay  living
         and lifestyle involves.  In relation to  this  ground,  Ms  Jaquiss
         identified that Judge Khan had erred in any event by suggesting the
         appellant claimed only to have had one sexual partner.

     vi) Judge Khan dismisses the evidence of Mr Rashid and Mr Chaudri based
         on negative findings made  by  another  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         (Designated Judge Manuell).  The mere fact  that  a  person  is  an
         experienced witness is not sufficient to justify discrediting  that
         person.    It was incumbent on Judge Khan to make findings of  fact
         on the evidence provided by Mr Rashid and Mr Chaudri.

12. In response, Mr Melvin relied on the following points.

      i) Judge Khan had taken into consideration that fact the appellant had
         delayed his claim for asylum for seven years, during which time  he
         had made other applications to the respondent, none based on a  gay
         relationship.  One application had been  based  on  a  heterosexual
         relationship.   Although  the  appellant  said  he  had  made  that
         application on the advice of a lawyer,  he  had  not  provided  any
         evidence of such collusion, and therefore such an allegation  could
         not  be  allowed  to  stand  (see  SV  (Alleging   misconduct   and
         suppressing evidence) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00160).

     ii) The appellant had not provided any medical evidence to support  his
         own claimed psychological history or  the  suicide  attempt  of  Mr
         Rashid.  In relation to the latter, Mr Melvin submitted that  there
         would have been time to obtain some  paperwork  from  the  hospital
         treating Mr Rashid over the weekend, the appeal having  been  heard
         on the Tuesday following  the  claimed  suicide  attempt.   In  the
         absence of evidence, and given the immigration and appeal  history,
         it was unsurprising that Judge Khan decided to proceed rather  than
         to adjourn.   It  was  also  unsurprising,  given  the  documentary
         evidence about the lack of Mr Rashid's reliability  as  a  witness,
         that  Judge  Khan  rejected  his  evidence  about  the  appellant's
         sexuality.

    iii) As to Mr Chaudri's evidence, Judge Khan recorded that  he  admitted
         to having supported at least another ten Bangladeshi asylum-seekers
         in relation to appeals based on  their  sexual  orientation.   That
         admission meant no evidence of the same had to be  obtained;  Judge
         Khan was right to question the reliability of the witness and  find
         his evidence did not stand up to scrutiny.

     iv) Overall, bearing in mind all the  factors  before  Judge  Khan,  Mr
         Melvin implied that the outcome was inevitable because  there  were
         numerous issues which undermined the credibility of the appellant's
         account.

13. Although I have sympathy with some of the appellant's arguments,  I  am
    not persuaded that they identify legal error.  It  was  open  to  Judge
    Khan to draw an adverse inference  about  the  appellant's  credibility
    because of the delay in claiming asylum.  It is clear from his decision
    and reasons statement that he was aware of the appellant's  explanation
    and that he rejected it.  It was open to the judge to identify that the
    appellant was sufficiently familiar with UK immigration processes  that
    his explanation was not credible.  The only criticism  I  see  is  that
    Judge Khan could have been more precise in his reasoning and could have
    given many more reasons for rejecting the appellant's  explanation  for
    the delay.  However, those criticisms are merely pointing to perfecting
    a decision; there is nothing wrong in law with the decision made or the
    reasons given.

14. It is unclear what was expected from Judge  Khan  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's   claimed   vulnerabilities.    The   First-tier   Tribunal
    procedures including Presidential guidance ensure  the  vulnerabilities
    of asylum seeking appellants are addressed to  ensure  such  appellants
    can give their best evidence.  I find there is nothing in  the  grounds
    of appeal to  indicate  that  Judge  Khan  failed  to  follow  expected
    procedures.  It is trite law that even though the standard of proof  is
    lower than a balance of probabilities  in  an  appeal  dealing  with  a
    protection claim, the burden still lies on the appellant to  prove  his
    case.  It was open to Judge Khan to find that  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged that burden because the evidence was vague  and  evasive  at
    many junctures.  I recall that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  any
    medical or other evidence to indicate any vulnerabilities that  had  to
    be addressed by special adaptations or procedures.

15. I have some  sympathy  for  the  appellant's  allegation  that  he  was
    confused by some of the questions  put  to  him  in  cross-examination.
    However, it would be usual practice for his counsel to deal with  those
    points in re-examination.  The appellant was represented by counsel and
    there is nothing from Mr Slatter to indicate that he was prevented from
    dealing with such confusion.  I find the time for raising concern about
    confusion has passed.  I cannot find Judge Khan erred in law by dealing
    with the evidence and submissions presented.

16. I have some sympathy with the appellant's concern  about  Judge  Khan's
    apparent identification of openly gay life with gay relationships.  The
    third sentence of paragraph 42 can be read in several ways if taken out
    of context.  But in context it can only mean  that  the  appellant  had
    been unable to give sufficient evidence of living an openly  gay  life.
    Judge Khan takes one specific issue, that the appellant claimed to have
    had gay relationships but in fact the evidence  did  not  support  that
    claim, as an example of why the appellant's claim was not made out.  In
    context, there is no legal error.

17. It was open to Judge Khan to reject the evidence of Mr  Rashid  and  Mr
    Chaudri as being unreliable because they  had  been  prepared  to  give
    evidence in several similar  cases.   Mr  Rashid  did  not  attend  the
    hearing for reasons which were not substantiated.  His evidence  was  a
    seven-line letter.  In the circumstances, this  was  particularly  weak
    evidence and fell below the low standard of  proof  that  applied.   Mr
    Chaudri admitted to giving evidence in at least  ten  similar  appeals.
    His evidence was found to be unreliable because it was  not  consistent
    with the appellant's account.

18. Overall, although it may be possible to criticise Judge Khan's decision
    and reasons because of typographical and linguistic errors,  when  read
    as a whole it clearly draws carefully from the evidence provided and is
    sound.  There were many reasons to find  the  appellant's  account  not
    credible,  even  taking  into  consideration  the  supporting  evidence
    provided.  Judge Khan did not resort to stereotyping and did  not  rely
    on any prejudicial matters; he examined the evidence fairly and  openly
    and came to a reasoned decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed because there is no legal error in the decision  and
reasons statement of Judge Khan.  His decision is upheld.


Signed                              Date     21 February 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"MJA".


Signed                              Date         21 February 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

