
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00370/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 1 April 2019                        |On 29 April 2019              |
|Prepared on 23 April 2019                    |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                                 KUJTIME [M]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzimmons of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                 REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born 24 March 1989. She  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 17 December 2017  to  refuse
    her asylum. The Appellant had claimed international protection  on  two
    bases: (i) that she was a member of a particular social group, a female
    victim of trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation  and  (ii)
    that she had a well-founded fear  of  persecution  as  a  member  of  a
    particular social group as a lone female in Albania with a  child  born
    out of wedlock.

The Decision at First Instance


 2. Her appeal came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davidson
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 5  February  2018.  The  Judge  allowed  the
    appeal although finding the Appellant's account of being trafficked and
    her travel to the United Kingdom to lack credibility see  [53]  of  the
    determination. The Judge also found the Appellant was not  at  risk  of
    persecution from her family in Albania and she would be able to  return
    to Albania without having to live in the area where the family resided,
    see [55]. It would be in the best interests of the Appellant's  son  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Appellant had aggravating circumstances of mental health issues and
    an illegitimate son which made the Appellant's prospects on  return  to
    Albania more challenging.  At  [62]  the  Judge  concluded  that  those
    aggravating factors made the Appellant more  vulnerable  to  being  re-
    trafficked. Given the Appellant's complex medical needs  she  would  be
    unable to avail herself of any assistance which could be given  by  the
    Albanian government. The Judge allowed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

 4. The Respondent appealed against that decision arguing  that  the  Judge
    had failed to explain why the complex needs  in  this  particular  case
    meant that the Albanian authorities could  not  prevent  the  Appellant
    from being re-trafficked and why  the  mental  health  issues  were  so
    severe as to establish a  risk  of  re-trafficking  given  the  Judge's
    finding that the Appellant was not at risk of being re-trafficked.  The
    Judge had failed to identify who the Appellant would be at  risk  from.
    The Judge had found the Appellant not to be credible yet had considered
    the Appellant's claim at its highest in allowing the appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the papers by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Parkes on 22 March 2018 who noted a  clear  inconsistency
    in the Judge's findings. Having rejected the  Appellant's  credibility,
    it was not clear why the Appellant's case had to be considered  in  the
    alternative. The Judge's findings were difficult to reconcile.

 6. Responding to the grant of permission counsel who had appeared at first
    instance and who appeared before me drafted a Rule 24  response  noting
    that the socio-economic challenges to the Appellant were likely  to  be
    substantial. The risk of trafficking could  arise  from  persons  other
    than the original traffickers and there was no material error  of  law.
    Nevertheless, the Appellant cross appealed out of time  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision to  reject  the  claim  of  being  trafficked
    submitting that the Judge's approach to  credibility  was  wrong  as  a
    matter of law. The Judge  had  not  come  to  specific  findings  about
    credibility and there was an erroneous approach  to  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant from the Appellant's  family.  The  Appellant  was  from  the
    northern part of Albania where the Kanun law  dominated.  The  question
    was whether there was a real risk of serious harm from the  Appellant's
    family in her home area and if there was whether relocation to  another
    part of Albania would be unduly harsh. The reasons given by  the  Judge
    for rejecting the continuing risk from the Appellant's trafficker  were
    inadequate.

 7. The cross application for permission  to  appeal  came  on  the  papers
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Boyes  on  25  June  2018.  He
    refused permission on the basis that the grounds were  misconceived  as
    the Appellant had won at first  instance.  The  Appellant  renewed  her
    cross-appeal to the Upper Tribunal, but permission was  again  refused,
    this time by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 22 October  2018.  There  had
    been a substantial delay in making the cross-appeal. Whilst  there  was
    some merit to the Appellant's challenge  to  the  Judge's  decision  on
    credibility, a wholesale challenge to  credibility  if  successful  was
    likely to lead the Upper Tribunal to remit the appeal for the  decision
    on the appeal to be remade on the merits.

The Hearing Before Me

 8. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me  to
    determine whether there was a material error of law and  if  there  was
    whether the appeal should be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal.
    I heard brief submissions from the parties. The  Respondent  relied  on
    his  grounds  of  onward  appeal  arguing  that  it  was  difficult  to
    understand on what basis the Judge had allowed this appeal, was  it  on
    Article 3 medical grounds or the chance of being re-trafficked  or  was
    it on Article 8 grounds in relation to the Appellant's child. According
    to the determination at [60]  having  an  illegitimate  child  made  it
    harder for a woman to access a sufficiency of protection yet  according
    to [55] the Appellant had not lived in her family's area for many years
    having moved to Tirana to study. She was therefore able  to  return  to
    Albania without having to live in the area where her family resided.

 9. At the conclusion of submissions, I indicated that I found there was  a
    material error of law and I would remit the appeal back to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard de novo with no  findings  preserved.  I  now
    give my detailed reasons for that decision.

Findings

10. The Appellant's claim for international protection was that she was  at
    risk of being re-trafficked and furthermore, could not be  expected  to
    live in Albania. Under Article 8 it was in her child's  best  interests
    that the child should remain in the United Kingdom. The  Judge  allowed
    the appeal, but I accept the criticism made in the Respondent's grounds
    that it is not clear on what basis the Judge did allow the appeal.  The
    Judge found the Appellant's account to lack credibility but  then  went
    on to consider the matter at its highest. It was not at all  clear  why
    the Judge chose to deal with the case in that way. On the one hand  the
    Judge said the Appellant would not be at risk of re-trafficking as  her
    original trafficker a man called Edison would not be able to  dupe  the
    Appellant a 2nd time.

11. On the other hand, at [62] in contradiction to that earlier finding the
    Judge found a real risk that the Appellant would be more vulnerable  to
    being re-trafficked (and thus presumably vulnerable  to  being  tricked
    again). It is axiomatic that the losing  party  should  understand  why
    they have lost but the inadequacy of the reasoning in this  case  means
    that that is not possible. Findings of fact need to be remade  in  this
    case since it is not clear what the findings were that were made by the
    Judge.

12. At [53] the Judge found the Appellant's account of being trafficked  to
    lack credibility for six reasons. Having said that the Judge then  went
    on to say that because she had not heard evidence  from  the  Appellant
    who was to be regarded as a vulnerable witness she would  consider  the
    risk of return for the Appellant based on the Appellant's case taken at
    its highest. It might have been possible for the  Judge  to  have  said
    that despite the fact the  Appellant  had  been  unable  to  give  oral
    testimony  nevertheless  the  facts  as  found  were  such   that   the
    Appellant's case was rejected. Alternatively, it might have  been  open
    to the Judge to say that even though there were credibility issues this
    these  could  be  explained  in  part  at  least  by  the   Appellant's
    vulnerability and therefore reliance would not be placed  upon  adverse
    credibility points in making  a  positive  finding  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant. However, the Judge chose neither of those courses.

13. I find a material error of law in the Judge's contradictory findings on
    trafficking. In the circumstances I consider the appropriate course  of
    action, bearing in mind the Senior President's Direction  is  to  remit
    this case back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  re-heard  with  no
    findings  of  fact  preserved.  All  issues,  the  risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked, the claimed hardship of relocation and the  best  interests
    of the Appellant's child are to be considered de novo.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I set it aside. I remit the appeal to the First-tier to  be  reheard
de novo.

Respondent's appeal allowed to that limited extent

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


                                                   Signed this 23 April 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


                                                   Signed this 23 April 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

