
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal


(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA / 00609 / 2020



                            the immigration Acts


|                                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|                                     |On 16th December 2020                 |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

                                   Mrs G K
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the original appellant. No  report
of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.
I make this order  because this is a protection claim.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.



DECISION TO SET ASIDE


The respondent's attention is drawn to paras 7 and 8 below.

1.    By my decision granting permission signed on  10  September  2020  and
     sent to the parties under cover of a notice (IA102) dated 28  September
     2020, the Upper Tribunal notified the parties of its  proposal  to  set
     aside the decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  S.  Aziz  and
     remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  Judge  of  that
     Tribunal  other  than  Judge  Aziz  to  re-make  the  decision  on  the
     appellant's appeal. The reasons for the proposal were set  out  in  the
     decision granting permission.

2.    In my decision granting permission, the  parties  were  informed  that
     the Upper Tribunal will proceed to issue a decision to give  effect  to
     its proposal unless the parties objected, with reasons, by 4 pm on  the
     14th calendar day after the date of the Tribunal's notice.

3.    To date, no response has been received from the appellant or from  the
     respondent.

4.    In all of the circumstances and for the reasons given in the  decision
     granting permission to appeal, I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of
     Judge Aziz involved the making of an error on a point of law such  that
     the decision to dismiss the appeal falls to be  set  aside.  I  set  it
     aside the decision of Judge Aziz in its entirety.

5.    For the reasons given in the decision granting  permission,  para  7.2
     of the Practice Directions applies. This appeal is  therefore  remitted
     on the merits on all issues to the First-tier Tribunal for a  Judge  of
     that Tribunal other than Judge Aziz to  re-make  the  decision  on  the
     appellant's appeal.

6.    I draw the attention of the parties to the recent judgment of  Fordham
     J in R (Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants) v President of the
     Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  [2020]  EWHC  3103
     (Admin).

7.    The respondent's attention is drawn to the fact that  she  is  now  in
     breach of the Directions issued in the decision granting permission.

8.    The respondent must now forthwith and in any event  within  5  working
     days of the date on which this Decision is sent to the  parties  comply
     with the directions issued in the decision granting permission.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set aside. This appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal on the merits on all issues for the  decision  on
the appellant's appeal to be re-made by a judge  other  than  Judge  of  the
First-tier Tribunal S. Aziz.



Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                    Date: 7 December 2020
