
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/00091/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 August 2017                     |On 31 August 2017               |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                    Q U Q
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr E Fripp counsel instructed by Morden Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction. An application was made and an order has been made.
2. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1984 and is a national of Pakistan.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Davies promulgated on 13 February 2017 which dismissed the
   Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  26
   December 2016 to refuse her protection claim.
The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Davies ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision.
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge  was  in  error  in
   that:
   a) There was procedural unfairness in proceeding to determine the  appeal
      without seeing a copy of the Appellants interview record.
   b) He failed to apply  Devaseelan  correctly  in  failing  to  adequately
      address the evidence of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK (AMUK)  or
      that of Naeem Bhatti which provided strong support for the claim  that
      her husband had been kidnapped.
   c) He raised the threshold of for  entitlement  of  protection  to  'open
      preaching' and failed to provide adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the
      Appellants evidence of sharing her faith with non Ahmadi people.
   d) He misdirected himself in respect of  MN and others (Ahmadis - country
      conditions - risk) Pakistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389(IAC)  in  that  he
      failed to adequately address the protected area  of  manifestation  of
      faith focusing  only  on  preaching;  he  failed  to  ask  whether  by
      preaching to non Ahmadis even within her open and wearing a hijab that
      identified her as an Ahmadi  did  not  reflect  someone  who  attached
      importance to the manifestation of her religious identity;he failed to
      address why the Appellant was not engaging in open activities.
7.  On 24 March 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge gave permission to appeal  on
   the grounds set out above.

8. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Fripp  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) The Respondent had failed to provide a bundle in  accordance  with  a
      direction  made  by  the  Tribunal  either  at  the  CMR  or  at  the
      substantive hearing. The contents of the interview were very relevant
      to the issue of her commitment to her faith as  there  were  detailed
      answers on this issue. The Judge was offered a copy of the  interview
      by Mr Fripp but refused this and instead accepted that  he  would  be
      provided with a copy  by  the  Respondent.  No  such  copy  was  ever
      provided and there is nothing in the decision  to  suggest  that  the
      Judge made any effort to obtain  the  interview  before  writing  his
      decision. This was unfair.

   b) Ground 2 argued that the Judge was bound to  consider  Devaseelan  as
      the Appellants husband had previously  had  an  appeal  rejected  and
      there was a clear overlap in that she also relied on the  account  of
      her husband being kidnapped. The Judge had letters from  AMAUK  which
      corroborated the kidnapping and had not been addressed in respect  of
      that  aspect  of  the  claim  by  the  previous  Judge.  This   Judge
      additionally had an AMAUK official give oral evidence.  His  evidence
      was largely unchallenged and it is unclear from the decision  whether
      Mr Bhatti was given the opportunity to address the issues  raised  by
      the Judge when he determined the weight to be given  to  Mr  Bhatti's
      evidence.

   c) The Judge reasoning about the credibility  of  the  family  suffering
      such  an  attack  was  inadequate  and  confused  plausibility   with
      behaviour that would attract protection according to MN.

   d) Ground 3 was that he wrongly identified public or open preaching, and
      the use of the word preaching was criticised  as  misleading  by  the
      Tribunal in MJ & ZM (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG   2008  UKAIT  00033
      as the key issue rather than the importance of the religious identity
      and whether this was concealed in order to avoid punishment.

   e) There was some overlap in Ground 4  in  that  the  Judge  misdirected
      himself in failing to recognise that those who wished to  express  an
      identity contrary to the penal code were entitled to refugee  status.
      The breadth of prohibitions in respect of  this  was  important.  The
      Judge focused on preaching. A correct understanding of MN was that if
      the Appellant was an active Ahmadi, had previously been  active,  her
      husband preached albeit in private, the lady wore a  style  of  hijab
      that identified her as Ahmadi  she  was  entitled  to  protection  in
      accordance with MN.

   f) The Judge had applied an elevated threshold but even on the basis  of
      the limited findings the Judge had made I could remake  the  decision
      and allow the appeal.

9. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Harrison submitted that :

   a) He relied on the Rule 24.

   b) It was a matter of concern that the Judge thought it was acceptable to
      make the decision when the evidence of the interview  was  not  before
      him and although it was undertaken by the Respondent that it would  be
      provided it was not.

   c) He accepted that the Judge applied too high a threshold.

   d) He suggested that potentially the Respondent  was  prejudiced  by  the
      Judge making findings without access to the interview.

10. In reply Mr Fripp on behalf of the Appellant submitted :

   a) The Judge did lack important material when he made  his  decision  but
      the Respondent did not  suggest  in  their  response  that  they  were
      prejudiced by the absence of the documents.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

12. The first challenge was that it was procedurally unfair of the Judge  to
   proceed without the record of interview given that Mr  Fripp  had  argued
   that her detailed responses in interview were relevant both to the  issue
   of the kidnapping and how she manifested her faith in  Pakistan  and  the
   UK. It is difficult to understand why the Judge simply did not accept the
   offer of a copy of the interview in court as both sides had it. The  case
   proceeded however on the basis that the Judge would have the  opportunity
   to consider her interview because the Respondent undertook to  provide  a
   copy. No copy was provided (and indeed there is  still  no  copy  of  the
   interview in this file) and rather than attempting to  secure  one  using
   court staff from the legal representatives the Judge  decided  (paragraph
   19) that he had 'sufficient  evidential  material  on  which  to  base  a
   decision.' This is not the test to be applied. The  Appellant  bears  the
   burden of proving her case and she asserted that  the  interview  was  an
   important part of her case. The Judge was therefore required to  consider
   whether it would be unfair to the Appellant to proceed  without  part  of
   the evidence on which she relied  and  on  which  Mr  Fripp  specifically
   addressed him in submissions. Given that the interview went to  an  issue
   that was at the heart of the case,  how  she  manifested  her  faith  and
   potentially why she behaved in the way she  did  this  was  an  important
   issue to engage with in deciding to proceed without the interview that he
   knew the Appellants Representatives could have provided  if  asked.   The
   failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and  determine  this  issue
   constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider  to  be  material
   since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise  the  outcome  could  have
   been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

13. In relation to the application of Devaseelan I am satisfied  that  while
   the Judge set out both the case and how it should be applied in this case
   at paragraphs 25-27. That he failed to properly engage with the  evidence
   of Mr Bhatti. Given that the Mr Bhatti did not appear before the previous
   Judge and his evidence 'largely unchallenged' by the HOPO (paragraph  27)
   and indeed by the Judge, it was procedurally unfair to  make  an  adverse
   finding on the basis that 'he did not produce any reports relating to the
   case of Dr Q without giving him the opportunity to address  this  concern
   in court when  Mr  Bhatti  apparently  had  the  files  relating  to  the
   Appellant with him at court.

14. In relation to the third and fourth grounds that the  Judge  misdirected
   himself in relation to MN   and set too high a threshold for  entitlement
   to refugee protection by apparently focusing only on preaching openly  Mr
   Harrison was correct in my view to concede that this ground was made out.
   I accept that MN finds that an Ahmadi who wishes to express  an  identity
   contrary to the Penal Code is entitled to refugee  status  and  that  the
   breadth of the prohibitions is significant. The Judge in focusing on open
   preaching both in Pakistan and the UK which  he  referred  to  repeatedly
   throughout the decision and which formed the basis of his conclusions  at
   paragraph 39 of  the  decision  was  applying  an  artificially  elevated
   threshold of entitlement to protection and  failed  where  he  found  the
   Appellants activities to be limited in some way to consider why they were
   limited as this is also relevant.

15. Mr Fripp argued before me that the Judge made sufficient findings  about
   the Appellants circumstances that I could  remake  to  the  decision  and
   allow it. I am satisfied that the findings in this case are  too  limited
   and insufficiently clearly reasoned to allow me to proceed on that  basis
   and the approach of the Judge so undermined by procedural unfairness that
   proceeding on the very limited positive findings made by the Judge (  she
   was active within the Ahmadi community, she wore a hijab that  identified
   her as an Ahmadi and preached to non Ahmadis in her own home)   would  be
   unfair to the Appellant. I therefore found that errors of law  have  been
   established and that the Judge's determination cannot stand and  must  be
   set aside preserving those findings that I have just referred to but  all
   other matters to be redetermined.

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In this case I have determined that the case should  be  remitted  as  I
   have found there was an error of law because the Appellant did not have a
   fair hearing due to the failure to obtain a copy of the asylum interview.



18. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard before me on a date to be fixed.

19. I made the following directions for the hearing

    . There is no copy  of  the  substantive  asylum  interview.  Given  the
      Respondents inability to provide  it  the  Appellants  representatives
      should provide the tribunal with a copy 5 days before the hearing.

    . List for 3 hours

    . Urdu Interpreter.

CONCLUSION

20. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination should be set aside and the matter remitted to  the
   First- tier tribunal.

21. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.




Signed                                                              Date
30.8.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

