
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00138/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June, 2017                        |On 12 June, 2017                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     m a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, instructed by Burton & Burton
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, M A, was born in 1972 and is a citizen  of  Libya.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge V A Cox) against a
    decision of the respondent to  refuse  him  asylum  which  is  dated  5
    November 2015.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on
    28 February 2017, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge was required to consider the appeal on asylum,  human  rights
    and humanitarian protection  grounds.   However,  at  [58],  the  judge
    perpetrated a clear error when he wrote, "I do  not  need  to  consider
    [humanitarian protection] as the appellant has been successful  in  her
    claim for asylum."  It is not  clear  why  the  appellant  has  changed
    gender at this point in the decision but what is very clear is that  in
    the preceding paragraph [57] the judge had found that the asylum appeal
    should be dismissed.  It was not correct, therefore, for the  judge  to
    ignore the claim for humanitarian protection  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had succeeded in the asylum claim because he had not done so.
     It is the case  that  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  humanitarian
    protection in the alternative and on the basis that the  appellant  was
    entitled to appeal on that basis given that he then wrote,  "Given  the
    conclusions I have reached I would in any event have found  there  were
    substantial grounds for believing that the appellant would not  face  a
    real risk of suffering serious harm  if  returned  to  the  country  of
    origin and that the appellant's removal  would  not  cause  the  United
    Kingdom to be in breach of  its  obligations  under  the  Qualification
    Directive."  This  sentence  appears  to  have  been  included  from  a
    standard template and is  insufficient,  in  my  opinion,  properly  to
    dispose of the humanitarian protection aspect of the appeal; it is  not
    clear which "conclusions" reached earlier  in  the  decision  that  the
    judge is referring to here or why those conclusions (made  in  relation
    to  the  asylum  appeal)  might  necessarily  relate  to   humanitarian
    protection.  In any event, as I have noted above, the judge should have
    proceeded to analyse the humanitarian protection claim properly and  in
    any event given that it was a live issue following the dismissal of the
    asylum appeal.

 3. I have considered whether I should leave the asylum decision intact but
    I am not persuaded that that would  be  appropriate.   The  grounds  of
    appeal challenge the judge's findings in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    claim to have worked for the previous regime in Libya and also his  sur
    place activities.  It is certainly the case that the judge has provided
    in his analysis some reasons for finding the appellant's account to  be
    incredible but,  equally,  he  has  resorted  to  generalisation  ("the
    appellant has failed to provide any satisfactory evidence  ...")  which
    leaves his reasoning in doubt.  It is unclear exactly what evidence the
    judge considered that the appellant had failed to adduce  and,  indeed,
    why that evidence might be 'satisfactory' when that which the appellant
    has adduced is not.  Having considered the  decision  carefully,  I  am
    persuaded that the only prudent course of action is to  set  aside  the
    decision in its entirety together with the findings made by the  judge.
    The next Tribunal will need to  consider  asylum  and  Article  3  ECHR
    afresh and must also, if it does not allow the asylum appeal, conduct a
    proper examination of the appeal in respect of humanitarian protection.
     When it does so, it will need to  consider  the  most  recent  country
    guidance which, as Judge Pedro (who granted permission to appeal) noted
    appears to have been ignored to a large extent by the judge (FA (Libya:
    Article 15(c)) CG [2016] UKUT 413 (IAC)).





Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  28
    February 2017 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.
    The appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge V A
    Cox) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 5. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 10 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 10 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

