
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00921/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2018                         |On 8th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Aster Wulutaw
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Ficklin of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge G R J Robson
    (the judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT)  promulgated  on  13th
    June 2017.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the  claimant.   She  claims  to  be  an
    Eritrean citizen born 5th April 1986.

 3. The claimant arrived in the UK in January 2009 and claimed asylum.  Her
    claim was refused and her subsequent appeal dismissed by  Judge  Khawar
    following a hearing on 29th July 2009.  Judge  Khawar  did  not  accept
    that the claimant was an Eritrean citizen.

 4.  The  claimant  remained  in  the  UK  and  subsequently  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain as  a  stateless  person,  pursuant  to
    paragraph 403 of the Immigration Rules.  This application  was  refused
    on 14th November 2016, the Secretary of State recording in the refusal,
    that the Appellant was not stateless, but is an Eritrean national.

 5. This appears to have prompted the claimant, on 21st December  2016,  to
    make further submissions claiming refugee  status.   These  submissions
    were refused on 12th January 2017.  The submissions  included  a  claim
    that the claimant would be at risk as  a  Pentecostal  Christian.   The
    Secretary of State accepted the further submissions as a  fresh  claim,
    but did not accept that the claimant was entitled to  asylum.   It  was
    not accepted that she had provided sufficient evidence  to  prove  that
    she can be  considered  to  be  an  Eritrean  citizen  (notwithstanding
    apparent acceptance of Eritrean nationality in the refusal  dated  14th
    November 2016).  It was not accepted that the claimant would be at risk
    if removed from the UK.   It  was  not  accepted  that  the  claimant's
    removal from the UK  would  breach  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 6. The claimant appealed and the judge allowed the appeal  on  asylum  and
    Article 8 grounds.  The judge found at paragraph 68;

         "I find that I can move away from the original determination and  I
         find that, to the lower standard, in the light of the  totality  of
         her evidence, the Appellant is of Eritrean nationality."

 7. The judge found that because the claimant is Eritrean, and she would be
    eligible to be drafted on return, she  was  entitled  to  asylum.   The
    judge rejected her claim that she would be at  risk  as  a  Pentecostal
    Christian.

 8. The judge also allowed the appeal with reference to Article 8,  finding
    that the claimant has family life with  her  partner  who  has  refugee
    status, and the couple have a child,  and  it  would  be  in  the  best
    interests of the child to remain with both parents.  The judge found it
    would be disproportionate for the claimant to be removed from the UK.

 9. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds are summarised below.

10. Firstly it was contended that the judge had erred in law by failing  to
    follow the guidance in Devaseelan Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702.  It was
    submitted that the judge had not used the previous Tribunal decision as
    a starting point, but had sought to  discredit  findings  made  by  the
    first Tribunal, in relation to the nationality and credibility  of  the
    claimant.  It was further  contended  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider that some of the additional evidence  before  him  could  have
    been before the initial Tribunal in 2009, and no reasonable explanation
    had been given as to why it was not.  Therefore  that  evidence  should
    have been treated with "the greatest circumspection" instead  of  being
    accepted at face value by the judge.  It was contended that  inadequate
    reasoning had been provided for departing  from  the  previous  finding
    that the claimant was not Eritrean.  It was contended that the previous
    Tribunal had used the correct burden and standard of proof, in  finding
    that the claimant had not proved that she is Eritrean.

11. The second ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    considering Article 8.  The judge had allowed the appeal with reference
    to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, but had not  explained  why
    it was an exceptional case.  The Secretary of State relied upon Agyarko
    [2017] UKSC 11.  It was contended that  the  judge  had  given  greater
    weight to the claimant's family life than should have  been  given  and
    had failed to carry out an adequate balancing exercise  in  respect  of
    proportionality,  and  had  failed  to  consider  the  public  interest
    considerations in section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  Judge  Manuell  in  the
    following terms;

         "1.  First-tier Tribunal Judge G R J Robson allowed the Appellant's
             appeal  against  the  refusal  in  a  decision   and   reasons
             promulgated on 13th June 2017.  The Appellant  claimed  to  be
             Eritrean but her previous appeal was dismissed in 2009.

         2.   The Respondent's onward grounds dated 22nd June 2017  were  in
             time.  In summary the grounds contend that the judge erred  in
             his approach to Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 and to Article 8
             ECHR proportionality.

         3.   The grounds are arguable.  The judge was mistaken to find that
             too  high  a  standard  of  proof  had  been  applied  by  the
             experienced judge who for secure reasons had found against the
             Appellant on all issues, including her claimed nationality, in
             2009.   Similarly,  the   Article   8   ECHR   proportionality
             assessment appears to have been driven by sympathy rather than
             statute."

13. Following the grant of permission  to  appeal  the  claimant  lodged  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  In summary  it  was  contended  that  the  judge  had  not
    materially erred in law.  It was contended that Judge Khawar was  wrong
    in law in stating at paragraph 40 of his decision in 2009;

         "The burden of proof of establishing the issue  of  nationality  is
         upon the Appellant.  The standard of proof is that of a balance  of
         probabilities.   The  evidence  presented  in  this  case,  is  not
         adequate to establish to the required standard of  proof  that  the
         Appellant is of Eritrean nationality."

14. It was  submitted  the  guidance  issued  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    confirmed that in doubtful nationality cases the burden of proof is  on
    the Appellant to show that he or she qualifies for protection under the
    Refugee Convention which  includes  evidencing  his  nationality.   The
    standard of proof is a reasonable degree of  likelihood.   In  disputed
    nationality cases the Secretary of State's guidance is that the  burden
    of proof rests with the Secretary  of  State  to  prove  the  assertion
    according to the balance of probabilities.

15. It was therefore contended that the  judge  was  entitled  to  consider
    again the issue of nationality.  The Secretary  of  State  had  in  the
    grounds seeking permission relied upon MA (Ethiopia)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    289, and on behalf of the claimant it was argued that this was  not  on
    point, and that MA (Ethiopia) was not authority to confirm the standard
    of proof in disputed or doubtful nationality cases.  The nationality of
    MA was neither in doubt nor in dispute, the issue was whether  she  was
    entitled to obtain an Ethiopian passport or not.  It was submitted that
    Devaseelan cannot be read as authority that a later  judge  must  adopt
    the clear error of a previous judge.

16. With reference to Article 8 it  was  contended  that  there  was  clear
    evidence before the FtT that if the claimant was removed from  the  UK,
    there were exceptional circumstances  preventing  the  continuation  of
    family life between the claimant, her partner and their son.

17. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the judge had erred in law such that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Submission

18. Mrs Pettersen relied upon the grounds contained within the  application
    for permission to appeal.   I  was  asked  to  note  that  the  earlier
    decision of Judge Khawar had not been successfully challenged.  I asked
    for,  and  received  from  Mrs  Pettersen  a  copy  of  a  refusal   of
    reconsideration in relation to that decision, dated 19th  August  2009,
    prepared by Senior Immigration Judge McGeachy.   Mr  Ficklin  was  also
    provided with a copy.   There  is  no  reference  in  Judge  McGeachy's
    decision to the burden of proof.

19. In making oral submissions Mr Ficklin relied upon the rule 24 response.
     It was conceded that the judge could have dealt with  Article  8  more
    fully but I was asked to note that  it  was  accepted  that  there  was
    genuine family life  between  the  claimant,  her  partner  who  is  an
    Eritrean with refugee status, and their son and therefore the judge was
    entitled to find that it would be disproportionate for the claimant  to
    be removed from the UK.

20. With reference to Devaseelan, Mr Ficklin argued that the judge had  not
    misapplied the guidance, and was fully entitled to look  again  at  the
    issue of Eritrean nationality, and one of the main  reasons  for  that,
    was the finding by Judge Khawar, that in relation to nationality it was
    for the claimant to prove this on a balance of  probabilities.   I  was
    asked to find that the decision did not contain material errors of law,
    and therefore the appeal of the Secretary of State should be dismissed.



21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

22. It is common ground that the judge was aware  that  there  had  been  a
    previous appeal and that he was aware that  the  relevant  guidance  is
    contained in Devaseelan, as he confirms this in  paragraph  51  of  his
    decision, in which he takes as his  starting  point,  the  decision  of
    Judge Khawar.  The issue that I must decide, is whether the  Devaseelan
    guidelines were correctly applied.

23. In my view the judge did not err in law on this issue.  At paragraph 37
    of Devaseelan guidance is given that the decision of  the  first  judge
    stands as an assessment of the claim the claimant was  then  making  at
    the time of that decision.  It is not binding on the second judge,  but
    the second judge is not hearing an appeal against it.  As an assessment
    of the matters that were before the first judge, it  should  simply  be
    regarded as unquestioned.  It may be built upon, and, as a result,  the
    outcome of the hearing before the second judge may be  quite  different
    from what might have been expected from a reading of the first decision
    only.  But it is not the second  judge's  role  to  consider  arguments
    intended to undermine the first judge's decision.

24. At paragraph 38 guidance is given that the second judge must be careful
    to recognise that the issue before him is not the issue that was before
    the first judge, in particular, time has passed, and the  situation  at
    the time of the second judge's decision may be shown  to  be  different
    from that which obtained previously.  The claimant's skeleton  argument
    that was before the judge addressed the  Devaseelan  point  at  length.
    The judge was specifically referred to the burden of proof, and I  find
    that he was entitled to consider this.  My view is that the  claimant's
    argument is correct that when deciding nationality, where  there  is  a
    doubtful or unknown nationality, the burden of  proof  rests  with  the
    claimant to show that they qualify for  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and the 1950 Convention, and this includes evidencing  their
    nationality.  The standard of proof that the claimant needs to meet  is
    the lower standard which is a reasonable degree of  likelihood,  not  a
    balance of probability. In my view the judge was entitled  to  consider
    this point.

25. In addition there were issues that were not before Judge  Khawar.   The
    judge was referred to background evidence on  language  and  refers  to
    this at paragraph 65.  This article was produced in 2015 and  therefore
    could not have been before Judge Khawar.  In the previous appeal  Judge
    Khawar had found at paragraph 48 that "in  the  fullness  of  time  the
    British Embassy will or will be able to make some  better  progress  in
    obtaining a response from the Eritrean Embassy.  It  may  be  that  the
    Appellant will be able to establish her claimed citizenship, that of an
    Eritrean."  Judge Khawar went on to find at paragraph 40 that the  fact
    that the claimant spoke Amharic tends to support  the  conclusion  that
    she is Ethiopian, although only limited weight  could  be  attached  to
    this.

26. The judge in referring to the report at paragraph 65 places weight upon
    the report by Asfaha Yonas Mesfun  who  described  a  period  when  the
    Ethiopian language was imposed on the Eritrean people.  In addition the
    judge noted that the Appellant's partner, who had been granted  refugee
    status as an Eritrean, also spoke Amharic and "a little Tigrinyan".

27. The evidence of the partner, to the  effect  that  he  spoke  the  same
    language as the Appellant, and he had been accepted as Eritrean,  could
    not have been before Judge Khawar in 2009.

28. I therefore conclude there were issues, some  of  which,  such  as  the
    report, and the evidence of the Appellant's partner,   could  not  have
    been before Judge Khawar, which meant that the judge  was  entitled  to
    consider those issues, and in my view he was entitled to  consider  the
    burden of proof  issue,  and  he  did  not  misapply  the  guidance  in
    Devaseelan.

29. I do not find a material error of law in the conclusion by  the  judge,
    that the Appellant is Eritrean, and would be at risk if returned  as  a
    draft evader, but not as a Pentecostal Christian.

30. In considering Article 8, I agree with Mr  Ficklin's  observation  that
    the judge could have dealt with this more fully.  There is no  evidence
    that the judge had regard to the considerations in section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that is  an  error  of
    law.  There is inadequate consideration of the public interest.

31. However, as the judge concluded that the Appellant would be at risk  if
    returned to Eritrea, and therefore was entitled to  asylum,  it  is  my
    view that the errors in relation to Article  8  are  not  material  and
    would not have altered the outcome of the hearing.

32. The judge further erred in having allowed the appeal on asylum grounds,
    and purporting to also allow it on humanitarian protection grounds.  An
    individual cannot be granted humanitarian  protection  if  they  are  a
    refugee.  However that error  is  not  material,  and  would  not  have
    altered the outcome of the hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not involve the making of a material  error  of
law such that it must be set aside.  I do not set aside the  decision.   The
appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Anonymity

The  FtT  made  no  anonymity  direction.   Mr  Ficklin  confirmed  that  no
anonymity direction was requested by the claimant.  I see no  need  to  make
an anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 3rd March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the FtT stands so does the decision not  to  make  a  fee
    award.






Signed                              Date 3rd March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

