
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/00505/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 April 2018                           |   On 25 April 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                             Mr SHAIQULLAH SAHIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Tate, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 3
      January 2017 refusing him asylum and humanitarian protection in the
      United Kingdom. First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal in a
      decision dated 29 November 2017.  Permission to appeal was granted by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Berrell on 4 January 2018, who stated that
      it is arguable that the Judge erred in his consideration of the
      appellant's age by accepting the age assessment report which was not
      provided at the hearing and by rejecting other evidence which was
      provided.

   2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  her  decision  made  the  following
      findings, which I  summarise.   The  respondent  in  her  reasons  for
      refusal letter accepts the appellant's identity  and  nationality  but
      does not accept the remainder of the appellant's account about his age
      and credibility. The respondent relies on the fact that the  appellant
      has not had any difficulties with the  Taliban  despite  his  brothers
      warning letters in 2010 and thereafter managed to live in  Afghanistan
      without difficulty for about six years. The fact that his cousins have
      a feud with the appellant lacks credibility as the appellant has given
      inconsistent evidence about this. The appellant has continued to  live
      in the same area for 5 to 6 years without serious harm and he has  not
      established that his cousin's death was either caused by  the  Taliban
      linked to his brothers work or that he would be of any interest to the
      Taliban on return.


   3. Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  Etc)
      Act 2004 applies  to  the  appellant's  appeal  because  he  travelled
      through several safe third countries on his way to the United  Kingdom
      and spent several months in France. It was clearly  his  intention  to
      come to the United Kingdom to join  his  brother  who  lives  in  this
      country. The appellant's evidence that he did not know  where  he  was
      going as he was in the agent's hands is contradicted by his  brother's
      evidence in this country who stated that his mother told them that she
      was sending the appellant to him and he should look after him and take
      responsibility for him. The appellant's credibility is compromised  by
      his failing to claim asylum in Turkey or France.


   4. The appellant's age is in dispute. He could be 17 years 11  months  or
      19 years 11 months. The appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in
      June 2016 and claimed asylum eight days later. The  appellant  claimed
      that he did not know his age until he was in Calais and enquiries were
      made about his age. It was not until this point that he was  aware  of
      how old he was. However, when answering questions at  the  hearing  he
      was able to say that his younger brother was 14  years  of  age.  When
      asked in his interview at question 9 how old  his  siblings  where  he
      answered that he said that he has three sisters, aged 30,  23  and  26
      and he also has a 14-year-old brother. It is  not  credible  that  the
      appellant would be able to know his siblings ages so clearly  and  yet
      claim he had no knowledge or concept of his own age until  he  arrived
      in Calais and his mother told him. It is also not  credible  that  the
      appellant would have to telephone his mother to find out  how  old  he
      was.


   5.  The  appellant  produced  his  identity  document,  Tazkira,  with  a
      translation which states that his age was assessed as nine  years  old
      in 2008. This document was  sent  by  his  brother  from  Afghanistan.
      Having considered the document in line with the case of Tanveer  Ahmed
      [2002] UKUT 00439, the document cannot be relied upon as comparing  it
      to his brothers Tazkira, where the details such as hair colour and eye
      colour have been filled in, the appellant's Tazkira does not have such
      details. This does not assist the appellant's credibility  as  to  his
      age. Therefore, the appellant's account  of  his  own  age  cannot  be
      accepted.


   6. The evidence of Ms Ortiz was of limited evidential value on the  issue
      of age as it would not have been her role to question the  appellant's
      age as she herself states in her witness statement as she was  present
      in Calais to provide support and aid to refugees. She  stated  in  her
      witness statement at paragraph 7 that her  feelings  are  that  he  is
      under the age of 18 years.


   7. Even if it is accepted that the appellant may not have  been  able  to
      state his date of birth according to the Gregorian calendar  and  that
      this should not count against him but there is no  suggestion  by  the
      appellant that he is depressed or has suffered any other mental health
      issues. In his skeleton argument Mr Tate does not address the issue of
      age and nor has he taken  any  points  on  any  compliance  issues  in
      relation to the assessment. The Judge was therefore satisfied that the
      appellant is now 19 years of age.


   8. There were several inconsistencies in the appellant's account  in  his
      interview and his oral evidence at the hearing. The  appellant  stated
      in his oral evidence that his cousins had not been able to attack  him
      too much as he was hardly ever outside the house and had  missed  some
      school. However, at the interview  he  had  claimed  that  his  cousin
      attacked him on the way to school when he went to play  football.  The
      appellant also claimed that she never had any trouble with the Taliban
      and nor had his family after his brother left Afghanistan in 2010. One
      explanation for this was that he was still young, and the  Taliban  do
      not act against women or children. However, he had two older  brothers
      aged 22 and 20 and the older one of the two apparently  fled  to  Iran
      only 10 days prior to the appellant leaving which means he would  have
      been 21 years old and therefore well into adulthood and he had not had
      any trouble from the Taliban. Given that the  events  surrounding  the
      appellant's brother happened in 2010 it would  be  expected  that  the
      Taliban, if they wanted to show interest in  the  appellant's  family,
      would have done so earlier. Earlier


   9. Dr Guistozzi who had prepared a report in support of  the  appellant's
      brother's appeal has also prepared a report in this appeal and  states
      at paragraph 9 that there is no time limit to feuds and  the  offended
      party's family can take revenge wherever possible and these fuels  can
      last for generations. However, whilst this may be the case for  family
      feuds  this  evidence  however  does  not  relate  to  the   Taliban's
      specifically and it is  not  credible  that  the  Taliban  would  have
      interest in the appellant or his family and yet  the  appellant  would
      not have had any difficulty or problems  caused  by  the  Taliban.  Dr
      Guistozzi further states in his report that  the  Taliban  could  have
      plausibly targeted the paternal cousins in order to  put  pressure  on
      the appellant's brother. This is one plausible  explanation  but  that
      falls far short of establishing that this is  what  actually  happened
      even on the lower standard of proof.


  10. It is not accepted that the appellant's cousins  have  carried  out  a
      campaign of harassment and abuse that has led to the appellant  having
      to leave Afghanistan to seek international  protection.  Dr  Guistozzi
      said that the appellant would be at risk in his  home  area  from  the
      Taliban. This further undermines the appellant's account that he is at
      risk from the Taliban as neither he nor his older brothers  living  in
      Afghanistan with him have had any problems from the Taliban.


  11. The appellant's brother's asylum case is materially different to  that
      of the appellant's case. The appellant's brother left  in  2010  after
      which the appellant has had no problems with the Taliban. His  cousins
      have not targeted him and his family to  any  significant  extent  and
      there is no credible evidence to suggest that they  would  inform  the
      Taliban of their dispute seven years after their cousin's  death.  The
      appellant was able to live safely in his home village so was his older
      brother who was 21 years of age on the appellant's own account when he
      left for Iran and therefore some years out of childhood.


  12. The appellant was not a target of sustained  harassment  and  violence
      from his cousins and is of no interest to the Taliban.  The  appellant
      can return to his home area where his mother lives and  with  whom  he
      remains in touch as well as his younger brother, sister and brother-in-
      law. There is no need to consider relocation as an option.

Finding as to whether there is an Error of Law in the decision

  13. The main complaint against the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  that  he
      rejected the appellant's assessment of his age  but  instead  accepted
      the age assessment of the social  services.  It  is  stated  that  the
      social services age assessment report was not produced at the  hearing
      and the Judge was not entitled to rely on it but should have relied on
      the evidence submitted by the appellant as to his age.

14. The Judge gave clear and cogent reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's
    evidence as to his age. The Judge did not find  it  credible  that  the
    appellant would be able to give the exact ages of all his siblings  but
    would need to telephone his mother in Calais to find out about his  own
    age. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant was aware of the
    concept of age as he knew the ages of all his siblings and  it  is  not
    credible that the only age he did not know was  his  own.  The  Judge's
    conclusion on the evidence is not perverse.


15. The Judge rejected the evidence of Mrs Ortiz who the Judge stated  that
    she was not in a position to assess the appellant's age and merely gave
    her opinion that "her feelings are" that  the  appellant  is  under  18
    years of age. He found her evidence of limited value because it was not
    her role to question the appellant's age as she herself stated  in  the
    witness statement that she was present in Calais to provide support and
    to aid refugees. There is no perversity in the Judge's finding that her
    "feelings" as to the appellant's age does not assist the appellant.


16. The Judge further placed no reliance  on  the  appellant's  Tazkira  to
    demonstrate his age. The appellant was assessed as nine  years  old  in
    2008. This document was sent  to  the  appellant  by  his  mother  from
    Afghanistan. The Judge considered this document in line with  the  case
    of Tanveer Ahmed and found the document cannot be relied upon for  good
    reasons. The Judge said that he compared the appellant's Tazkira to his
    brother's Tazkira which had details such as hair colour in  eye  colour
    on his and the appellant's Tazkira these details were  not  filled  in.
    That the judge was entitled not to rely on this evidence to  prove  the
    appellant's age.


17. The appellant was also entitled to find that the appellant's  brother's
    application  for  asylum  in  2010  was  different  from  that  of  the
    appellant.


18. Judge was therefore left with the evidence of the social  services  age
    assessment who put the appellant's age at 19 years of age. Although the
    grounds of appeal state that there was no social services  report,  but
    it was pointed out to me that  the  report  was  in  Annexe  B  of  the
    respondent's bundle.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  age
    assessment of the social services and he added in his decision that  no
    issue had been taken as to the procedure of the age assessment.


19. The Judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  the  victim  of
    harassment by the Taliban because his own evidence is that  he  managed
    to live there for six years after his brother fled in 2010 without  any
    adverse interest from them in him. The judge was entitled to take  into
    account that past persecution is an indicator of future persecution.


20. The Judge also took into account  that  the  appellant's  fear  of  his
    cousins is not objectively placed because he had no trouble  from  them
    while he lived in Afghanistan after his older brother left on 2010. The
    Judge was entitled to say that if anyone had an adverse interest in the
    appellant they would have done something  to  him  while  he  lived  in
    Afghanistan for all that time. This is a  sustainable  finding  on  the
    evidence before the judge and I find no perversity in it


21. I find that the first-tier Tribunal Judge has not made a material error
    of law in his decision. He was entitled to reach the  conclusions  that
    he did on the evidence before him. I find that the  appellant's  appeal
    is no more than a quarrel with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings
    and conclusion.


22. I therefore dismiss the appellant's appeal and uphold the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed by                                             Dated  this  23rd  day
    of April 2018

A Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Ms S Chana




