
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/00263/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard Cardiff Civil Justice Centre      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 September 2018                    | On 01 November 2018               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    S Y R
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Claimant: Ms Zapata Besso, Counsel
For the Secretary of State:     Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Ethiopia.  The Respondent refused her
application for asylum and humanitarian protection in a decision letter
dated 20 December 2017.  The Respondent also decided that she failed to
meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to remain on the
basis of her family life or private life in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision and her appeal came
before First-tier Tribunal Judge N J Osborne, who in a Decision and Reasons
promulgated on 17 May 2018 dismissed her appeal on all grounds.

3.   The Appellant then sought permission to appeal against the decision of
Judge Osborne and permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M
Hollingworth who concluded that it was arguable that the Judge had set out
insufficient analysis of background material in relation to activities of
the Ethiopian government outside Ethiopia or in relation to social media;
of the Appellant not being required to dissimulate upon return if asked
questions irrespective of whether the Appellant was a member or supporter
of the OLF and had set out an insufficient analysis of the relationship
between the degree of sophistication of the Ethiopian authorities within
Ethiopia and the examination of social media appertaining to issues within
Ethiopia. It was arguable that the Judge had set out insufficient analysis
of the perception of the Ethiopian authorities of demonstrations such as
those the Appellant took part in relation to the question of risk.

The Grounds

4.   The grounds are drafted by the Appellant and state that the Appellant
had been clear throughout her case that she was a supporter of OLF and not
a member. The Appellant states that she had submitted evidence that the
Ethiopian government held great interest in those who attended
demonstrations in the UK. She states that she is at risk on return for
having attended these demonstrations and just because only a handful of
people had seen the YouTube video she appeared in this did not mean that at
least one of those was a not government agent or someone who would inform
the government about their activities. There were videos of demonstrations
in the UK that had been viewed hundreds and thousands of times. She decided
to return to Ethiopia from Yemen before she knew about her parents. There
was a civil war on in Yemen so she had to leave. Her aunt told her on the
phone not to come back but didn't tell her about her parents until they
reunited. It would have been too dangerous for her to tell the Appellant
about her parents over the telephone.

The Hearing

5.   The appeal therefore came before the Upper Tribunal in order to
determine whether there was an error of law in the decision of Judge
Osborne and if so whether to set that decision aside.

6.   Ms Zapato Besso applied to amend the grounds of appeal on the basis
that they were drafted by the Appellant and that the new grounds were not a
distinct challenge. Mr Howells stated that he was aware of the proposed
grounds and had no objection despite the lateness of the application.

The power to permit the amendment to the grounds of appeal as "a document"
before the Upper Tribunal is contained in rule 5(3) of the Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. That power is subject to the
overriding objectives set out in Rule 2 of the 2008 Rules to deal with the
case "fairly and justly" including having regard to the factors set out in
Rule 2 (2). There is a structural framework to the Rules which involves the
making of an application in respect of which permission can be granted if
there is an arguable case. The Respondent then has an opportunity to file a
rule 24 Reply. However, in view of the Respondent's agreement in this case
that she is not prejudiced and the fact that is arguable that the
additional grounds flow from the original ones, I concluded that it was
fair and just to permit the amendment.

7.   I heard submissions from both representatives. Miss Zapata Besso
submitted that in relation to her Ground 1, undue weight was attached to
the inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence as to her OLF membership.
Her case was that she had always been a supporter and not a member. She did
use the word member in her asylum interview. Whilst the Judge noted at
paragraph 25 that she was using an interpreter, no weight appeared to be
attached to the fact that there is a fine line semantically between member
and supporter. The Judge did not bear in mind that she had little education
and was working through an interpreter. There was a real possibility that
the distinction was not recognised. Nowhere in the substantive interview
did she say that she was a member and not a supporter and the Judge failed
to consider what was in in her mind at that time.

8.   She submitted that undue weight was attached to issue of the
Appellant's return to Ethiopia and there was a failure to take into account
relevant expert evidence in this regard. Undue weight was attached to
positive credibility factors and no adequate reasons were given for placing
no weight on photos provided by the Appellant of herself at demonstrations
going to the issues of credibility and risk.

9.   Ground 2 related to the fact that the Judge placed too much weight on
perceived inconsistencies when they were not inconsistencies at all. Great
weight was placed on the fact that her aunt allowed her to return to
Ethiopia once she knew that her parents had been arrested as OLF members
and Judge found this implausible. The Judge failed to have regard at all to
the expert country report of Claire Beston where she explicitly stated at
30, 50 and 91 that she did not find it implausible that she was able to
exit and enter again and that she had interviewed dozens of people. She
explained that the authorities' intention is to silence people and allowing
her to exit and enter was not implausible. The Judge had given no reason
for rejecting expert's findings in this regard. His rejection was
internally inconsistent with his assessment of the fact that the expert was
a genuine Oromo expert.

10.  The Judge placed weight on the fact that she said in her screening
interview that her aunt told her that her parents had been arrested and in
her substantive interview that her aunt told her over the phone. He then
said that there was a further inconsistency at paragraph 13. In fact, the
Appellant stated in her witness statement that she was told about her
parent's arrest in the airport by her aunt. Her account in her witness
statement was consistent with account in screening interview. Paragraph 32
of the Judgment was wrong in that it said there were three accounts. There
were actually two inconsistent statements not three as between asylum
interview and screening interview and not as between them and the witness
statement.

11.  At paragraph 34 the Judge took this discrepancy to undermine her
support for the OLF. Apart from the fact that her account of when her
parents were arrested did not go to her personal political beliefs, the
Judge placed undue weight on this discrepancy because he did not place
weight on other credibility factors.

12.  Ground 3 was that insufficient weight was attached to positive
credibility factors. The Judge failed to have any regard to independent
objective evidence in the form of the expert's report in assessing the
credibility of her claim to be pro OLF. There were points which supported
the credibility of the Appellant's claim throughout the expert's report not
in the sense that she found her credible, but she found her account
consistent with information due to her expertise. There was a long list of
such findings. The first was that the country expert stated that it was
plausible that she would not have details of her parent's membership at 18.
The arrest on the basis of a report by members of public was considered to
be consistent at 20-23 of the report and at 88. The country expert
considered it to be consistent at 27-29 and 90 and plausible that father's
land was confiscated as there was extensive documentary evidence of land
occupation 82. The country expert stated that her account of a group member
of pro OLF group in Yemen being arrested was consistent with background
evidence at paragraphs 42 to 94 of her report. The expert also found it
consistent that the Appellant would have joined a pro OLF group in Yemen
that OLF refugees group together. The Judge had no regard to the
photographs provided by the Appellant on 21 May, Oct 2016 and Oct 2017 in
terms of how this corroborated her credibility. The You-tube screenshots
were not taken into account, and no regard was had to a letter from the
Secretary of the Oromo Community confirming her status as an OLF supporter.
The Tribunal needed to consider an appeal in the context of evidence as a
whole including credibility. The Judge's failure to take account of
relevant factors corroborating her account amounted to an error of law.

13.  Ground 4 was that the Judge gave no adequate reasons given for placing
weight on photos. At paragraph 38 the Appellant provided photos and
screenshots on the basis that they were outside Downing Street.  The
complaint was being made to the British Government but the complaint was
about the Ethiopian Government, pleading with the British Government to
oppose the action of the Ethiopian state. The Judge placed too much weight
on the location of protest and did not placed sufficient weight on the
perception of the authorities regarding the perception of risk.

14.  Ground 5 was that the Judge erred in failing to have regard to
documentary evidence and failing to give adequate reasons for rejecting
this evidence. The Appellant provided letter dated 3 Feb 2018 showing that
infiltrators could take pictures. The Appellant relied on the document to
show sur place activities would come to the attention of the authorities
through surveillance. He acknowledged receipt at paragraph 12 of the
decision but not when assessing risk on the basis of surveillance. He
stated that she had failed to provide documentary evidence. Moreover, the
Judge placed little weight on screenshots on the basis that it was viewed
97 times which was irrational because it did not follow that one of these
viewers was not an informant. The recording of this on Youtube placed her
at an enhanced risk. It was irrational to conclude otherwise. On any view
this was a significant amount of viewers and it was not possible to
discount the possibility that they were informants.

15.  In relation to Ground 6, Ms Zapato Besso argued that the Judge failed
to consider adequately whether as a supporter in fact she would be required
to dissimulate on return. The Appellant was at risk both the basis of her
own activities but also on HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31
grounds. Her actual opinion was pro OLF and she could not be returned
because she would continue to manifest this support. The Judge did not
address this point at all. It was submitted that the errors of law did not
apply in respect of 20 to 23 where she was found to be of Oromo ethnicity.
Those findings should be maintained.

16.  Mr Howells submitted in respect of Ground 1, in relation to the
question of whether the Judge should have placed weight on a material
discrepancy as to whether the Appellant had been a supporter or member in
Ethiopia, the Appellant had given inconsistent evidence. In her screening
interview and significantly at the hearing she claimed to have been a
supporter of the OLF. The discrepancy arose from what she said at her
asylum interview. At question 131 -5 she referred to a card and she was
asked and said she was a member. Significantly her then representatives
wrote with a large number of corrections and she did not correct her answer
to 131. She corrected her answer to 122 and 128 not 131. There was a
material discrepancy at the core of her claim to have been involved with
the OLF in Ethiopia and it was open to the Judge to find that this
discrepancy undermined the materiality of the account.

17.  In relation to Ground 2 which related to paragraph 32 of the
determination, the Respondent accepted that the Appellant's explanation at
paragraph 13 of her witness that she met her aunt in Addis Ababa and was
informed of her parent's arrest was not incompatible with her answers in
the screening interview. That still meant she had given two versions; one
that she was told in Yemen and the other in Ethiopia and that was another
material discrepancy and it was open to the Judge to find that this
undermined her credibility. Ground 2 also asserted that the Judge's finding
at paragraph 36 about the plausibility of aunt allowing her to return was
contrary to the expert evidence. That may be the case but this was not the
only reason why the Judge did not accept that the Appellant's account about
the arrest of her parents was untrue. There was a material discrepancy as
to where she was when she learnt of the arrest.

18.  In relation to Ground 3, the Judge made findings on whether the
Appellant was a member of the OLF, whether her parents had been arrested
and her sur place activity. The adverse credibility findings were open to
him. The expert report went to plausibility. The expert was not entitled to
comment on credibility. The Judge identified material inconsistencies.

19.  In respect of Ground 4 the Judge was mindful of the photographs which
were adduced and that was clear from paragraphs 39 and 40. Having
considered those photographs, he said that she was a face in a crowd and
unlikely to be identified. With regard to the You tube extract, this went
to Ground 5 also, whether there was evidence that the Ethiopian authorities
conducted surveillance, reliance in the grounds was placed on the letter of
the Secretary dated 3 February 18. At page 2 the Secretary of the Oromo
Community stated that it was suspected that infiltrators assigned by the
Ethiopian government through their embassies could disguise themselves and
take pictures. He submitted that the use of the "suspect" could indicate
that it was speculative and not based on any firm evidence and therefore
although the Judge did not mention this the omission was not material.

20.  With regard to Ground 6 it was unclear whether the HJ point was made
and it was not clear from her statement that she intended to continue with
political activities on return. There was no skeleton argument before the
First-tier Tribunal and no HJ argument made. There were no material errors
of law in the decision.

21.  Ms Zaptato Besso said that for the avoidance of doubt in respect of
Ground 4, the Judge said he was not satisfied that she would be more than a
face in the crowd and pro OLF and this issue went both to risk and
credibility of her status or belief as an OLF supporter.

22.  Both representatives agreed that the appeal should be remitted to
First-tier if an error of law was found.

Discussion

23.  I have firstly considered the grounds in respect of which permission
was granted and then I subsequently deal with the grounds and submissions
advanced at the hearing. Permission was chiefly granted on the basis of the
Judge's approach to the issue of the activities of the Ethiopian government
outside Ethiopia. At paragraph 40 of the decision the Judge noted that the
Appellant had produced no independent documentary evidence and that he had
not been referred to independent documentary evidence that the Ethiopian
government investigate or scours the worldwide social media in order to
identify or pursue those who demonstrate in the UK or indeed in any other
country outside Ethiopian against the actions of the Ethiopian government.
Although permission was granted on this ground I have not been referred to
any background evidence which the Judge should have and did not take into
account in relation to the ability of the Ethiopian government to identify
those who are active on social media or demonstrate in the UK. I note that
in the letter of 6 February 2018 from Duncan Lewis solicitors they list the
questions which are to be posed of the expert in this case, Claire Beston.
One of those questions is: "What do you consider would happen to her if she
were to return to Ethiopia as a family member of an OLF family that has
come to the attention of the authorities and in addition as an OLF
supporter in Yemen and in the UK?". The expert's report is at pages 11 to
32 of the Appellant's bundle and does not set out the questions that she
was asked to address. However, one of the subheadings is risk on return and
nowhere in the expert report is there a reference to risk arising as a
result of taking part in demonstrations in the UK.

24.  I have been referred to a letter dated 3 February 2018 from the Oromo
community which states:

 "We suspect that infiltrators assigned by the Ethiopian government through
its embassies could disguise themselves and record voices and take pictures
of people attending Oromo meetings and report them to the government. This
is a risk for those who involve in all Oromo activities here in the UK if
they were to be returned to Ethiopia among whom (the Appellant) could be
one. "

25.  The Judge refers to this letter at paragraph 37 and 38 of the decision
and therefore clearly had it in mind. It was not independent documentary
evidence, however, and the Judge was entitled to find, at paragraph 40 that
no such evidence had been produced. His finding, therefore that there was
no supporting documentary evidence to which he had been referred that
confirmed that the oppressive activities of the Ethiopian government were
extended outside Ethiopia is unimpeachable.

26.  The Appellant now impugns the Judge's findings in relation to her
membership of OLF. The Judge deals with this question at paragraph 24 to 31
of the decision. It is asserted on her behalf that the Judge placed too
much weight on inconsistencies in relation to whether she was a member or a
supporter. At paragraph 4.2 of the screening interview the Appellant stated
she was a member of the OLF and when asked at questions 96 and 97 of her
substantive interview whether she had been a member of the OLF appears to
confirm that that was the case. It is correct to say however, that she does
not specifically say herself at that point in her asylum interview that she
was a member but answers questions in relation to her membership.
Significantly, however, in answers to question 125 and 126 of her interview
she described the formal process of becoming a member and specifically
stated that she became a member herself and indeed was registered as a
member. She also described her ID card and the details on her ID card. At
paragraph 6 of her witness statement for the purposes of the hearing she
stated she was a supporter. The Judge was entitled to take account of the
fact that there was an inconsistency in her evidence. He was entitled also
to take account of the fact that he was assisted throughout her asylum
interview by an interpreter, that the Appellant's solicitors wrote to the
Respondent after her interview but did not clarify this point, and that her
oral evidence completely contradicted her claim to be a member in her
asylum interview because in cross-examination she said she was only a
supporter. The Judge evaluated all of the evidence, took account of her
explanations, and was entitled to find that on this important and central
aspect of her account she had given inconsistent and contradictory
evidence.

27.  The Appellant argues that the Judge placed too much weight on a
discrepancy as between her screening interview, witness statement and
asylum interview in relation to when and where she was when her aunt
informed her that her parents had been arrested. I agree that there were
two inconsistencies rather than three because the evidence provided in her
screening interview is consistent with the evidence she provided at
paragraph 13 of her witness statement that she was informed by her aunt at
Addis Ababa airport that her family had been arrested because they were OLF
members. The Judge set out all of the evidence and the Appellant
explanations at paragraphs 32 to 36 of the decision. It is incontrovertible
that the Appellant clearly stated in answer to questions 78 and 91 of her
asylum interview that she called her aunt prior to returning to Ethiopia
when she was in Yemen and that she returned to Ethiopia with the knowledge
that her parents had been arrested. It is also incontrovertible that at
paragraph 13 of her witness statement she states that her aunt informed her
of her parents arrest on her arrival at Addis Ababa airport. The Judge was
therefore entitled to conclude that this was a material inconsistency
having heard and rejected her explanation.

28.  The Appellant also criticises the Judge's adverse credibility finding
at paragraph 36 of the decision in which he concludes it is implausible
that the Appellant's aunt would have allowed her to return to Ethiopian as
a close relative of arrested and detailed OLF member because this would
have jeopardised her safety. It is the Appellant's case that in coming to
this conclusion the Judge failed to take adequate account of the expert's
report. What the expert says at paragraphs 30, 50 and 91 of the report is
that it is not implausible that a person who was under suspicion would have
been able to exit and enter the country because harassment, threats and
periods of arbitrary detention were intended to serve as a warning.
However, this was not the basis for the Judges adverse credibility finding
he did not find that it was implausible that the Appellant would be able to
exit and enter but rather that it was implausible that her aunt would have
allowed her to do so knowing the risk. He was entitled to come to this
conclusion which was adequately reasoned.

29.  The Appellant also argues that the Judge placed insufficient weight on
positive credibility factors. It is asserted that he failed to have any
regard to the independent objective evidence in the form of the expert's
report in assessing the claim of the Appellant to be pro OLF. It is clear
from reading the judgement as a whole that the Judge was fully cognizant of
the contents of the expert's report and indeed accepted the conclusions in
relation to the Appellant's Oromo ethnicity which had been disputed by the
Respondent. However, he rejected her account of her membership of the OLF
and her claim that her parents had been arrested on the basis of material
inconsistencies in her account and he gave adequate reasons for finding
that the Appellant had not explained these inconsistencies. He applied the
correct standard of proof and was entitled to come to the conclusions he
did on the evidence before him.

30.  The grounds further assert that insufficient regard was had to
photographic documentary evidence, her activities in the UK, and the risk
arising out of sur place activities. It is said that her social media
activities placed her at an enhanced risk. However, the Judge took full
account of the evidence produced by the Appellant in relation to these
activities from paragraphs 37 to 40 of the decision. His conclusion that
these activities would not put the Appellant at risk on return was open to
him in view of the absence of supporting independent documentary evidence
that the Ethiopian government had the inclination or ability to identify
individuals who engage in such activities abroad.

31.  It has also been argued that the Judge failed to consider that the
Appellant would seek to manifest her beliefs on return and consequently be
at risk. However, there is no suggestion in the Appellant's witness
statement or the evidence on the court file that the Appellant had ever
claimed that she would manifest her views on return. This was also not a
matter addressed by the expert and there was no skeleton argument before
the judge asserting that this is a matter that he should have considered.
In the circumstances he cannot be criticised for failing to consider
something he was not asked to consider.

32.  I conclude therefore that there was no error of law in the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law and I do not set it aside.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 15 October 2018
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

