
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00213/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2017                            |On 24 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji instructed by Malik & Malik Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of Judge
    O'Rourke allowing the appeal of  S  I  (hereafter  "the  claimant")  on
    asylum grounds and under Art 8 of the ECHR.  The judge found  that  the
    appellant would be at risk of persecution by the Taliban on  return  to
    Afghanistan as  a  result  of  her  association  with  her  father  and
    returning as a sole woman.  The judge also allowed her appeal under Art
    8 of the ECHR.

 3.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  claimant  was  one  of  eight
    appellants including her parents and five siblings. Their appeals  were
    allowed on asylum grounds on the basis that their father  was  at  real
    risk from the Taliban in his home area (close to Kabul) as a result  of
    his previous work with the US and other NATO  forces  in  his  business
    supplying them with fuel.  The judge also found that those  appellants,
    given that their home area was very close to Kabul,  could  not  safely
    relocate to Kabul itself as there was a real risk that  they  would  be
    targeted there.

The Appeal

 4. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  favourable
    decision in respect of the claimant on the basis  that  the  judge  had
    failed to give adequate reasons why she would return alone without  her
    husband.  Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 5 August
    2016.

 5. The Secretary of State has not appealed against the judge's decision to
    allow the appeals of the claimant's family members.

 6. The Secretary of State's case is that the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account that the appellant's husband, although  a  naturalised  British
    citizen, had travelled to Afghanistan in 2014 where he had married  the
    claimant and had stayed there  for  three  months.   Consequently,  the
    judge's  finding  that  the   claimant's   husband   because   of   his
    'westernised'  background  would  be  unable  to  accompany   her   was
    unsustainable.   Further,  the  judge's   finding   that   there   were
    'insurmountable obstacles' under paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM of  the
    Rules was unsustainable as was, therefore, the judge's finding that the
    claimant's removal to Afghanistan would breach Art 8.

The Submissions

 7. In his oral submissions, Mr Richards on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State relied upon the ground upon which  permission  was  granted.   He
    submitted that the judge's reasoning was very brief and inadequate.  He
    acknowledged, however, that the outcome of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal  depended  upon  whether  the  judge's  finding  was,  in  fact,
    inevitable.

 8. Mr Dhanji, who represented the claimant accepted that the  judge  could
    perhaps have given more reasons.  However,  he  pointed  out  that  the
    claimant's husband had arrived in the UK in January 2001 when he was 12
    years old.  He had been granted exceptional leave to remain in 2001 and
    indefinite leave to remain in 2006.  He became  a  British  citizen  by
    naturalisation in 2007.  Mr Dhanji accepted that it might be reasonable
    for him to go back if he had been doing so regularly but that  was  not
    the case.  He pointed out that the evidence before the judge  was  that
    the claimant's husband had returned in 2014 to marry the  claimant  and
    had stayed for three months but had barely left the  house  as  he  was
    scared.

 9. Mr Dhanji submitted that it was properly open to the judge to find that
    the claimant would be returning  as  a  lone  woman  and,  indeed,  the
    judge's decision was inevitable.

Discussion

10. It appears that the claimant's appeal was treated separately from those
    of her parents and siblings because she made a  separate  asylum  claim
    whereas her mother and siblings' claims were dependent upon that of her
    father.  As a consequence, the judge dealt with the  claimant's  appeal
    on a separate and free-standing claim.

11. It is not entirely clear to me why the judge did not  accept  that  the
    claimant was at risk as a family member of  her  father.   The  judge's
    finding in favour of the  claimant's  family  in  that  regard  is  not
    challenged.  Part of the evidence, which the judge accepted,  was  that
    the threats made by the Taliban to the claimant's father  were  threats
    made to the family as a whole.  In fact,  the  claimant's  sibling  was
    abducted in 2013 and was tortured and ultimately found dead having been
    shot.

12. On the face of it, the risk, if any, was  to  the  family  as  a  whole
    including the claimant and it is  only  perhaps,  because  of  her  age
    (namely she is 31 years old), that she made a  separate  asylum  claim.
    In reaching his findings in respect of the claimant's family the  judge
    appears to have accepted that the risk of being targeted by the Taliban
    was to the 'family' and not merely  the  claimant's  father.   At  para
    21(i)(e) the judge stated:

         "I do not accept, in the context of personal targeting of  him  and
         his family that there is a sufficiency of protection  available  to
         them in that Country." (emphasis added)

13. At para 21(i)(f), in finding that  relocation  was  'not  feasible'  to
    Kabul the judge, again, noted the position of the family:

          "I accept the appellant's submissions that his  large  family  and
          previous commercial activities would draw undue attention to  him,
          resulting in a real risk that they would be  targeted."  (emphasis
          added)

14. Those findings would and should, in my judgment, have led the judge  to
    allow the claimant's appeal on the very same basis that he allowed  the
    appeals of her family.

15. In fact, the judge adopted a  different  approach  in  para  21(ii)  as
    follows:

         "I find that while the risk of persecution of the  Eight  Appellant
         by the Taliban, by association with her father, may be less, as she
         is a sole individual who might draw less attention to herself, such
         risk, when combined with the risk to her of being an  unaccompanied
         female  in  Afghanistan,  renders  her  return  unlawful.   As  the
         Respondent's current Operational Guidance Note states:

             3.12.10  Women cannot currently rely on  protection  from  the
             Afghan authorities and it would be unreasonable to expect lone
             women and female heads of households to  relocate  internally.
             Women with a male support network  may  be  able  to  relocate
             internally.   Case  law  has   established   that   women   in
             Afghanistan are a particular social  group  in  terms  of  the
             Refugee Convention;  therefore  a  grant  of  asylum  will  be
             appropriate to applicants in this category  who  are  able  to
             demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution for  reason  of
             their gender.

         I accept that as a UK citizen, with a 'westernised' background, her
         husband would  be  unable,  for  reasons  of  his  own  safety,  to
         accompany her,  constituting  an  'insurmountable  obstacle'  under
         paragraph  EX.1  of  the  Rules,  or,  in  the  alternative,  be  a
         disproportionate interference  with  their  right  to  respect  for
         family life under Article 8".

16. I  accept,  as  both  representatives  acknowledge,  that  the  judge's
    reasoning in this passage is brief.  Also, in this  passage  the  judge
    does not make specific  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  claimant's
    husband had been in Afghanistan in 2007 in order to marry the claimant.
     However, the judge's determination must be read as  a  whole  and,  at
    para 17 of his determination, he sets out the claimant's case that  her
    husband could not be expected to live  in  Afghanistan  because  he  is
    'westernised' and makes specific reference to his visit to  Afghanistan
    to marry the claimant but that he had not felt  safe  and  rarely  went
    out.  In the refusal letter relating to the claimant, the Secretary  of
    State did not reject the claimant's asylum claim on the basis that  she
    would be returning as a lone woman without  her  husband.   Rather,  at
    paragraph 98, the Secretary of State concludes that the claimant  would
    be travelling with her 'family unit' to Afghanistan where as  a  result
    of that she could internally relocate with the family unit.   The  case
    before Judge O'Rourke appears to have been  put  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on the sole basis that there was no real risk to  the  claimant's
    father or family as a whole.  The distinction drawn by  Judge  O'Rourke
    between the claimant and other family members does  not  seem  to  have
    been one which was pursued before the judge as a  relevant  distinction
    at all.

17. In my judgment, the Secretary of State's appeal fails for a  number  of
    reasons.

18. First, as regards the claimant's asylum claim, given the way  in  which
    the case  was  argued  before  Judge  O'Rourke  in  the  light  of  his
    favourable decision in respect of the claimant's father and  the  other
    members of the family, the judge should  have  allowed  the  claimant's
    appeal on the basis of the real risk to the family as a whole.

19. Secondly, in any event, although the judge's reasoning is brief, it was
    inevitable, in my judgment, that the claimant's appeal would be allowed
    on the basis that her husband  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to
    relocate to Afghanistan given his circumstances.  He  left  Afghanistan
    at the age of 12.  He has lived in the UK ever since and since 2007 has
    become a British citizen.  He is now  28  years  old.   The  claimant's
    husband gave evidence that he had, not unexpectedly given that  he  has
    lived for sixteen  years  in  the  UK  since  the  age  of  12,  become
    'westernised'.  The judge accepted that evidence.

20. Taking all those factors into account,  the  only  rational  conclusion
    that could be reached is that it would not be reasonable to expect  the
    claimant's husband to move to Afghanistan (despite  his  origins).   He
    would be moving to an area where, on the judge's findings, the  Taliban
    are active and there is the background of the  family's  problems  with
    the Taliban including the killing of one of the claimant's siblings.

21. Consequently, I do not accept that the judge failed to consider all the
    circumstances although his reasons were brief.  In Shizad  (sufficiency
    of reason:  set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC),  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded that even if a decision contained an  error  of  law  because
    inadequate reasons were given, the Upper Tribunal  would  not  normally
    set aside the decision where there had been no misdirection of  law  or
    other error  unless  the  conclusions  drawn  by  the  judge  were  not
    reasonably open to him or her (see [10] per Blake J).  In this case,  I
    am satisfied that the judge's conclusion in respect of  the  claimant's
    asylum appeal was reasonably be open to  him,  indeed  it  was,  in  my
    judgment inevitable on the basis of the evidence.

22. For these reasons, the judge did not materially err in law in  allowing
    the claimant's appeal on asylum grounds.

23.  Technically,  as  a  result,  the  judge  should  have  dismissed  the
    claimant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and I substitute a
    decision to that effect.

24. No separate submissions were made to me  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal under Art 8.  His reasoning is very  brief
    asserting 'insurmountable obstacles' under paragraph EX.1. of  Appendix
    FM of the Rules to their family life continuing in Afghanistan and that
    there would be a disproportionate interference with  respect  to  their
    family life.  Strictly speaking, having found in the claimant's  favour
    on asylum,  the  judge's  finding  in  respect  of  Art  8  represented
    something of an  unnecessary  after  thought.   There  is  no  separate
    consideration of the proportionality of the claimant's removal and,  in
    those circumstances the judge's decision in respect of Art 8 is  flawed
    and cannot stand.  However, as I have upheld the  judge's  decision  to
    allow the claimant's appeal on asylum grounds,  it  is  unnecessary  to
    make a separate decision in respect of Art 8.

Decision

25. For the above reasons, the judge did  not  materially  err  in  law  in
    allowing the  claimant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.   That  decision
    stands.

26. I set aside the decision allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection
    grounds and substitute a decision dismissing the appeal on that ground.

27. The decision to allow the appeal under Art 8 is also set aside.


                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
