
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00271/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|1 October 2015                       |8 October 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 Suman Banik
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. In The Lord Chancellor v Detention Action [2015] EWCA Civ 840,  the
         Master of the Rolls (with whom Briggs and Bean LJJ agreed) said:

          1. For the reasons that I have given, the  FTR  are  systemically
             unfair and unjust. The appeal must, therefore,  be  dismissed.
             The object of the SSHD in placing asylum appeals in  the  fast
             track is the  entirely  laudable  one  of  dealing  with  them
             quickly. This is not because she considers that they  are  all
             hopeless cases. Far from it. Although many of the appeals  are
             dismissed, many succeed. They are placed in the fast track  so
             that they can be handled  quickly  and  efficiently.  But  the
             consequences for an asylum seeker of mistakes in  the  process
             are potentially disastrous. That is why section 22(4)  of  the
             2007 Act recognises that justice and fairness  should  not  be
             sacrificed on the altar of speed and  efficiency.  As  I  have
             explained, the FTR do not strike the correct  balance  between
             (i) speed and efficiency and (ii) fairness and justice. It  is
             too heavily weighted in favour of the former and needs  to  be
             adjusted. Precisely how that is done is a matter for  the  TPC
             and Parliament.

      2. This prompted the President of the First-tier Tribunal to set aside
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  to  direct  that  the
         appellant's appeal be re-determined again by a different First-tier
         Tribunal Judge.

      3. On 18 August 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein gave the  parties
         a memorandum and directions to the effect that the  litigation  was
         now academic.  He stated that the  appeal  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
         would be dismissed unless either party wrote to the Tribunal within
         7 days of the sending out of memorandum and directions proposing  a
         different course.  The directions were sent out on 19 August 2015.

      4. Although it is undated, there appears to be a response on the  file
         from the appellant which may be a  response  to  Judge  Goldstein's
         directions.  In it, the appellant expresses his wish  to  have  his
         asylum appeal heard.  This is, of course, precisely the  effect  of
         the  decision  of  Mr  Clements  in  setting  aside  the   original
         determination of the appellant's appeal.

      5. Accordingly, I am satisfied that  neither  the  appellant  nor  the
         respondent (who has not voiced a  contrary  view)  objects  to  the
         order setting aside the first  determination  and  for  the  appeal
         being listed for hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

RULING

The setting aside of the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
means that there is no longer an appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  In  this
sense, the appeal stands dismissed.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

