
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00187/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 January 2019                   |On 21 January 2019                   |
|                                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     TAM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Brown, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                                  DECISION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He claims that he  is  gay
         and faces a real risk of persecution in Pakistan for this reason.

Procedural history

      2. In a decision dated 23 April 2018 First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') Judge
         Moxon rejected the appellant's claim to be gay  and  dismissed  his
         appeal.

      3. In grounds of appeal submitted on behalf of the  appellant  it  was
         argued, inter alia, that  the  FTT  failed  to  make  any  findings
         regarding the appellant's claim to have been involved  in  specific
         gay relationships when he was in Pakistan.  FTT Judge Pedro granted
         permission to appeal in a decision dated 16 May 2018.

      4. The respondent submitted a rule 24 notice dated  10  July  2018  in
         which he made it clear that  he  did  not  oppose  the  appellant's
         appeal and invited the Upper Tribunal to remit the  matter  to  the
         FTT.

Error of law discussion

      5. I can state my reasons for finding that the FTT committed an  error
         of law briefly given the respondent's concession.

      6. The appellant's claim that when he was 15 (1997) he began a  secret
         gay relationship with Arshat until 2000 (when he  moved  to  a  new
         area) before commencing another secret gay relationship with Shahid
         in 2001, is an important aspect of his overall claim to  be  a  gay
         man.   As Ms Pettersen acknowledged, the respondent  regarded  this
         aspect of his claim to be of  significance:  when  summarising  the
         claim in the decision letter at  [10]  a)  to  g),  the  respondent
         refers to these two relationships at c)  and  d).   The  respondent
         then addresses the relationship with Arshat in detail at  [22]  and
         with Shahid at [23].  As the grounds  of  appeal  point  out  those
         relationships are also expressly referred to in some detail in  the
         appellant's comprehensive witness statement.

      7. When summarising the appellant's asylum claim in its decision,  the
         FTT refers to these two relationships at [24].  The FTT's  findings
         of fact regarding the appellant's earlier gay  relationships  as  a
         teenager  are  to  be  found  at  [39].   The  FTT   rejected   the
         respondent's criticisms as to how the appellant realised he was gay
         or his account of  the  relationship  when  he  was  15.   The  FTT
         regarded the appellant's evidence on these matters as plausible and
         consistent with the objective evidence.  Although the FTT  went  on
         to find that "these features enhance his credibility", the FTT made
         no clear finding as to whether it accepted the credibility  of  the
         claimed relationships with Arshat  and  Shahid.   Plausibility  can
         inform credibility but is not determinative of it.  Rather, the FTT
         listed matters supportive of the appellant's credibility  and  then
         evidence it considered  as  significantly  undermining  it,  before
         rejecting the appellant's claim to be gay.   At  no  stage  in  its
         reasoning has the FTT made clear findings on the credibility of the
         claim to have been in two long term secret gay  relationships  when
         in Pakistan.  This constitutes an  error  of  law  undermining  the
         entirety of the FTT's factual findings.

      8. In addition, the FTT appears to reject  the  appellant's  claim  to
         have been involved in a gay relationship with a man named Robert in
         the UK (see [44](a) and (b)) yet makes  no  finding  regarding  the
         claim that  the  appellant  had  a  gay  sexual  relationship  with
         Muhammad Hussain.   This  is  particularly  surprising  because  Mr
         Hussain gave oral evidence before the FTT, having  made  a  witness
         statement  that  appears  in  the  appellant's  bundle.   The   FTT
         expressly records his evidence at [32] that  he  previously  had  a
         sexual relationship with the appellant and makes it clear  at  [42]
         that it is prepared to give weight to Mr  Hussain's  evidence,  yet
         entirely fails to make a clear finding on the credibility of  their
         claimed past gay sexual relationship.  This error of  law  has  not
         been clearly identified in the grounds of appeal, but it assists to
         underline the point that has been made on the  appellant's  behalf,
         as accepted by the respondent, that the FTT failed  to  make  clear
         findings regarding the appellant's claimed past  gay  relationships
         (other than Robert).

Disposal

      9. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I indicated at  the
         hearing that I agreed with both representatives  that  this  is  an
         appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.   Findings of
         fact must be entirely remade. There is  likely  to  be  significant
         oral evidence from four witnesses.

     10. I note reference to  the  use  of  the  "second  appellant"  as  an
         interpreter at the FTT hearing.  It is unclear who was used  as  an
         interpreter, but it is important to highlight that only  the  court
         appointed interpreter should be utilised, where one is required, in
         hearings before the FTT.

Decision

     11. The FTT decision contains an error of law and I set it aside.   The
         appeal is remitted to the FTT, where it shall be reheard  on  a  de
         novo basis.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
12 January 2019

