
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00402/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 February 2018                  |On 28 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   MR S L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Knight, counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appeal first came before me for an error  of  law  hearing  on  12
October 2017. In a  decision  and  reasons  which,  for  unforeseen  reasons
although it was written on 18 October 2017  was  not  promulgated  until  22
February 2018, I found an error of law and  announced  my  decision  at  the
hearing. A copy of the error of law decision is appended.

2.    The resumed appeal came before me for determination on  the  basis  of
submissions only in respect of (i) whether the Appellant had a  well-founded
fear of persecution in Albania; (ii) whether he meets  the  requirements  of
paragraph 276ADE (vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  (iii)  whether  his
removal would be contrary to Articles 2, 3 and 8 of ECHR on account  of  his
mental health and the risk of suicide.

3.    At the outset Mr Wilding sought clarification as to whether or not  Mr
Knight was seeking  to  rely  on  the  judgment  of  the  Grand  Chamber  in
Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867 which Mr Knight confirmed he was.  Mr
Wilding summarised his position as being that he accepts what the  Appellant
says and the medical evidence but would argue that his case does  not  reach
the Article 3 threshold. Mr Knight invited me to make findings in line  with
the findings in AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64.

4.    Mr Knight sought to rely upon his skeleton argument prepared  for  the
First tier Tribunal hearing dated 10.4.17. He drew my attention to [12]  and
the report from Sheila Melzak of the Baobab Centre  as  to  the  reason  she
considered that the Appellant was unable to give evidence because  he  would
not be able  to  recall  or  give  an  account  of  his  experiences  in  an
adversarial environment. Her subsequent  report  dated  7.12.17  deals  with
lack of progress. He submitted that because  of  the  manner  in  which  the
Asylum  Policy  Instruction  on  medico-legal  reports   is   drafted,   the
Respondent is not entitled to  go  behind  those  reports  and  nor  is  the
Tribunal: 1.4. page 4, 3.1 page 11.

5.    In respect  of  the  substantive  asylum  claim,  Mr  Knight  drew  my
attention to page 5 onwards of the skeleton  argument.  In  respect  of  the
apparent inconsistency arising from the asylum interview as to the date  the
Appellant state's that he was assaulted by E's  brother.  If  there  is  any
confusion then Mr Knight  submitted  that  it  could  be  explained  by  the
medical evidence, but that there was  no  meaningful  inconsistency  in  any
event and it had been clarified by the  Appellant's  statements.  He  was  a
child asylum seeker with PTSD, which clearly  impacted  on  his  ability  to
communicate and it  is  an  extremely  minor  inconsistency  if  it  can  be
considered as one at all.

6.    In respect of the purported letter from the British Embassy in  Tirana
attesting to the absence of the Appellant's family's involvement in a  blood
feud, which is addressed at [17] of the  skeleton  argument,  the  Appellant
has never seen such a letter and it has not been  placed  before  the  Upper
Tribunal, thus he invited me to place no weight on it and  even  if  it  was
produced it would not undermine his case.

7.    Mr Knight submitted that it  was  obvious  that  the  Appellant  is  a
member of a particular social group and drew my attention to AB  2  and  the
Home Office guidance in respect of blood  feuds  where  at  1.3.8  the  Home
Office accept that those constitute involved in a blood  feud  constitute  a
particular social group. He further submitted that the  Appellant  would  be
at risk in his home area and it would be unreasonable and  unduly  harsh  to
expect him to relocate.  In  this  respect  he  drew  my  attention  to  the
supplementary bundle A4 and the report at 76 and the Country  Information  &
Guidance at 103 and that it was clear that if you move you have to  transfer
your residence in order to access public services in  the  new  location  so
would have to register with the local government.

8.    Mr Knight further submitted that  it  was  clear  that  there  was  an
insufficiency of protection as is summarised at [29]-[30]  of  his  skeleton
argument and bundle  4,  which  is  the  background  evidence.  He  drew  my
attention to the Albania 2016 Human Rights report at page  5  through  to  8
and 17, 39 and 2.5.3. and 2.6. onwards; page 55 at 8.2.1.  and  pages  86-87
and 103. Mr Knight submitted that the  Albanian  police  are  corrupt;  that
there may have been improvements but as the Respondent rightly  concedes  in
the refusal decision, there are still challenges and the police are open  to
bribery. He submitted that it was easy to  bribe  State  representatives  to
find a person registered in the  civil  registration  system  and  that  the
police are not actors of protection but actors that  undermine  efficacy  of
relocation.

9.    In respect of Article 2 and the risk  of  suicide,  Mr  Knight  relied
upon his skeleton argument at [32]-[43]. In respect  of  Article  3  on  the
basis of the Appellant's medical condition, he submitted that  the  guidance
set out in AM (Zimbabwe) was obiter dicta and  the  domestic  law  had  been
wrongly decided in light of Paposhvili however, the Supreme Court  needs  to
make the change. He submitted that  even  if  the  appeal  must  fail  under
existing domestic law, it was open  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  go  on  to
consider if the test  were  different  the  appeal  would  succeed  (in  the
alternative). He sought to rely on [44]-[50] of  his  skeleton  argument  in
this respect.

10.   Mr Knight lastly addressed Article 8 and  the  issue  of  whether  the
Appellant had established a private life in  the  United  Kingdom,  both  in
respect of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration  Rules  or  alternatively
outside the Immigration Rules.  He drew my attention  to  [51]-[56]  of  his
skeleton argument. He submitted that  in  respect  of  the  public  interest
considerations set out at section 117B of the NIAA 2002 that these  did  not
outweigh the fact that the Appellant is now embedded in the culture  of  the
UK. He submitted that it should be concluded that  the  Appellant's  account
is accurate and that the appeal should succeed.

11.   In his submissions, Mr  Wilding  drew  my  attention  to  the  country
guidance decision in respect of blood feuds: EH [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC).  He
submitted that the Appellant  had  failed  to  establish  a  credible  case.
Whilst it is easy to say after the event that  a  discrepancy  is  minor  it
should not be forgotten that it is central to the Appellant's case  yet  the
Appellant contradicted himself in that regard. In respect of  the  timeline,
he was asked in interview in July 2015 not long after the incident  happened
and therefore, that informs whether greater weight  should  be  attached  to
the discrepancy. It is also material whether he was  assaulted  in  November
or December. Nothing happened to him in the 4  month  period  following  the
supposed assault. The Appellant did not leave until March 2015 and  was  the
only member of his family to leave, but in terms of how blood feuds  operate
through generations of family members, it is extraordinary and not  credible
that his family would make arrangements for him to  leave  but  did  not  do
anything to protect  themselves.  Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  this  was  a
critical and important point, because of what we know and  how  blood  feuds
operate and that the Appellant's  account  is  contrary  to  the  background
material.

12.   In respect of the medical evidence Mr Wilding  acknowledged  what  was
said in the Asylum Policy Instruction regarding Helen Bamber Foundation  and
Medical Foundation reports, however, one cannot  second  guess  a  diagnosis
which must be assessed in the round on all  of  the  evidence  and  was  not
determinative of credibility. He submitted that there are many  cases  where
what is said to the  expert  does  not  chime  with  what  is  said  to  the
Respondent or, equally it might chime completely but there  are  other  good
reasons why it cannot be truthful. The doctor's  responsibility  is  not  to
assess credibility but to assess a medical condition and it is not right  to
say that the Tribunal cannot go behind a medical report.

13.   Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the  Appellant  has  not  established  a
credible account as to why he left Albania and he disputed that there  is  a
blood feud at all given that it is only the Appellant who left the  country.
He submitted that even if I were to find the Appellant has given a  credible
account he can internally relocate and there was nothing in the evidence  to
establish that the family he says he fears are  so  well-connected  or  have
the ability to know  where  he  will  be.  Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the
Appellant's medical condition would not prevent him relocating albeit  there
was some confusion in terms of the treatment the Appellant is receiving.  Mr
Knight helpfully clarified through  instructions  that  his  drug  treatment
regime is ongoing as is set out at [39] of Sheila Melzak's report,  but  the
Appellant has disengaged from the  talking  therapy.  Mr  Wilding  submitted
that there was nothing to suggest that anti-depressant medication would  not
be available in Albania and that this was not  a  case  where  there  was  a
support network that was being uprooted. It would not be  unduly  harsh  for
him to go to live in Tirana cf. EH at [69] and [70]  and  the  Appellant  is
not a refugee for the purposes of the Convention.

14.   In respect of Articles 2 and 3, Mr Wilding invited me to consider  the
J threshold as illuminated by Y & Z but this was a  foreign  risk  case  and
the Appellant has not made out that he is at imminent risk, given  that  the
Appellant's ideation amounts to no more than that. Since  he  expressed  his
ideation there has been an intervention in terms of medication  and  it  may
well be driven by an undiagnosed mental health issue rather  than  fear.  He
submitted that the medical evidence does  not  establish  there  is  a  real
likelihood of the Appellant prosecuting a suicidal ideation.

15.   In respect of Article  3  and  the  application  of  the  judgment  in
Paposhvili,  irrespective  of  the  judgment  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  the  Upper
Tribunal is bound by N and D and it is clear that it is  a  high  threshold,
which has to be applied. Mr Wilding further submitted that  Paposhvili  does
not reduce the threshold and the findings are  obiter  dicta.  He  submitted
that the Appellant is simply unable to establish a  risk  of  Article  3  on
return to Albania, because he  would  be  returning  to  the  bosom  of  his
family. Even if there was a real risk in his home area it  is  difficult  to
see how it would lead to an article 3 breach, in  the  absence  of  evidence
that, if left undiagnosed,  his  PTSD  would  lead  to  something  else.  In
respect of Article 8, he submitted that it  was  difficult  to  see  if  the
Appellant loses on all other grounds that he  can  succeed  on  this  basis,
bearing in mind insurmountable obstacles test at paragraph 276DE(vi) of  the
Rules was not met.

16.   In reply, Mr Knight submitted that,  with  regard  to  the  nature  of
blood feuds and the question  of  credibility  that  blood  feuds  are  slow
burning and could result in death in the future but no one else has  as  yet
been targeted. He reason that nothing happened to him personally is  because
he self-confined.  In  respect  of  internal  relocation,  the  Respondent's
position is premised on a hope and a prayer that the family he fears do  not
have the reach. As to the medical reports he invited the Upper  Tribunal  to
consider the up to date reports of Sheila Melzak and Isaac  Oluyade  and  no
alternative reason for how PTSD caused  has  been  put  forward.  Mr  Knight
concluded by submitting that Paposhvili does reduce the  threshold  modestly
cf. see AM (Zimbabwe) at [37].

Findings

17.   Firstly, I accept the medical and other evidence  in  support  of  the
contention that the Appellant is not fit to give evidence as  a  consequence
of what has been described by Dr Ronder as "extreme incapacitating  distress
in relation to  his  PTSD  symptoms."  I  further  bear  in  mind  that  the
Appellant was a child at the time of his  asylum  application  and  decision
and remained so until 2 July 2016. He is currently 19 years of  age  and  is
thus a young adult.

18.   The first issue to be determined is whether the Appellant has a  well-
founded fear of persecution on account of a blood feud, which arose  out  of
his  (sexual)  relationship  with  his  then  girlfriend,  E  S,  which  was
discovered in October 2014 following which E's  brother  assaulted  him  and
told him to stay away from his sister or he  would  kill  him.  In  December
2014, the Appellant's parents were approached by E's parents, who said  that
he had to  marry  her  otherwise  they  would  declare  a  blood  feud.  The
Appellant's parents decided that he was too young and informed  E's  parents
of their decision  in  the  New  Year  of  2015.  Thereafter  the  Appellant
remained in self-confinement until he fled Albania  on  28  March  2015.  An
attempt was made to mediate between the two  families  in  the  interim,  in
February 2015, by an elder of the village, which is in the Dodes  region  of
Albania, but this did not work.

19.   The Respondent's position as set out in the refusal decision  dated  4
January 2016 is that she did not accept that there was  a  blood  feud  with
the family of ES; that following checks with the British Embassy  in  Tirana
and  other  relevant  Albanian  authorities,   these   revealed   that   the
Appellant's father and other family members did  not  have  any  blood  feud
conflicts with the family of ES or any other family  in  their  village  and
are not confined, which was considered to undermine his claim [36].

20.   Mr Knight strongly submitted that no  weight  should  be  attached  to
this assertion, given that no evidence has been produced by  the  Respondent
by  way  of  substantiation.  Whilst  I  am  concerned  by   the   lack   of
substantiation and that the reference to  "other  Albanian  authorities"  is
unhelpfully vague this is not a case of a confidentiality breach given  that
the Appellant's fear of persecution is from  non-State  agents  and  thus  I
attach some, albeit limited weight to this evidence.

21.   The only other issue raised in relation to  the  asylum  claim  is  an
inconsistency in the Appellant's account in his asylum interview in  respect
of when the Appellant was assaulted by E's brother: the end of  November  or
in October 2014. In light of the  Appellant's  age  at  that  time  and  the
substantial evidence concerning his mental health,  I  attach  only  limited
weight to this inconsistency.

22.   It is  necessary  to  consider  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
account in light of  all  the  evidence,  both  expert  and  background  cf.
Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367. The psychiatric report of Dr  Ronder  dated  13
June 2016 diagnosed the Appellant as suffering from PTSD  with  dissociative
symptoms and Major Depressive disorder [AB 15]. She further states at  4.10:


    "I genuinely believe that if Mr L has to be deported  back  to  Albania
    that he will choose to end his own life.  This  has  been  reported  to
    myself, to Dr Hepper  and  to  his  LINK  counsellor  in  a  consistent
    manner."

In respect of the causes, Dr Ronder states at 4.13:

    "In forming my clinical impression (Istanbul protocol paragraph 287)  I
    find that Mr L's diagnoses of PTSD and depression are  consistent  with
    his alleged report of death threats from his girlfriend's  family,  and
    their consequences. The threat of being killed has  deeply  traumatised
    Mr L." [AB17]

I have considered this evidence in  the  round  with  the  other  supporting
evidence,  including:  the  witness  statement   of   Isaac   Oloyede,   the
Appellant's social worker, dated 6 April 2017; the report of  Sheila  Melzak
of the Baobab Centre dated 3 April 2017 and the  undated  letters  from  his
LINK counsellor, Martyn Walsh and  the  letters  from  Dr  Hepper,  Child  &
Adolescent Psychiatrist.

23.   As is clear from the medical and other evidence set out at above  from
the   Appellant's   psychiatrists,    social    worker,    counsellor    and
psychotherapist, he has been diagnosed with PTSD and has  been  assessed  as
being at a serious or "very  high"  risk  of  suicide.  I  have  taken  into
account in particular the most recent report  from  Sheila  Melzak  dated  7
December 2017, having seen the Appellant  on  20  November  and  1  December
2017, in addition to  a  number  of  previous  appointments,  in  which  she
states:

    "50.   SL suffers chronically from complex symptoms that have persisted
    during the time I have known him. He cannot at this time cope with many
    of the ordinary demands of life or care adequately for himself ...

    53.    He does however seem resolved that should he be forced to return
    to Albania he would rather kill himself in the UK, as for him,  waiting
    for the S family to carry out their promise ... would be unbearable and
    he feels he might go mad. So he would rather  assert  himself  and  his
    dignity. It is for these reasons that in  my  clinical  opinion  he  is
    highly  likely  to  make  a  serious  suicide  attempt  which  may   be
    successful."

24.   I have given careful consideration to whether the clear  and  reasoned
concerns set out by Dr Hepper and Dr Ronder, both  consultant  psychiatrists
and Sheila Melzak, who has had the benefit of meeting with the Appellant  on
a number of occasions for psychotherapy, that the  Appellant  would  attempt
to commit suicide if it is attempted to remove him to Albania.  I  have  had
regard to the relevant jurisprudence viz J [2005] EWCA Civ 629 per Dyson  LJ
(as he then was) at [26]-[31] and Y & Z [2009] EWCA Civ 362  per  Sedley  LJ
at [15]-[16], [46], [47], [61] and [63]. Following the  principles  set  out
therein, I find that there is a causal link between the  threatened  act  of
removal and the feared treatment and I find, in light of the evidence,  that
the Appellant has a subjective fear of persecution if  returned  to  Albania
and that he genuinely  believes  that  he  will  be  killed  by  his  former
girlfriend's family, as a consequence of which he would attempt to take  his
own life instead.

25.    The  question  is,  therefore,  whether  the  Appellant's   fear   is
objectively  well-founded.  The  Respondent   has   asserted,   absent   any
substantiating evidence, but  apparently  based  on  investigations  by  the
British Embassy  in  Tirana,  that  there  is  no  blood  feud  between  the
Appellant's family and the family of ES.

26.   I have given careful consideration to the  country  guidance  decision
of the Upper Tribunal in EH (blood  feuds)  Albania  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00348
(IAC). I set out the pertinent parts of the headnote:

    "1.    While there remain a number of active blood  feuds  in  Albania,
    they are few and declining. There are a small number of deaths annually
    arising from those feuds and a small  number  of  adults  and  children
    living in self-confinement for  protection.  Government  programmes  to
    educate self-confined children exist but very few children are involved
    in them.

    2.     The existence of a 'modern blood feud' is not established: Kanun
    blood feuds have always allowed  for  the  possibility  of  pre-emptive
    killing by a dominant clan.

    3.     The Albanian state has taken steps to improve state  protection,
    but in areas where Kanun law  predominates  (particularly  in  northern
    Albania) those steps do not yet provide sufficiency of protection  from
    Kanun-related blood-taking if an active feud  exists  and  affects  the
    individual claimant. Internal relocation to an  area  of  Albania  less
    dependent on the Kanun may provide sufficient protection, depending  on
    the reach, influence, and commitment to prosecution of the feud by  the
    aggressor clan.

    4.      International  protection   under   the   Refugee   Convention,
    Qualification Directive or Articles 2 and 3 ECHR is not available to an
    appellant who is willing and intends to commit  a  revenge  killing  on
    return to his country of origin, by reference to that intention.

    5.     Where there is an active feud affecting an individual and  self-
    confinement is the only option, that person will normally  qualify  for
    Refugee status.

    6.     In determining whether an active blood feud  exists,  the  fact-
    finding Tribunal should consider:

         (i)      the history of the alleged feud, including  the  notoriety
         of the original killings, the numbers killed,  and  the  degree  of
         commitment by the aggressor clan  toward  the  prosecution  of  the
         feud;

         (ii)      the  length  of  time  since  the  last  death  and   the
         relationship of the last person killed to the appellant;

         (iii)    the ability of members of the aggressor clan to locate the
         appellant if returned to another part of Albania; and

         (iv)     the past and likely future  attitude  of  the  police  and
         other authorities towards the feud and the protection of the family
         of the person claiming to be at risk, including any  past  attempts
         to seek prosecution of members of the aggressor clan,  or  to  seek
         protection from the Albanian authorities.

    7.     In order to  establish  that  there  is  an  active  blood  feud
    affecting  him  personally,  an  appellant  must  produce  satisfactory
    individual evidence of its existence in relation to him. In particular,
    the appellant must establish:

         (i)      his profile as a potential target of the  feud  identified
         and which family carried out the most recent killing; and

         (ii)     whether the appellant has been, or other  members  of  his
         family have been, or  are  currently,  in  self-confinement  within
         Albania ...

    11.    Whether  the  feud  continues  and  what  the  attitude  of  the
    aggressor clan to its pursuit may be will remain questions of  fact  to
    be determined by the fact-finding Tribunal."

27.   It is clear from the country guidance that  blood  feuds  still  exist
but are "few and declining"; there is  a  presumption  that  those  that  do
exist have a history and involve more than one person: [6] refers  and  that
an appellant must produce satisfactory individual evidence of its  existence
in relation to him [7]. There is also a presumption of  prior  killings  and
self-confinement.

28.   I find on the  evidence  put  forward,  which  does  not  include  the
Appellant's oral evidence as he has been found not to be fit  to  give  oral
evidence, that he has not discharged the burden of proof in relation to  the
existence of a blood feud in the manner set  out  in  EH.  This  is  because
there is no evidence that there have been any killings to date and there  is
no evidence that his family  have  had  to  self-confine  or  have  had  any
difficulties with the family of ES.

29.   I do, however, accept that the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  subjective
fear of persecution from  his  former  girlfriend's  family  on  account  of
having had a  sexual  relationship  with  her  outside  marriage  and  thus,
according to the code of Kanun, dishonouring her. I find that he  is  not  a
member of a particular  social  group  but  rather  fears  serious  harm  or
revenge killing, contrary to Articles 2 or 3 on account of  his  actions  as
an individual, which does not constitute a Convention reason.

30.   The Appellant's home area of  Dodes  is  in  the  north  east  of  the
country and thus it is plausible that kanun law is still applied there.  The
background evidence submitted is not entirely up  to  date  but  the  United
States State Department report for 2016 provides at page 25:  "Incidents  of
societal  killings,  including  both  "blood  feud"  and  revenge  killings,
occurred during the  year  ...  the  ombudsman  reported  that  authorities'
efforts  to  protect  families  and   prevent   blood   feud   deaths   were
insufficient, although the government increased efforts  to  prosecute  such
crimes."  This evidence post dates that considered by the Upper Tribunal  in
EH but I do not find that it materially changes the conclusions  reached  in
respect of country guidance.

31.   In light of the evidence  I  find,  applying  the  lower  standard  of
proof, that there is a serious  possibility  that  the  Appellant  would  be
subjected to a revenge killing contrary to Article 2  or  violence  contrary
to Article 3 of ECHR on the part of members of the family of ES if  he  were
to be returned to his home area. I  find  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
expect him to self-confine in his home area indefinitely and that, based  on
the country guidance decision in EH despite increased efforts  to  prosecute
crimes as referred to in the United States  State  Department  report  cited
above, the authorities or police  would  be  unable  to  provide  sufficient
protection for him.

32.   I have considered  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
Appellant to internally relocate to e.g. Tirana and I have applied the  test
established by Lord Bingham of Cornhill, in Januzi and  others  v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5, [2006] 2 AC 426, at [21]:

    "The decision-maker,  taking  account  of  all  relevant  circumstances
    pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of  origin,  must  decide
    whether it is reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or  whether
    it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so."

33.   I have also had regard to the CIG in respect of Albania, dated  August
2015 at 2.2.2 which provides: "in general where  the  threat  is  from  non-
state agents internal relocation to another area of Albania is likely to  be
a viable option but will depend on the nature and origin of  the  threat  as
well as the personal circumstances of the person."

34.   The Appellant would be returning to Albania as  a  young  adult,  aged
19. Whilst he has attended college at various times since he arrived in  the
United Kingdom he does not have  any  qualifications  nor  has  he  had  the
opportunity to work to attain skills which he could  utilise  on  return.  I
find that, whilst the Appellant would have to register in a new location  in
order to access government or public services, given  my  finding  that  the
Appellant's fear is of a revenge killing rather than due to an extant  blood
feud, there is no evidence to support a contention that  the  family  of  ES
would either seek him or be able to find him through e.g. corruption of  the
police as they would not  be  aware  of  his  return  to  Albania.  However,
without family to support him in the proposed place of relocation  and  with
a limited ability to support himself there is a serious possibility that  he
is likely to be destitute. There is limited evidence before  me  as  to  the
provision of medical treatment in  Albania  but  the  Refugee  Documentation
Centre report dated 27 May  2016  at  pages  132-135  of  the  supplementary
bundle  describes  the  secondary  health  service,  which  included  mental
hospitals, as problematic  and  it  is  clear  from  the  2016  US  Overseas
Advisory Council report that healthcare is a  serious  problem  and  medical
care beyond first aid is limited.

35.   I have concluded that, in light of the evidence, which I accept,  that
the Appellant is at a serious risk of  suicide  and  given  the  absence  of
medical treatment in Albania, let alone any support from social  workers  or
a community mental health team, the provision which appears to  be  entirely
absent in Albania, it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  Appellant  to
internally relocate due to the risk that he would take his own life, due  to
his subjective fear of being located  and  killed  or  seriously  harmed  by
members of the family of ES.

36.   I find that removal of the Appellant to Albania would be  contrary  to
the United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Articles 2 and 3 of ECHR.

37.   For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  I  do  not  find  on  the  particular
circumstances of this case that Article 3 of ECHR is engaged on  account  of
the  Appellant's  mental  health  condition,  even  with  the  very   modest
relaxation of the Article 3 threshold as found by the Court  of  Appeal  per
Lord Justice Sales in AM  (Zimbabwe)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  64  at  [37]  as  a
consequence of the Grand Chamber judgment in  Paposhvili  v  Belgium  [2017]
Imm AR 867.

38.   Whilst it is not strictly  speaking  necessary  for  me  to  determine
whether there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
integration  into  Albania  pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE  (vi)   of   the
Immigration Rules in light of my findings above,  it  follows  in  light  of
those findings,  for  the  reasons  set  out  at  [34]  and  [35]  that  the
Appellant's fragile mental health in particular along with  the  absence  of
appropriate support for him in Tirana, or indeed, anywhere else in  Albania,
would meet the very significant  obstacles  test.  In  these  circumstances,
whilst the public interest considerations set out at  section  117B  of  the
NIAA 2002 would otherwise indicate that removal of the  Appellant  would  be
proportionate, I find that  his  appeal  also  falls  to  be  allowed  under
Article 8 of ECHR on the basis that he meets the requirements  of  paragraph
276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

Decision

39.   The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds viz Articles 2, 3 and  8
of ECHR.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman     23 March 2018
