

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
pA/00643/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 July 2016                         |  On 6 July 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     aam
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Petersen a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Khan of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. For the sake of consistency with  the  decision  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal I will hereafter refer to AAM as the Appellant and  to  the
       Secretary of State as the Respondent.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.  This  direction  applies  to,
       amongst others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
       direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do  so
       in order to retain the order previously granted.


    3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for  asylum  and
       ancillary protection on 11 November 2014. His  appeal  against  that
       decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands following  a
       hearing on 29 April 2016. This is an appeal against that decision.

The grant of permission


    4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert granted permission to  appeal  (25
       May 2016) on the ground that it is arguable that  the  finding  that
       the Appellant was at risk on return to Iran due to church attendance
       in the UK despite having found that his account of  events  in  Iran
       was not credible and he was not a  genuine  Christian  convert,  was
       inconsistent with guidance case law.


Respondent's position

    5. The Judge had failed to apply SB (risk on return-illegal exit)  Iran
       CG [2009] UKAIT 00053, AB and Others (internet activity -  state  of
       evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT  257  (IAC),  and  BA  (Demonstrators  in
       Britain - risk  on  return)  Iran  CG  [2011]  UKUT  36  (IAC).  The
       Appellant would not be expected to lie on return. He would  not  say
       he was a Christian. He had made no  public  statements.  He  had  no
       profile, publicity, or problems before he left. He was just a failed
       asylum seeker who had no passport and he would be asked why  he  had
       been to church.


Appellant's position

    6. The issue is how he would be perceived on return. Even  if  he  just
       tells  the  Iranian  authorities  the  truth,  namely  that  he  had
       fabricated an asylum claim, he would be at risk from them.  Reliance
       was placed upon SA (Iran) v SSHD 2012 EWHC 2575 (Admin). I could not
       rely upon SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG
       [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) as that was not promulgated at the  date  of
       decision. The Judge was entitled to reach the view she did given his
       church attendance. She was  aware  of  the  circumstances  and  made
       findings open to her. The fact that a different  Judge  may  take  a
       different view is not the test.

The Judges findings

    7. The Judge stated [34];


       "I do not find the Appellant is a genuine  convert  to  Christianity
       and I do not find his  account  of  events  in  Iran  prior  to  his
       departure to be credible. However, I do find that his attendance  at
       church and his involvement with the Christian  faith  while  he  has
       been in the United Kingdom will mean that he faces a  real  risk  of
       persecution on his return as it will  be  regarded  as  anti-Islamic
       conduct should he be returned to Iran having left illegally. In that
       regard only, the Appellant has established he is a  refugee  and  is
       entitled to a grant of asylum."


Summary of case law


   8. SB guides me to the view that Iranians facing enforced return  do  not
      in general face a real risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment.  That
      remains the case even if they exited  Iran  illegally.  Having  exited
      Iran illegally is not a significant risk factor, although if it is the
      case that a person would face difficulties with  the  authorities  for
      other reasons, such a history could be a factor adding to the level of
      difficulties he is likely  to  face.  Being  accused  of  anti-Islamic
      conduct constitutes a significant risk factor.


    9. AB guides me to the view that there is insufficient evidence to give
       guidance on what can be expected in terms of the reception  in  Iran
       for those returning otherwise than  with  a  "regular"  passport  in
       relation to whom interest may be excited into internet  activity  as
       might be revealed by  an  examination  of  blogging  activity  or  a
       Facebook account.


   10. BA guides me  to  the  view  that  there  is  not  a  real  risk  of
       persecution for those who have exited Iran illegally or  are  merely
       returning from Britain.


  11. SA stated [24] that "there must  be  a  real  risk  that  if  she  has
      professed herself to be a Christian, and  conducted  herself  as  one,
      that profession, whether true or not, may be taken in Iran as evidence
      of apostasy"


  12. I also note here the very recent guidance case of SSH which  I  raised
      with the representatives and provided copies  of  the  decision.  This
      guides me to the view that an Iranian male whom it is sought to return
      to Iran, who does not possess a passport,  will  be  returnable  on  a
      laissez passer, which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on  proof
      of identity and nationality. An Iranian male in  respect  of  whom  no
      adverse interest has previously been manifested by the  Iranian  State
      does not face a real risk  of  persecution/breach  of  his  Article  3
      rights on return to Iran on account  of  having  left  Iran  illegally
      and/or being a failed asylum seeker.  No such risk exists at the  time
      of questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
      exit and being a failed asylum  seeker)  have  been  established.   In
      particular, there is  not  a  real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
      imprisonment.


Discussion

   13. I do not agree that SSH is of no relevance. It considered and upheld
       previous case law having considered up-to-date evidence. It did  not
       refer to SA but dealt with the question contained within it to which
       I have already referred. The Judge speculated  as  to  whether  self
       serving attendance and involvement at church would  be  regarded  as
       anti-Islamic conduct and had no evidence to support the decision she
       reached. The Appellant had created a bogus asylum claim.  The  Judge
       was not entitled to reach the view she took without specific  expert
       evidence that countered the body of jurisprudence summarised in SSH.




   14. In those circumstances I am satisfied  that  there  was  a  material
       error of law. I set aside the decision.

Remit or rehear

   15. Miss Khan submitted  that  I  should  remit  the  matter  to  enable
       evidence to be adduced as to how he would be perceived regarding the
       lies he had told about his claimed conversion and  his  self-serving
       church attendance and  involvement.  Ms  Petersen  conceded  that  a
       remittal may preserve ongoing appeal rights.


   16. In an abundance of caution, I decided to remit the matter to  enable
       the specific question by Miss Khan raised to be  considered  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal which would preserve any ongoing  appeal  rights
       should the matter go against the Appellant as would currently appear
       to be likely.


   17. In doing so I preserve [30], [31], the 1st 4 sentences of  [33]  and
       the 1st sentence of [34]. I do not preserve sentence 5  of  [33]  or
       sentences 2, 3, or 4 of [34].

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  a  Judge
    other than Judge Hands.



Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
5 July 2016
