
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00897/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 December 2016                  |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     I N
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Representation
For the  Appellant:      Ms  A  Nizami,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Davjunnel
Solicitors
For the  Respondent:     Mr  P  Armstrong,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


      1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 1 January  2005.
         He has discretionary leave to  remain  as  an  unaccompanied  minor
         until 15 July 2018. He appeals against the decision of  15  January
         2016 refusing his asylum application  and  was  granted  permission
         against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fenoughty on
         16 November 2016.

      2. The appellant put forward several grounds which have been  expanded
         upon today in submissions. It was argued:

             . that the judge did not  meaningfully  engage  with  the  fact
               that the appellant was a child of  10  at  the  date  of  his
               asylum claim,
             . that she considered minor inconsistencies  as  a  fundamental
               problem,
             . that she did not have  regard  to  the  correct  approach  to
               matters of plausibility involving minors,
             .  that  she  relied  on  a  discrepancy  not  raised  by   the
               respondent in the decision letter,
             .  that  she  misdirected  herself  on  the  issue  of   forced
               recruitment by the Taliban,
             . that she failed to assess the risk to the appellant  even  if
               his father was a low ranking army official,
             . that she made no finding on whether  the  appellant's  father
               had fled to Turkey,
             . that she irrationally concluded that he could return  to  his
               family in Afghanistan,
             . that she failed  to  consider  the  country  guidance  in  AA
               (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT   00016
               (IAC).


      3. Mr Armstrong responded. He submitted that  as  there  was  no  oral
         evidence, the judge had to assess the credibility of the account on
         the basis of the witness statement  and  background  material.  She
         gave reasons  for  her  findings,  noting  that  the  evidence  was
         internally  inconsistent  and  did  not  accord  with  the  general
         information (at paragraphs 58  and  65).  The  Taliban  had  enough
         supporters and did not have to  force  people  to  join  them,  the
         appellant was not forced or threatened and it was not accepted that
         his father was a high ranking official. The  appellant  had  family
         near Kabul. He had not provided details of  his  relatives  to  the
         Secretary of State so his  family  could  not  be  traced.  Country
         guidance  was  taken  into  account.  The  determination  was  well
         reasoned and all the evidence was considered.


      4. Ms  Nazami  repeated  her  submission  on  forced  recruitment  and
         maintained there had been evidence before the  judge  about  forced
         recruitment being a widespread problem. Whilst AA was referred  to,
         there was no practical engagement with it.


      5. Those were the submissions. At the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  I
         reserved my determination which I now give.

      6. Findings and conclusions

      7. I have taken account of the helpful submissions made by the parties
         and all the evidence before me. The judge was  well  aware  of  the
         appellant's  youth  and  took  specific  care  when  assessing  the
         credibility  of  his  account  (see  paragraph  55).  She  properly
         directed herself on the law (at 44-47 and 55-56) and had regard  to
         section 55 of the 2009 Act and to Chapter 8 of the UNHCR guidelines
         on refugee children. There is no merit in  the  criticisms  of  her
         approach to the  assessment  of  credibility.  The  inconsistencies
         identified by the judge arose from the witness  statement  prepared
         by the appellant for the hearing and so could not have been  raised
         by the respondent in her decision letter. As the witness  statement
         was prepared with the help of the appellant's  representatives,  it
         should  have  been  plain  to  them   that   there   were   serious
         contradictions within it and it was for them  to  seek  to  resolve
         them. The judge cannot be  criticised  for  having  regard  to  the
         appellant's evidence. Nor can it be argued  that  they  were  minor
         matters as they go to the heart of the appellant's claim.


      8. Much was made in submissions about the appellant's  young  age  and
         the caution to be applied when assessing his  account  however  the
         witness statement contains information and  assertions  well  above
         what one may expect from a young child. The appellant is clearly  a
         minor but with  an  ability  to  provide  a  full  account,  albeit
         discrepant. It was, therefore, open to  the  judge  to  assess  his
         statement and to reach her own conclusions about it.


      9. In paragraphs 59-60 the judge considered  the  background  evidence
         and concluded that it did not accord with the appellant's  account.
         Ms Nazami strove to rely on certain  sections  of  the  documentary
         evidence to argue that forced recruitment was widespread but  other
         than a  sentence  in  an  article  and  a  brief  reference  in  an
         incomplete UNHCR report, there is little to confirm that this is  a
         serious  issue.  There  is  evidence  against  it,  as  the   judge
         highlighted, and, in any event, she found that the appellant's home
         was not in a Taliban controlled area and that neither  he  nor  his
         father were ever approached by the  Taliban.  Those  were  findings
         open to her to make.


     10. The claim of the appellant's father's  position  in  the  army  was
         addressed at paragraphs 62-64  and  contrary  to  what  was  argued
         before me, the judge did consider whether the father  would  be  at
         risk as a low ranking official (at paragraph 70).


     11. The judge was criticised for not making a specific  finding  as  to
         whether or not the appellant's father was outside Afghanistan. That
         omission is immaterial as when finding  that  the  appellant  could
         return home or relocate to Kabul, she had regard to the  fact  that
         he still had close family there and  that  he  had  an  adult  male
         family member (his uncle).


     12. The judge had regard  to  AA  (at  paragraph  12);  whilst  she  is
         criticised for not "practically engaging" with the case,  there  is
         nothing to show that she erred in her conclusions  on  humanitarian
         protection (at 74-75). These are certainly not  irrational  as  was
         argued by Ms Nazami.

     13. It follows that I conclude that the judge's decision is sustainable
         and contains no errors of law.  It shall stand.

     14. Decision

     15. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain
         errors of law. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


    Signed






          Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

           Date: 20 December 2016






