
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00644/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |                                     |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 20 October 2020                   |On 26 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    C B S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Dainty, promulgated on 19  March  2020,  dismissing
    her appeal under the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    against a decision of the respondent made on 10 January 2020 to  refuse
    her asylum and protection claim.

 2. I have made an anonymity order in  this  case,  given  that  it  raises
    protection issues.  The reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Dainty for not doing so at [2] of her decision are simply wrong and  it
    is evident that she did apply the correct test. For the reasons set out
    below, Judge Dainty's decision involved the making of further errors of
    law and is to be set aside. Regrettably, those  errors  are  such  that
    none of judge Dainty's findings are sustainable, and the decision  must
    be remitted to be heard again by another First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.  Her  case  is
    that she is at risk on return of domestic violence at the hands of  her
    husband and her family; and, at the hands of an officer with whose wife
    her husband had an affair.

 4. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account, nor that she was
    credible.

 5. At the hearing before Judge Dainty on 9 March 2020, the respondent  was
    not represented. The appellant gave  evidence  and  her  representative
    made submissions.

 6. Judge Dainty did not find the appellant to be a  credible  witness  and
    rejected her account.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on  the  grounds  that  Judge
    Dainty's  assessment  of  credibility   was   flawed   as   it   relied
    significantly  on  concerns  as  to  plausibility  in   particular   at
    paragraphs 27 and 29 to 33; and, that it is also vitiated by  an  error
    of fact at [31]. It is also averred that the findings are inadequate in
    that they are not properly structured.

 8. On 23 April 2020, FtTJ l Murray granted permission to appeal.

 9. On 18 August 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam gave directions  which
    provided amongst other matters:

          1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the  light  of  the
             present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-
             19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the  Procedure
             Rules[1], I have reached the provisional view,  that it  would
             in  this  case  be  appropriate  to  determine  the  following
             questions without a hearing:


        a)  whether  the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
           involved the making of an error of law, and, if so


        b) whether that decision should be set aside.


          2. I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:


               i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of
                  the assertion of an error of  law,  and  on  the  question
                  whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision should  be  set
                  aside if error of law is found, to be filed and served  on
                  all other parties no later than 14 days after this  notice
                  is sent out (the date of sending is on the covering letter
                  or covering email);


              ii)  Any  other  party  may  file  and  serve  submissions  in
                  response, no later than 21 days after this notice is  sent
                  out;


             iii) If submissions are made in accordance with paragraph  (ii)
                  above the party who sought permission to appeal  may  file
                  and serve a reply no later than 28 days after this  notice
                  is sent out.


              iv) All submissions that rely on any document  not  previously
                  provided to all other parties in electronic form  must  be
                  accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.


          3. Any party who considers that despite the foregoing  directions
             a hearing is necessary to consider the questions  set  out  in
             paragraph 1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons  for
             that view no later than 21 days after this notice is sent  out
             and they will be taken into  account  by  the  Tribunal.   The
             directions in paragraph 2 above must be complied with in every
             case.


10. On 3 September 2020,  the  respondent  replied,  accepting  that  Judge
    Dainty had not adequately reasoned her credibility findings.

11. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  Given that no objection to this course of
    action has been raised, and bearing in mind the overriding objective in
    Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly,  I
    am satisfied that in the particular circumstances of this case where no
    objection to a decision being made in the absence of a hearing that  it
    would be right to do so.

12. It is only rarely that a First-tier Tribunal's credibility finding will
    be  set  aside.  Nevertheless,  Judge  Dainty's   conclusions   as   to
    credibility are, for the reasons set out below, so flawed that they are
    unsustainable as the respondent acknowledges.

13. Put simply, Judge Dainty has in effect  judged  an  illiterate  woman's
    actions out of context and on standards not applicable to  her.   There
    is no rational basis for how at [29] Judge Dainty could have  found  it
    not credible (in reality not  plausible)  that  the  appellant  who  is
    illiterate, unfamiliar with the  United  Kingdom  and  does  not  speak
    English, would not have consulted a lawyer  or  CAB  about  a  divorce.
    Quite why Judge Dainty thought that because the appellant's 12-year-old
    son might be able to help is not at all clear, nor does it appear  that
    Judge Dainty put that point to the appellant.

14. Similarly, there is no rational basis for drawing inferences adverse to
    the appellant from not knowing the progress of her estranged  husband's
    asylum claim [30] and it is worrying that Judge Dainty refers to him as
    the "Appellant" at [30] and [31].

15. At [31] Judge Dainty judges the appellant's actions by what she  thinks
    someone of the appellant's  background  who  has  been  in  an  abusive
    marriage would do. That is not approaching the evidence  with  an  open
    mind nor is the conclusion at [32] that she thought that  the  violence
    would not have been irregular.  Again, no evidence is  relied  upon  by
    Judge Dainty for such conclusion and these conclusions are irrational.

16. Further, at [34] Judge Dainty took a point against the appellant  which
    had not been expressly raised  by  the  respondent,  finding  that  the
    appellant's separation from her husband was not genuine.

17. Judge Dainty did not undertake an overall assessment of credibility  in
    a structured way as she was  required  to  do.  On  the  contrary,  the
    impression is given that Judge Dainty did not consider the evidence  in
    the round as can be seen from the start of her analysis of the evidence
    in her decision at [26].  Relying on section 8 of the 2004  Act,  Judge
    Dainty found that the appellant's failure to claim asylum in Italy  was
    "consistent with a directed attempt to find a better life in the UK  as
    opposed to a genuine situation of fleeing and claiming asylum".   Judge
    Dainty therefore starts her evaluation with an express negative finding
    without apparently considering any explanation there  may  be  for  not
    claiming; and, failing also to apply section 8 in the round and in  the
    context of the evidence as a whole.  The description  at  [27]  of  the
    appellant's account of her account of separation as "bizarre"  adds  to
    the impression that Judge Dainty did not approach the  evidence  fairly
    or in a structured manner.

18. While Judge Dainty does, finally, consider the background  evidence  at
    [35], there is  no  indication  that  she  considered  the  appellant's
    evidence against it, nor does her statement at [38] that she took  into
    account the difficulties the appellant may have had indicate a  proper,
    structured approach to credibility.

19. For these reasons, the decision involved the making of an error of  law
    as claimed and I set it aside.

20. Judge Dainty's assessment of credibility is so undermined that none  of
    the findings of fact can stand.  It cannot in all the circumstances  be
    said that the appellant received a  fair  hearing  and  accordingly,  I
    conclude that the appeal must be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh decision on all issues.

21. As the appellant has now relocated permanently to Glasgow,  I  consider
    it appropriate that the appeal be heard in the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    Glasgow.

Notice of Decision & Directions
      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  de
         novo. For the avoidance of doubt, none of  the  findings  of  Judge
         Dainty are preserved.




         Signed   Date 20 October 2020


         Jeremy K H Rintoul
         Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


         -----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

