
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00822/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke-on-Trent                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 October 2017                         |On 27 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     IS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Khan, Buckingham Legal Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, IS, was  born  in  1973  and  is  a  female  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  In a decision dated 6 August 2015,  the  respondent  refused
    the appellant's application for asylum.  The appellant appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Callow) which, in a decision promulgated  on
    16 January 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a Sunni Muslim from Faisalabad.  The appellant  became
    pregnant by  a  man  who  was  not  her  husband.   The  pregnancy  was
    terminated.  The appellant claims that her brother and other members of
    the family sought  to  kill  her.   Following  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom, she met a Portuguese citizen.  That  relationship  broke  down
    although in March 2014 the appellant applied for a  residence  card  as
    the spouse of an EEA national.   The  appellant  claims  to  have  then
    discovered that her husband was already married.  The appellant  relied
    upon a First Information Report (FIR) dated October 2014 asserting that
    the appellant had a boyfriend and had become pregnant out of  marriage.
    The appellant claimed that her brother had issued a fatwa  against  her
    in November 2014.  The appellant claimed that, but for the issue of the
    FIR and fatwa, she  might  have  returned  to  Pakistan  following  the
    breakdown of her relationship in the United Kingdom.

 3. As regards the arrest warrant/FIR upon which the appellant relied,  the
    respondent had obtained a document verification report (DVR) which  was
    dated 6 July 2015.  There is a similar DVR  in  respect  of  the  fatwa
    dated 9 July 2015.  Both documents are deemed by the DVRs to be  false.



 4. The appellant also relied upon medical evidence indicating that she was
    suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  Medical evidence
    indicating that the appellant's mental health had "deteriorated".   The
    doctor concluded that "on the balance of  probability  [the  appellant]
    will try to harm herself whilst in Pakistan".

 5. There are four grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant challenges  the
    reliance placed by the judge on the DVRs.  The judge  records  at  [21]
    that the appellant had been unable to explain in oral evidence why  she
    had relied upon a false FIR arrest warrant and  fatwa.   The  appellant
    asserts that she does not believe that the FIR was false.  The DVR  had
    only been produced at a hearing in April 2016 (a previous  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal had been set aside and  the  matter  remitted).
    DVRs were, therefore, before the appellant when she  prepared  for  her
    hearing before Judge Callow in December 2016.  The appellant  complains
    that the DVRs are unsigned.  The DVRs also make  reference  to  e-mails
    which have not been produced to the appellant.  The judge had erred  in
    law by relying upon the DVRs.

 6. I find that the ground has no merit.  The appellant appears to be  more
    concerned with quibbling with the particulars of the DVRs  rather  than
    seeking to rebut their contents.  The initials of  the  author  of  the
    DVRs are given as are the verifier's qualifications.  On my examination
    of the forms, I cannot see that there is provision on them  to  include
    the signature of the  verifier.   In  any  event,  there  is  no  legal
    provision or procedure which would invariably vitiate a DVR as evidence
    simply because  it  had  not  been  signed;  rather,  the  document  is
    admissible and it is for the judicial decision maker to  consider  what
    weight should attach to it.

 7. As regards the fatwa, there is significant  detail  given  on  the  DVR
    regarding the steps taken by the verifier to  check  its  authenticity.
    The full name of the Secretary General  of  the  International  Khatame
    Nabuwat Darul Iftaa Jamia Ilmia Ichra Lahore is given in the  document.
    The DVR records that, "he [the Secretary general] asked me to send  the
    fatwa through an e-mail.  I later received a reply e-mail from him said
    he had never issued such a fatwa.  These were not  his  signatures  and
    this is not his letterhead.  He further claims in his  reply  that  the
    fatwa issued does not conform to the  true  according  to  the  Islamic
    Sharias (sic) as it is the state or  the  court  that  investigate  and
    punish.  It is not an individual who is  authorised  to  do  so."   The
    Secretary General also indicated to the verifier that his name had been
    incorrectly stated on the document.  It is  significant  that,  in  the
    time  since  this  DVR  was   served   on   the   appellant   and   her
    representatives, she has taken no steps whatsoever to  seek  to  obtain
    the e-mails which are referred to in the DVR.  Also significantly,  the
    DVR makes plain that there were not only problems with the form of  the
    fatwa document but also with its  substance;  the  fatwa  purported  to
    confer powers of investigation and punishment on an extra-judicial body
    in Pakistan.  If such a body possessed such powers, then one would have
    expected the appellant to produce evidence which might show that it did
    possess such powers.  In the circumstances, I find  that  Judge  Callow
    was plainly entitled to rely upon both  DVRs.   Not  surprisingly,  the
    judge found that the appellant's  reliance  on  these  false  documents
    severely undermined her credibility as a witness.  The  judge  did  not
    err in law in reaching such a conclusion.

 8. Secondly, the appellant complains that the statement of a  witness  (S)
    had been misunderstood by the judge.  At [39], the judge wrote,

         A consideration of the evidence in the  round,  in  particular  the
         failure by Mr S in his lengthy statement ... make  any  mention  of
         having spoken to the appellant's brother by Skype in  circumstances
         where the  brother  threatened  to  kill  the  appellant,  is  most
         unsatisfactory.

    The appellant asserts that the written statement of S at [22] recorded,
    "...I had in 2014 a conversation with S's mother and sister.  I had  no
    idea [the brother] was present in the house let alone in  the  room...I
    recall his sister being frantic when he butted in telling  me  that  we
    were all conspiring against him including me and that I was meddling in
    his affairs.  ...  He went off threatening  to  do  this  and  that  to
    everyone did not know do not want to know or listen to what  I  had  to
    say."  I consider that the judge's observation was  reasonable  in  the
    circumstances.  It was open to the judge to place weight  on  the  fact
    that S had failed to record that the appellant's brother had threatened
    to kill the appellant.  The passage from S's  statement  which  I  have
    quoted above does not suggest the contrary.  The fact that S  may  have
    threatened 'to do this  and  that  to  everyone'  does  not  amount  to
    threatening to kill the appellant.

 9.  Thirdly,  the  appellant  complains  that  the  judge   has   attached
    insufficient weight to the medical evidence.  I  disagree.   The  judge
    has set out at length the jurisprudence regarding suicide and Article 3
    ECHR.  His conclusions at [46] were  plainly  available  to  him.   The
    judge wrote, "... if [the appellant] needs to relocate it has not  been
    shown that she has a genuine fear creating a  risk  of  suicide.   Both
    Pakistan and the UK in answer to the sixth  proposition  [of  J  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 629] have effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide."
     I can identify nothing wrong in law in that statement. I am  satisfied
    the judge has dealt with the medical evidence appropriately.

10. Fourthly, the appellant complains that the judge has failed properly to
    scrutinise the evidence.  The appellant  asserts  that  the  judge  had
    evaluated the evidence in "merely two paragraphs" [38] - [39].  I  find
    that there was no merit in the  grounds.   The  judge  has  prepared  a
    lengthy and thorough decision from which it is  apparent  that  he  has
    considered all relevant  evidence  in  his  analysis.   I  am  entirely
    satisfied that the judge's analysis has been holistic, whilst, for  the
    reasons I have given above, the fact that the appellant had been  shown
    to rely upon false documentary evidence was a significant factor in the
    credibility analysis.

11. For the reasons I have given, I find that Judge Callow  has  reached  a
    decision in this appeal which was available to him on the evidence.  He
    has supported that decision with cogent and clear  reasons  with  which
    the Upper Tribunal has no valid reason to interfere.  Accordingly,  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





