
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00491/2016
     PA/02647/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On May 18, 2017                       |On May 26, 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                   MR G K
                                   MR S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Dixon, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants  are  Albanian  nationals.   The  first-named  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on May  1,  2015.  The  second-
    named appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally  with  his  mother
    and sibling on May 12, 2015. They claimed asylum on May 14,  2015.  The
    respondent refused their applications on October 29, 2015.

 2. The appellants appealed those decisions  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. Their appeals came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Chapman
    (hereinafter called the Judge) on September 16, 2016 and in a  decision
    promulgated on October 19, 2016, the  Judge  dismissed  their  appeals.
    That decision was appealed and Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Grant
    granted permission to appeal on November 14, 2016 and the  matter  came
    before me on the above date for an error of law hearing.

 4. I extend the anonymity order in this case.

    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Mr Dixon adopted the grounds of appeal that had been drafted by counsel
    who represented the appellants in the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr  Dixon
    submitted that corruption in Albania was endemic and  deeply  ingrained
    and he submitted the Judge failed  to  give  this  enough  weight  when
    considering the appellant's claim. He submitted five grounds:

      a) The first ground related to his claim that the appellants' home had
         been  visited  by  witness  PS,  who  used  to  work   within   the
         intelligence  services,  and  this  was  unusual.  The  first-named
         appellant stated that  such  visits  were  carried  out  by  junior
         members of staff and this visit was a blatant attempt to intimidate
         the appellants and demonstrate PS's power. The Judge failed to give
         this any consideration in his assessment of credibility and when he
         did consider this issue he applied the wrong standard of proof.

      b) The second ground related to the Judge's surprise the appellant had
         not retained text messages and he held this against  the  appellant
         despite there being no requirement for corroboration.

      c) The third ground concerned the adverse finding made by the Judge in
         respect of the failure by the appellant's  wife  and  son  to  give
         evidence. The Judge failed to give the appellant any warning and he
         failed to raise it with counsel  at  the  hearing  which  Mr  Dixon
         submitted was unfair. The  Judge  relied  on  the  decision  of  TK
         (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 but this was an article 8  case  where
         the standard of proof was different to that in an asylum case.  The
         Judge erred in his application of TK and this went to the heart  of
         the case because the Judge placed great weight on  the  failure  of
         the witnesses to give evidence.

      d) The fourth ground related to the Judge's finding that  the  second-
         named appellant's failure to report the kidnapping  to  his  father
         sooner was a reason to disbelieve the account. The  Judge  did  not
         seek to clarify whether there were reasons for this and  the  Judge
         failed to raise this with the second-named appellant and afford him
         an opportunity to  provide  an  explanation.  This  amounted  to  a
         further example of procedural unfairness. Reliance  was  placed  on
         paragraph [7] of HA v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
         [2010] CHIH 28.

      e) The final ground concerned the Judge's failure to  determine  if  a
         text message had been received.

 6. Mr Dixon submitted that either the individual grounds  or  the  grounds
    taken collectively amounted to an error in law.

 7. Mr Bates adopted the content of the Rule 24 letter dated  December  22,
    2016 and submitted the Judge made findings that were open  to  him  and
    there had been no procedural unfairness especially as the appellant had
    been properly represented by  counsel.  Dealing  with  each  ground  he
    submitted:

      a) The Judge considered the issue relating to witness PS  and  clearly
         rejected the appellant's account. Full reasoning was  contained  in
         paragraph [62] of the Judge's decision.

      b) As regards the adverse finding on the appellant's failure  to  keep
         his text messages the Judge was entitled to make  the  findings  he
         did. This was not a case in  which  an  adverse  finding  was  made
         because the appellants had not produced the evidence  from  Albania
         because the appellant had the phone in the United Kingdom  and  due
         to his job it was not unreasonable to expect him to  have  retained
         such evidence.

      c) The appellant's wife and other child did  not  give  evidence  even
         though they were present. The  respondent's  representative  raised
         their failure to give evidence in closing submissions  and  it  had
         been open  to  the  appellants'  counsel  to  address  it  when  he
         responded. No witness statements had been signed and  no  challenge
         was made to the submissions. The Judge was  entitled  to  make  the
         findings he did.

      d) As regards the fourth and fifth grounds the Judge  did  not  accept
         the second-named appellants'  evidence  and  he  made  findings  in
         paragraph [65] and [66] that were open to him.

 8. Mr Bates submitted all the findings were sustainable and  open  to  him
    and the appeal should be dismissed.

 9. Mr Dixon  submitted  the  Judge  should  have  addressed  witness  PS's
    attendance as it went to the core of the appellants' claims. By failing
    to do so the Judge erred. As regards the first-named  appellant's  wife
    and child not giving evidence he accepted that previous counsel had not
    challenged the respondent's submission but he submitted that the  Judge
    should have ensured that the appellants addressed any concerns.

10. Having taken submissions I reserved my decision.






    FINDINGS

11. The Judge was concerned with  applications  for  asylum  brought  by  a
    father and son. It is clear from the Judge's decision that he was fully
    aware of how the claim was being presented. This is  evidenced  by  his
    summary of the appellants' claims between paragraphs [8]  and  [22]  of
    the decision.

12. Mr Dixon raised five grounds of appeal before me. In giving  permission
    to appeal Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant gave  no  reasons  for
    finding there may be an error in law.

13. The first ground centred around the Judge's approach to witness PS.  Mr
    Dixon submitted that the Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  fact
    witness PS personally visited and when assessing  this  aspect  of  the
    appellant's appeal he applied the wrong burden of proof.

14. The Judge clearly considered the significance  of  witness  PS  in  his
    decision and in  reviewing  this  ground  of  appeal  I  have  reviewed
    paragraphs [18] and [19], [43], [48] and [63] of the Judge's  decision.
    The arguments advanced both in writing and  orally  by  Mr  Dixon  take
    issue with how the Judge assessed  this  witness.  However,  the  Judge
    noted the appellant's claim and his response to questions  put  to  him
    and at paragraph [63] made findings. It is those findings that Mr Dixon
    challenges because he submits more weight should have been attached  to
    a personal visit by witness PS. The Judge found the issues raised to be
    speculative and not well-founded relying on the first-named appellant's
    own belief that it was possible witness PS might not have been involved
    in any of his subsequent problems. The Judge  clearly  did  not  accept
    what Mr Dixon advances  and  having  given  detailed  reasons  for  his
    findings on this  ground  I  find  no  merit  to  this  aspect  of  his
    submissions.

15. Mr Dixon submitted the Judge applied the wrong  standard  of  proof  in
    paragraph [63] when he wrote "In the light of A1's resignation from his
    work it is not implausible to think of a more innocent approach for any
    such visits." The standard of  proof  in  asylum  cases  is  the  lower
    standard of proof  namely  "a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood."  At
    paragraph [52] of his decision the Judge set out the  correct  standard
    of proof and I am satisfied that in considering the issue  relating  to
    witness PS he would have in mind the correct standard of proof. The use
    of the word implausible implies "not likely"  and  whilst  the  Judge's
    wording may have been clumsy I am satisfied there was no error.

16. Mr Dixon's second ground of appeal centred on the Judge's finding  that
    the appellant could have produced text messages to support  his  claim.
    In ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119 the Tribunal
    said that it  was  a  misdirection  to  imply  that  corroboration  was
    necessary for a positive credibility finding.  However, the  fact  that
    corroboration was not required did not mean  that  an  Adjudicator  was
    required to leave out of account the absence of  documentary  evidence,
    which could reasonably be expected: the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
    comment that it would not have been difficult to provide  the  relevant
    documents in this case. In Gedow, Abdulkadir and Mohammed v  SSHD  2006
    EWCA 1342 the Immigration Judge noted that the Somali appellant claimed
    that an uncle had funded his journey and the Immigration Judge referred
    to "the absence of any corroborative evidence by letter  or  any  other
    means from his paternal uncle".  The Immigration Judge was attacked  on
    appeal for erroneously requiring corroboration, but the Court of Appeal
    said that he was not; he was  merely  drawing  a  conclusion  from  the
    absence of corroboration; and he was entitled to do so, so long  as  he
    bore in mind the difficulties faced  by  asylum  seekers  in  producing
    corroborative evidence. In TK (Burundi) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ  40  the
    Court of Appeal said that  where  there  were  circumstances  in  which
    evidence corroborating the appellant's evidence was easily  obtainable,
    the lack of such evidence must affect the assessment of the appellant's
    credibility.  It followed that where a judge in  assessing  credibility
    relied on the fact that there was no  independent  supporting  evidence
    where there should be  and  there  was  no  credible  account  for  its
    absence, he committed no error of law when he relied on that  fact  for
    rejecting the account of the appellant.   In  this  case  the  evidence
    concerned a partner  in  the  UK.  In  MST  and  others  (Disclosure  -
    restrictions - implied undertaking) Eritrea [2016] UKUT 00337 (IAC)  it
    was  held  that  where  uncorroborated  and/or  anonymous  evidence  is
    received, the Tribunal's task is to scrutinise it with caution  and  to
    attribute such weight as is considered appropriate.

17. The Judge considered the evidence regarding the text messages and found
    an inconsistency in the number of texts messages  received.  The  Judge
    had regard to his the first-named appellant's previous  employment  and
    found that this inconsistency undermined his account and he  then  went
    onto find it surprising that the appellant had  not  retained  messages
    and he gave his reason for that finding noting the planning  that  went
    into his departure. This  was  a  credibility  finding  rather  than  a
    requirement for corroboration and he was entitled to draw the inference
    he did.

18. The third ground of  appeal  centred  around  the  adverse  finding  in
    respect of the first-named appellant's wife's failure to give evidence.
    Mr Dixon submitted the Judge misapplied the decision of  TK  (Burundi).
    The appellants were represented throughout these proceedings and at  no
    time did the appellants'  solicitors  indicate  the  wife  would  be  a
    witness. How they presented the  appellants'  cases  was  ultimately  a
    matter for them and at  the  First-tier  hearing  the  appellants  were
    represented by a counsel who regularly appears in the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Mr Dixon submitted the Judge had acted  unfairly  by  not  raising  the
    issue with Mr Holt but  reading  the  record  of  proceedings  and  the
    decision I am satisfied that it was only in submissions was this  issue
    raised by the presenting officer and Mr Holt did not raise any issue at
    that  stage.  The  fact  Mr  Dixon  would  have  dealt  with  the  case
    differently is not the issue  in  hand.  Whilst  TK  (Burundi)  was  an
    article 8 claim Mr Dixon accepted it could be applied in  asylum  cases
    and that appears to be a well-established  principle.  The  first-named
    appellant's wife was supposedly a witness to what happened but did  not
    provide a statement or  give  evidence.  I  am  satisfied  the  Judge's
    approach on this issue was open to him.

19. The fourth  ground  of  appeal  related  to  the  submission  that  the
    respondent had not relied on any failure by the second-named  appellant
    to report matters to his father. Mr Dixon relies on the decision of  at
    HA v SSHD [201] CSIH 28 to support his submission.  The  assessment  of
    the second-named appellant's credibility is not confined  to  paragraph
    [66]. The Judge had to consider the written and oral evidence given  to
    him  and  then  make  findings.  The  Judge  highlighted   a   material
    inconsistency between the evidence of the two  appellants  and  he  set
    this out in paragraph [65] of his decision  and  so  whilst  the  Judge
    accepted kidnapping and intimidation did take place he  rejected  their
    account due to inconsistencies that arose in the  evidence.  The  Judge
    made a number of findings on the evidence in paragraph [66]  and  these
    followed earlier  findings  he  had  made.  Where  inconsistencies  are
    apparent in the evidence  it  is  open  to  counsel  to  revisit  those
    inconsistencies in re-examination. Clearly that was not done  based  on
    Mr Dixon's submissions but that does not negate the Judge's findings on
    matters that arose during the  hearing.  There  was  no  error  in  his
    approach on this issue.

20. The final ground of appeal was based on the argument the  Judge  should
    have resolved the credibility of a text  message  being  received.  The
    Judge considered the messages in paragraph [64] and made findings  that
    were open to him. Mr Dixon acknowledged this aspect of  the  claim  was
    called into question by the Judge but taking the decision it  is  clear
    the Judge rejected all aspects of the asylum  claim  and  having  given
    clear reasons for rejecting the accounts it was not necessary  to  make
    specific findings on each and every point raised.  The  Judge  did  not
    accept the claim and any omission to make a  specific  finding  is  not
    material when the decision is read as a whole.


    NOTICE OF DECISION

21. There was no error in law and I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date     April 12, 2017





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I dismiss the appeal.

Signed                              Date     April 12, 2017





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

