
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
PA/00851/2017

                                                      PA/00854/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 January 2018                         |On 1 February 2018               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     SK
                                     VS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Alban of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellants.  A failure to comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellants, who are respectively mother and son,  are  citizens  of
    Afghanistan and were born on 1 January 1960 and 1 January  1994.   They
    are Sikhs.  They arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 July 2016 and made
    asylum claims.  Their applications were refused by the respondent on 13
    January 2017 and 23 January 2017 respectively.

 3. Both appellants appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  individual
    determinations  sent  on  28  February  2017,  Judge  Suffield-Thompson
    dismissed each of the appellants' appeals on asylum grounds but allowed
    them on humanitarian protection grounds.

 4. On 12 June 2017, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Scott-Baker)  granted
    the Secretary of State permission to appeal on the grounds  that  there
    was an inconsistency in allowing the appeals on humanitarian protection
    grounds having concluded that there was no real risk of persecution and
    that the judge had erred in finding that the  appellants  could  safely
    and reasonably internally relocate and that state protection would  not
    be available.

 5. On 29 September 2017, the First-tier  Tribunal  (RJ  J  F  W  Phillips)
    granted the appellants permission to appeal on the basis  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge  had  failed  properly  to  apply  the  country
    guidance  decision  in  TG  and  Others   (Afghan   Sikhs   persecuted)
    Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC)  and  had  failed  to  give  due
    weight to the past incidents of persecution as a serious indicator  for
    a future risk of persecution.

 6. At the hearing before me,  Ms  Alban,  on  behalf  of  the  appellants,
    conceded that the Secretary of State's  grounds  were  established  and
    that  the  judge's  decision  to  allow  the  appeals  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds could not stand.

 7. Further, Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of State,  accepted
    that the  appellants'  grounds  challenging  the  judge's  decision  to
    dismiss their appeals on asylum grounds were also established and  that
    her decisions in that regard also could not stand.

 8. Both representatives invited me to set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  re-
    hearing.

 9. Ms Alban invited me to preserve the judge's finding that the appellants
    were credible.  As I pointed out, the difficulty with this is that  the
    judge made no such finding.   She  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    factual background was established but made no finding as such.  It  is
    unclear whether there was an issue at the hearing in  relation  to  the
    appellants' credibility.  Mr Richards acknowledged that  the  issue  of
    credibility had only been raised in the refusal  decision  relating  to
    the second appellant.  In these circumstances,  I  see  no  finding  to
    preserve and the re-hearing must be de novo although  it  may  well  be
    that credibility will not, in fact, be in issue.

Decision

10.  Consequently,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellants' appeals on asylum grounds and to  allow  their  appeals  on
    humanitarian protection grounds involved the making of a material error
    of law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decisions are set aside.

11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo  re-
    hearing before a judge other than Judge Suffield-Thompson.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                          31, January 2018

