
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00043/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 September 2016                 |On 20 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris, counsel instructed by Goodfellows
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




    Introduction

 1. The appellant appeals a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore,
    promulgated on 5 July 2016, in which he dismissed his protection claim.




    Background

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  2  December  2003  with
    leave to enter as a visitor.  He  overstayed  and  was  encountered  by
    immigration  officers  on  1  August  2006  and  placed  on   reporting
    conditions which he failed to observe.

 3. On 19 June 2009 the  appellant  sought  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. That claim was promptly refused  with  no  right  of
    appeal. On 7 August 2014, the appellant made an application  under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  which   was
    promptly refused. On 12 August 2015 the appellant applied for asylum.

 4. The appellant's asylum  claim  was  based  on  his  account  of  having
    converted from Sunni Islam in order to become an Ahmadi  Muslim,  which
    took  place  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  either  2014  or  2015.  The
    appellant's religious conversion came to the attention  of  his  family
    and  others  in  Pakistan  and  consequently  placed  him  at  risk  of
    persecution. In addition, the appellant fears that he would be at  risk
    in Pakistan because his father began co-educating boys  and  girls  and
    Mullahs had issued a false First Information Report (FIR) against him.

 5. The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant was an  Ahmadi
    Muslim owing to  inconsistencies  between  his  accounts,  his  limited
    knowledge of the faith  and  an  inability  to  provide  basic  details
    regarding his claimed religious activities in the United  Kingdom.  The
    respondent was of the view  that  the  appellant  was  also  unable  to
    provide details regarding his father's problems and it was not accepted
    that he would be  linked  to  such  problems  should  they  exist.  The
    respondent considered the claim on the basis that  the  conversion  was
    genuine but found that by his own  account,  the  appellant  would  not
    engage in activities which would put him at risk in  Pakistan  and  nor
    was it important for him to do so. The appellant's human rights  claim,
    based on his private life with  his  parents  and  brothers,  was  also
    rejected.

 6. For similar reason as those given by the respondent, Judge Moore  found
    that the appellant was not an Ahmadi, would not practise the  faith  on
    return to Pakistan and was therefore not at risk of persecution or ill-
    treatment breaching Article 3 if removed there. His Article 8 claim was
    also rejected, both under and outside the Immigration Rules.

    Error of Law

 7. There were five grounds of appeal. Firstly, it was said that the  judge
    wrongly recorded  the  appellant's  evidence  as  to  how  his  claimed
    conversion came to the attention of individuals in  Pakistan;  secondly
    the judge failed to resolve a material issue of  whether  a  bad  faith
    conversion  would  suffice  to  trigger  a   need   for   international
    protection; thirdly  that  the  appellant's  explanations  regarding  a
    number of matters had not been considered;  fourthly,  that  the  judge
    erred in finding that there was one fatwa rather than three and  lastly
    that the judge failed to consider evidence of the appellant's claim  to
    be a genuine Ahmadi.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne considered it to be apparent that the
    judge considered only one fatwa rather than three. He added,  "as  this
    arguable error of law has been identified, all the issues raised in the
    grounds are arguable."

 9. The Secretary of State, in her rule 24 response opposed the appeal.  It
    was said that the judge made adequate findings of fact, was entitled to
    find against the appellant and concluded  that  the  fatwa  was  not  a
    reliable document. The response commented that it was "unclear" whether
    the judge was referred to the two other fatwas.

    The hearing

10. Mr Harris concentrated on the third ground, arguing that the judge  had
    not looked  at  the  appellant's  second  witness  statement  where  he
    responded to the matters raised in the reasons for refusal  letter.  He
    also relied on the grant of permission as to the fatwa issue and  added
    that there was no challenge to the judge's section 8 findings based  on
    the appellant's immigration history.

11. Mr Walker stated  that  the  respondent  had  been  hampered  by  being
    unrepresented before the judge as well as the fact  that  she  did  not
    receive the appellant's bundle of evidence. He agreed  with  Mr  Harris
    that the judge did not address the specific fatwa which  concerned  the
    appellant.

    Decision on error of law

12. In the appellant's witness  statement  dated  9  June  2016,  there  is
    clarification as to when and how the appellant learned  of  the  Ahmadi
    faith; explanations as to why he provided the answers he did  regarding
    the Ahmadi faith during his interview; an assertion  that  a  confusion
    ensued during the  interview  regarding  how  the  appellant's  claimed
    conversion reached the ears of those in Pakistan; an  acceptance  of  a
    mistaken date and a description  of  the  spiritual  benefits  of  this
    conversion. All of  these  issues  were  raised  in  order  to  address
    specific paragraphs of the reasons for refusal letter.

13. At [31] the judge finds  that  the  appellant's  responses  during  his
    interview were vague and limited and at [32] that his  account  of  how
    people in Pakistan became aware of his conversion  was  "inconsistent."
    While the judge refers to  the  appellant's  first  witness  statement,
    there is  no  reference  in  the  judge's  findings  to  this  detailed
    additional statement which was drafted primarily to  address  the  very
    many issues taken against him in the reasons for  refusal  letter.  The
    appellant is entitled to judicial consideration of his responses to the
    credibility issues relied upon by the respondent. In  failing  to  have
    regard to all the appellant's evidence  regarding  a  range  of  highly
    pertinent issues, the judge erred materially.

14. The judge, at [33], states that he has considered "the fatwa  document"
    and finds "it" to be unreliable because the judge found it was  written
    by a solicitor friend of the appellant's father. Yet, there  are  three
    such documents enclosed  in  the  appellant's  bundle  and  it  is  not
    entirely clear from the judge's findings which of them, if any,  he  is
    referring to.

15. For the foregoing reasons, the judge's findings cannot be sustained.




    Conclusion

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.





    Directions

       . This appeal is remitted to be heard, de  novo,  by  any  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge except Judge Moore

       . The appeal is to be listed for a hearing at Taylor House

       . Time estimate is 3 hours

       . Those representing the appellant are to serve a further copy of the
         appellant's bundle of evidence on the respondent within 10 days

       . An Urdu interpreter is required




    An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. In view  of
    the fact that this is a protection claim, I consider it appropriate  to
    continue the said direction in the following terms:

         "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify the original appellants. This direction applies
         to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to  comply  with  this
         direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "


Signed   Date: 16 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

