
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00948/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 November 2016                   |On 8 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     AOQ
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spuring, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Iran born on 9 April 1991 whose
    application for asylum was refused. His ensuing appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal was heard by Judge Mailer. In a decision promulgated on
    24 August 2016, the appeal was dismissed.

 2. The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether the appellant
    faces a real risk of persecution in Iran on account of having left the
    country illegally and being a failed asylum seeker. The appellant
    submitted that one of the reasons he would face such a risk is because
    he is Kurdish. In order to substantiate his claim, he submitted reports
    from two experts, Professor Joffe and Dr Khaki.

 3. Not long before the appeal was heard, a new Country Guidance case
    concerning asylum seekers from Iran who have illegally exited Iran
    and/or are failed asylum seekers was reported: SSH and HR (illegal
    Exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC). Dr Khaki
    gave evidence before the panel; Professor Joffe did not. Paragraph 33
    of SSH and HR sets out the panel's conclusion on the country guidance
    issue in the following terms:

         (a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who does
         not possess a passport, will be returnable on a laissez passer,
         which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on proof of identity
         and nationality.

         (b) An Iranian male in respect of whom no adverse interest has
         previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not face a
         real risk of  persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights on return
         to Iran on account of having left Iran illegally and/or being a
         failed asylum seeker.  No such risk exists at the time of
         questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of illegal
         exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have been established.  In
         particular, there is not a real risk of prosecution leading to
         imprisonment.

 4. The two appellants in SSH and HR were Kurdish. Although neither SSH nor
    HR made ethnicity the central focus of their case and the treatment of
    Kurds in Iran was not the subject of oral evidence (see paragraph 45 of
    Appendix 1), the panel at paragraph 34 reached the following conclusion
    about the risk faced by Kurds who have left Iran illegally and/or are
    failed asylum seekers:

         It was not suggested to us that an individual faces risk on return
         on the sole basis of being Kurdish.  It was however agreed that
         being Kurdish was relevant to how a returnee would be treated by
         the authorities.  For example, the Operational Guidance Note refers
         at 3.12.14 to the government disproportionally targeting minority
         groups, including Kurds, for arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention
         and physical abuse.  No examples however have been provided of ill-
         treatment of returnees with no relevant adverse interest factors
         other than their Kurdish ethnicity, and we conclude that the
         evidence does not show risk of ill-treatment to such returnees,
         though we accept that it might be an exacerbating factor for a
         returnee otherwise of interest.  Accordingly we conclude that it
         has not been shown that a person in the position of these
         appellants faces a real risk on return to Iran either on the basis
         of what would happen to them when questioned at the airport or
         subsequently if they were convicted of an offence of illegal exit.
         With regard to HR specifically, it does not appear to be disputed
         that he is Kurdish and that he is undocumented: hence we see no
         reason for remittal.  Prosecution for illegal exit is an outcome
         not generally experienced by such returnees, and where it does
         occur, the most likely sentence in relation to the illegal exit
         charge would be a fine. It has not been shown that there would be a
         real risk of prosecution under Article 500 for propaganda against
         the state on the basis of having made an asylum claim which was
         found to be false.  Accordingly these appeals are dismissed.

 5. The reports of Professor Joffe that were before the First-tier Tribunal
    take a different view to the panel's conclusion in SSH and HR.
    Professor Joffe argues that Kurds, as a consequence of their ethnicity,
    face severe discrimination in Iran, both collectively and individually,
    which amounts to persecution and that a failed asylum seeker who is
    Kurdish would face a real risk on return to Iran.

 6. Judge Mailer acknowledged that the appellant had sought to rely on
    reports of Dr Khaki and Professor Joffi. He noted that the evidence of
    Dr Khaki had been before the panel in SSH and HR. Regarding Professor
    Joffe, he stated, at paragraph 19, that there were no examples in his
    report of a person without a profile being at risk of persecution for
    having left Iran illegally and being a failed asylum seeker. The judge
    concluded that, having regard to SSH and HR, the appellant would not be
    at risk merely because he is a failed asylum seeker who exited Iran
    illegally.

 7. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge did not engage with
    Professor Joffe's evidence and failed to give adequate reasons for
    departing from his expert opinion. It is contended that this was
    particularly significant because Professor Joffe, who is an expert on
    Kurdish affairs, did not give evidence in SSH and HR.

 8. At the error of law hearing Mr Spuring argued that SSH and HR should
    not be treated as Country Guidance on the issue of Kurds being returned
    to Iran. Although the appellants in that case were Kurds, the risk
    faced by Kurds was not the subject of oral evidence and was not a
    central focus of the appeal. He argued that the discussion about the
    risk to Kurds (at paragraph 34) is not Country Guidance and that the
    only Country Guidance findings are those at paragraph 33, which make no
    reference to Kurdish ethnicity. In sum, he contended that SSH and HR
    should not be treated as authoritative in this case as it is not
    guidance for an appeal, such as this one, where Kurdish ethnicity is
    centre stage.

 9. Mr Norton, in response, highlighted that both appellants in SSH and HR
    were Kurds and the issues relevant to the risk they would face on
    return, including those relating to their ethnicity, were fully
    explored by the panel. He argued that I am in effect being asked to
    remake the Country Guidance case by finding Professor Joffe's evidence
    preferable to the conclusions of the panel.

Consideration

10. A Country Guidance case is authoritative in any subsequent appeal so
    far as that appeal relates to the same issue in question and depends
    upon the same or similar evidence.

11. However, where a person claiming asylum puts forward what he contends
    is a good reason for not following a Country Guidance case the decision
    maker is bound to consider it.  A failure to do so would be an error of
    law. See SA v Advocate General of Scotland (2015) CSOH 180.

12. In this case, the appellant put forward detailed reports from a
    recognised expert on Iran and Kurds, Professor Joffe, that was not
    before the panel in the Country Guidance case and which took a contrary
    view to that expressed in the Country Guidance case. It was therefore
    incumbent on the judge to consider Professor Joffe's evidence.

13. The judge's only consideration of Professor Joffe's evidence is at
    paragraph 19 where he stated that no examples in the report were given
    of a person without a profile being at risk of persecution for having
    left Iran illegally and being a failed asylum seeker. Although this
    analysis of Professor Joffe's report is brief, it indicates that the
    judge has thoroughly reviewed the evidence - how else could he reach a
    conclusion that no examples were given unless the full report was
    reviewed?  Having carefully assessed the reports of Professor Joffe
    that were before the First-tier Tribunal, I agree with the judge's
    observation that the reports do not give examples of Kurds who have no
    risk profile being persecuted on return. This is a matter of some
    significance because at paragraph 34 of SSH and HR, where risk to Kurds
    is considered, the panel highlighted the absence of examples in Dr
    Khaki's evidence of ill treatment of Kurdish returnees "with no
    relevant adverse interest factors."

14. SSH and HR is a very recent case. It concerned two Iranians of Kurdish
    ethnicity in a similar position to the appellant. The panel, which
    included three Upper Tribunal Judges who had the benefit of hearing
    oral expert evidence, reached an unambiguous conclusion that Iranian
    men in respect of whom there has not been previous adverse interest are
    not at risk on account of having left Iran illegally and/or being
    failed asylum seekers. The decision makes clear that it is applicable
    to all Iranian males irrespective of ethnicity. Indeed, if the reader
    is left in any doubt that that the country guidance, as set out at
    paragraph 33, is intended to include Kurds, this is addressed at
    paragraph 34 where in clear terms the panel stated that the evidence
    does not show a risk to Kurdish returnees (although Kurdish ethnicity
    may be an exacerbating factor for a returnee otherwise of interest).

15. I am satisfied that the judge has not made a material error of law. He
    correctly identified that SSH and HR is applicable Country Guidance in
    respect of an Iranian male of Kurdish ethnicity (or, indeed, any other
    ethnicity). He considered Professor Joffe's evidence but for an
    understandable reason (the absence of examples) did not find it to be
    sufficiently persuasive to depart from the Country Guidance. There was
    no error in taking this approach and accordingly my conclusion is that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should stand.





Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

17. The appeal is dismissed.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 6 November 2016               |

