
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00413/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 26th July 2016                    |on 16th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     MM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate; Quinn, Martin & Langan,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on [  ]  1976.   An  anonymity
    order was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  matter  was  not
    addressed in the Upper Tribunal.  I have preserved  anonymity  in  this
    decision.

The appellant's claim and its refusal.

 2. The appellant said that he  had  a  black  belt  in  martial  arts  and
    operated three gyms.  The Sepah knew from  the  time  of  his  military
    service in 1995 of his skills, and wished to recruit him to train their
    personnel.  The appellant made excuses and put them off.  In 2005  they
    tried to frighten him by carrying out an explosion  which  damaged  his
    car.  In 2012 he was detained for  almost  a  week.   In  2013  he  was
    detained  again,  and  ill-treated.   There  was  no  longer  talk   of
    recruiting him, but he  was  accused  of  being  anti-regime.   He  was
    allowed to go home.  He was arrested again on return  from  holiday  in
    Italy in 2015.  When arrested on this occasion he was told not to leave
    the country and to  remain  available  for  questioning.  He  fled  the
    country, but did not have enough money to bring  his  wife  and  family
    with him.  After arriving in Glasgow, he converted to Christianity.  He
    fears persecution for reasons of  imputed  political  opinion,  and  of
    religion.

 3. The respondent's reason for refusing  the  claim  are  explained  in  a
    letter  dated  19th  June  2015.   The  appellant's  account   of   his
    experiences was rejected, and he was  not  accepted  to  be  a  genuine
    convert to Christianity.

The First-tier Tribunal decision.

 4. Judge Lea dismissed the appellant's appeal by a decision promulgated on
    22nd February 2016.  She accepted that he is a black  belt  in  martial
    arts, considered in his local area to be very good, but  found  nothing
    to suggest that he was "of higher profile than any other trainer  sport
    in the round".  His skull had been damaged, but that  could  have  been
    for any number of reasons.  His account of events, in  the  round,  was
    not credible.  It was not plausible that he would breach an undertaking
    given  to  the  authorities  if  he  were  genuinely  concerned   about
    consequent problems for his family.  Those threatened problems had  not
    materialised since he left.  If he had a history such  as  claimed,  it
    would be reasonable to think he might have made a claim in Italy  while
    on holiday.  He had been a regular attender at church in Glasgow  since
    September 2015.  The judge accepted evidence given by Mr W White and Mr
    G Taylor about involvement with the church.  She  found  Mr  Taylor  "a
    retired  solicitor  and  missionary,  to  be  a  particularly  credible
    witness".  She accepted that Mr White knew the appellant better than Mr
    Taylor, and Mr White was of the view that  the  appellant's  conversion
    was genuine.  In all the circumstances  however,  she  did  should  not
    accept that  the  appellant  had  converted,  that  he  was  a  genuine
    Christian, and that he would practise on return to Iran.

The appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 5.  The grounds, in summary, seek to make the following points:

    .    No reasons, or no adequate reasons, for finding the claim to be  a
         Christian incredible, having accepted the evidence of W White and G
         Taylor which was evidence  of  both  fact  and  opinion,  and  both
         believing the appellant to be genuine.

    .    Both witnesses having been accepted as credible, the judge gave no
         reasons why the evidence of the  appellant  of  genuine  desire  to
         become or be a Christian had been rejected; a good reason is to  be
         expected, where the central evidence in support  of  the  claim  to
         conversion is accepted.

    .    The reader of the decision was left real and substantial doubt  of
         the reason for rejection of the claim of Christian conversion.

    .    No finding on whether as a matter of fact that the  appellant  did
         evangelise and seek to convert MY [another witness].

    .    The judge found it incredible that the appellant left his wife and
         child in Iran, but gave no reason for  discounting,  or  failed  to
         have regard to the material facts that the appellant took  thirteen
         to fourteen days to reach the UK by travelling to  Turkey,  walking
         for seven to eight hours, stowing away in the  back  of  vans,  his
         wife was within three weeks of her due date to give birth, and they
         had another child; those  factors  were  material  and  provided  a
         cogent explanation as to why  the  appellant  travelled  alone  and
         justified his actions; it was within judicial  knowledge  that  the
         applicant's  wife  within  three  weeks  of  her  due  date   would
         experience extreme hardship on such a journey.

    .    The judge drew a negative  inference  from  the  lack  of  visible
         "scorch marks" on the appellant's car after the explosion, but  she
         had no (disclosed) basis for determining that scotch marks would be
         present on a car in the vicinity of an  explosion;  presence  or  a
         lack of scorch marks was outwith the experience of a judge; without
         specialist information, this was speculation.

    .     The  hypothesis  that  the  appellant  was   not   "of   national
         importance", a claim he had never made, and  that  the  authorities
         had their own trainers, on which the appellant  could  not  make  a
         firm comment, tested his evidence on a false premise.  He  did  not
         require to establish national importance or the staffing  needs  of
         the authorities.

    .    The claimed behaviour of the Sepah had not been placed in context.

    .    The judge failed to give weight  to  the  appellant's  consistency
         "internally and externally".

    .    The judge thought it was reasonable to think  that  the  appellant
         may have considered claiming asylum in Italy, and drew  an  adverse
         inference, whereas the appellant said at interview that he had  not
         then made up his  mind,  showing  that  the  issue  was  under  his
         consideration.

Written response to the grant of permission.

 6. The grounds are  an  elaborate  disagreement.   The  observation  about
    scorch marks was common sense.  The judge  did  not  find  the  account
    implausible because the appellant's wife had not left Iran, rather that
    it was implausible that the appellant would leave the country when  the
    authorities had directly threatened his family should he do so.  It was
    valid to observe that a large organisation such as Sepah would not need
    continually to harass the appellant to train its members,  rather  than
    approaching someone willing.  There was no explanation of why the Sepah
    waited from 2005 until  2011  to  try  again.   On  the  conversion  to
    Christianity, it did not follow from the fact that the  witnesses  were
    credible that the appellant's claim was bound to  succeed.   The  judge
    was required to look at that evidence in the round along with the  rest
    of the evidence.



Submissions for appellant.

 7. Mr Byrne's submissions followed the lines of the grounds.  He sought  a
    remit for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  He characterised
    the grounds  principally  as  identifying  absence  of  reasoning.   At
    paragraph 28 the judge said that in the whole circumstances she did not
    accept that there was a genuine conversion.  That was a statement of  a
    conclusion without any reason.  A distinction was to  be  made  between
    fact and opinion evidence.  The evidence of  the  witnesses  White  and
    Taylor was not expert evidence, but it was evidence of persons  with  a
    position in the church, opinion evidence for which a strong reason  was
    needed before it might not be accepted.  The judge  had  not  explained
    why this evidence did not assist the appellant's case.  The reader  was
    left in real substantial doubt about  rejecting  his  conversion.   The
    reasons given for rejecting other  parts  of  the  case  might  justify
    scepticism, but could not by themselves been enough  to  determine  the
    conversion point.  The judge failed to consider  that  the  appellant's
    wife in the final trimester of her pregnancy would have  faced  a  long
    and difficult journey.  The question of scorch marks  arising  from  an
    explosion  near  a  car  was  not  within  her  province.   The   judge
    misconceived the claim by assessing whether the appellant  was  of  any
    national importance.  That was not the test.  The judge  had  explained
    that when he was in Italy he was considering making  an  asylum  claim,
    but had not made up his mind.  It was wrong to say at paragraph 25 that
    nothing in particular had happened since then, when he had said that he
    was detained, ill-treated and subject  to  a  warrant.   The  terms  of
    paragraph 25 disclosed a lack of anxious scrutiny.

Submissions for respondent.

 8. Mr Matthews said that it was a difficult  task  to  assess  whether  an
    appellant genuinely adhered to a faith, but  the  question  had  to  be
    answered by  judges  who  were  the  specialist  arbitrators  for  that
    purpose.  In doing so,  they  had  to  take  account  of  all  relevant
    evidence.  A finding that another witness  genuinely  believed  in  the
    sincerity of the appellant  went  only  so  far.   That  was  itself  a
    subjective assessment, as the witness in this case was recorded to have
    accepted.  The genuine sincerity of such a witness does  not  give  his
    view the quality of expert evidence.  It is  a  matter  of  opinion  to
    which the judge is not bound to give any particular weight,  but  which
    she is entitled to assess as  she  sees  fit.   Although  paragraph  28
    expresses a conclusion and does not within itself state any reasons, it
    has to be read along with paragraphs 26 and 27  and  with  the  judge's
    other doubts about the whole case.  At paragraph  26  the  judge  noted
    that the supporting witness Mr AA, who obtained refugee recognition  on
    the grounds of conversion to Christianity, said in his  statement  that
    the appellant had not said anything about leaving Islam but was keen in
    converting to Christianity.  The judge then  said  that  she  found  it
    quite probable that the appellant attended church to improve his asylum
    claim, knowing that another Iranian obtained  refugee  status  in  this
    manner.  The judge considered the evidence of the witness Mr  MY,  whom
    the appellant claimed to have converted to Christianity, but  who  said
    in cross-examination that he was an atheist.  The judge  recorded  that
    the witness "went on to say that he now believed he  was  a  Christian"
    but she did not accept this "given his previous statement that  he  was
    an atheist".  The judge thus pointed out weaknesses in the  appellant's
    evidence about conversion.  She doubted his reasons  for  beginning  to
    attend church, and  one  of  the  witnesses  he  produced  was  plainly
    unsatisfactory.  In the next paragraph, 27, she found both Mr White and
    Mr Taylor credible but that was qualified by six months not being  long
    enough to make a final judgment, by the matter being subjective, and by
    the appellant not yet  being  accepted  for  baptism.   The  judge  had
    already  reached  adverse  conclusions  on  other  points,  which  were
    relevant to the conversion issue also.  The ground relating to  on  the
    appellant's family being left behind misunderstood the  decision.   The
    judge's point had nothing to do with the difficulties  of  travel,  but
    with the implausibility of leaving them there when his departure  would
    allegedly pose a direct threat.   That  was  a  sensible  reason.   The
    judge's  observation  about  scorch  marks  was  a   comment   on   the
    photographic evidence produced, and only one of a number of reasons for
    being sceptical about that chapter of the evidence.   The  judge  posed
    the sensible question that if Sepah intended to terrify the  appellant,
    then why would they not  have  claimed  responsibility.   It  was  also
    sensible to observe that the appellant did not have any such profile as
    to allegedly make him a  particular  attraction  to  the  revolutionary
    guards as a trainer over a period of over a decade.   The  judge  might
    have understated at the end of paragraph 25  the  further  developments
    since the appellant returned from Italy, but that was a  minor  matter.
    The decision, read fairly and as a whole, disclosed no error of law.

 9. Mr Byrne in reply submitted again that the  expression  "in  the  whole
    circumstances" at  paragraph  28  did  not  refer  back  to  any  prior
    reasoning, and that most of the prior findings on the point appeared to
    be  positive  rather  than  negative  to  the  appellant's  conversion.
    Regarding the appellant's status as a trainer, it is well-known that  a
    black belt is the top level in martial arts.  The judge may  have  been
    entitled to be sceptical of the evidence of Mr MY at paragraph 26,  but
    the key question was whether the appellant sought to convert  him,  not
    whether he had been successful.

Conclusions.

10. The judge found credible the two eminently  respectable  witnesses  who
    thought  that  the  appellant  has  an  interest   in   converting   to
    Christianity.  That was not expert evidence.   Whether  the  conversion
    is genuinely heartfelt or a  contrivance  remained  a  matter  for  the
    judge.  It was a conclusion about the state of the appellant's own mind
    which the judge had to reach on the  basis  not  of  what  any  witness
    thought but on the evidence as a  whole.   It  is  in  no  way  to  the
    discredit of the favourable witnesses that the judge  came  to  another
    conclusion.  As with any other finding, she had to  give  her  reasons,
    but I am not persuaded that the  supporting  reasoning  is  absent,  or
    defective.   The  reasons  are  within  the  careful  consideration  at
    paragraphs 26 and 27 of this particular issue.

11. The adverse conclusions on the original claim about the Sepah were also
    relevant, although it is clear from the structure of the decision  that
    the judge did not think that  simply  because  the  appellant  was  not
    otherwise a credible witness, he could not be  a  genuine  convert  (or
    prospective convert).

12. On the point about the appellant's wife and family being left in  Iran,
    the obvious reading is as submitted for the  respondent.   The  judge's
    observation was based on the risk allegedly posed  to  the  appellant's
    family in Iran.  It is not affected by the difficulty of the journey.

13. The judge's observations about scorch marks on the car  and  about  the
    appellant's degree of prominence as a trainer are further common  sense
    matters, well within her province.

14. The grounds and submissions for  the  appellant  have  probed  for  all
    possible weaknesses in the judge's decision, but  in  my  opinion  they
    have not disclosed anything material.  They do not  resolve  into  more
    than disagreement with factual conclusions which were properly open  to
    the judge, and which are more than adequately  explained,  reading  her
    decision fairly and as a whole.  That decision shall stand.


                           [pic]


                           15 August 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
