
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/00657/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2018                              |On 27 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    a s m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Broudie Jackson & Canter,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, A S M, is a citizen of Iraq.  I shall  hereafter  refer
    to the respondent as the appellant and the appellant as the  respondent
    (as they appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).   By  a
    decision which is dated 30 November 2017, I found that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law such that its decision fell to be set aside.   My
    reasons were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  the
         respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, ASM, was born in 1991 and
         is a female citizen of Iraq.  She came to  the  United  Kingdom  in
         July 2016 when she claimed asylum.  Her application for asylum  was
         refused by a decision of the Secretary of State dated  6th  January
         2017.  The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Myers) which, in a decision promulgated on 7 March 2017 allowed the
         appeal.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,  to
         the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The judge found the appellant to be a "singularly unimpressive
         witness."  [22]. The judge found that the appellant had  fabricated
         her account of fleeing forced marriage and found  also  that  "[the
         appellant] has her family's full support for her  marriage  to  her
         husband.  I find there was nothing to prevent her returning to  her
         family in the IKR [Independent Kurdish Region]."  The  judge  moved
         on to consider risk on return.  He noted the appellant claimed  not
         to have a passport or Civil Status Identity Document  (CSID).   The
         judge found that there was no evidence to show that  the  appellant
         had been "pre-cleared with the IKR authorities [for a return to the
         IKR]".  The judge found that she was "left with the situation  that
         the appellant would be returned to Baghdad as a lone woman with  no
         documentation,  unable  to  speak  Arabic  and  from   a   minority
         community."

         3.   The parties are agreed that the appellant is an Iraqi  Kurdish
         woman from Sulimaniyah in the IKR, Iraq.  The grounds assert  that,
         instead of considering whether  the  appellant  could  obtain  pre-
         clearance  from  the  IKR  authorities,  the  judge  had,  instead,
         proceeded  to  consider  irrelevant  matters,  namely  whether  the
         appellant had a passport or CSID, the latter only of relevance were
         she to settle and live in Iraq.  The grounds also complain that the
         judge effectively reversed the burden  of  proof  by  finding  that
         "there was no evidence that [the appellant]  has  been  pre-cleared
         with the IKR authorities"; the respondent observes  that  the  onus
         remained on the appellant to show that her identity had  been  pre-
         cleared and it seemed likely, in light of the judge's findings, the
         appellant's family in  the  IKR  could  assist  in  resolving  that
         matter.

         4.   I find that the judge's decision is problematic.  At [33], the
         judge appears to find that the appellant would be likely to  return
         to the IKR with her husband and with the support of her family  who
         live there.  However, she then dismisses  her  own  observation  as
         "mere speculation".  It was entirely within the judge's  power,  on
         the evidence, to make a finding as  to  the  likelihood  of  family
         support in the IKR and, indeed,  whether  the  appellant's  husband
         would return to live with her there.  I am not clear as to why this
         should amount  to  "mere  speculation."   I  also  agree  with  the
         respondent that the judge has raised the question of  pre-clearance
         with the IKR authorities (which would enable the appellant  to  fly
         directly to Erbil in the IKR and  bypass  Baghdad  altogether)  but
         then has not made any proper findings in relation  to  that  issue.
         Instead, at [34], the judge has considered the possible position of
         the appellant in Baghdad where she would have  no  CSID.   This  is
         strange given  that,  if  pre-clearance  to  the  IKR  were  to  be
         obtained, the appellant could fly directly to Erbil; the possession
         of a CSID only arises as a factor in the risk on return analysis if
         the appellant had to live for  any  length  of  time  in  Iraq,  as
         opposed to the IKR.  Overall, I find the  judge's  decision  to  be
         incomplete and confused.  I have decided to set it aside.

         5.   I have, however,  refrained  from  remaking  the  decision  by
         dismissing  the  appeal.   The  judge's  findings  as  regards  the
         appellant's asylum claim are entirely sound and they  shall  stand.
         The only question in this case is whether the appellant can  travel
         directly to the IKR and live there with her  family.   Because  the
         judge in the First-tier Tribunal did not examine this issue in  any
         proper detail, it remains for the  Upper  Tribunal  to  do  so.   I
         therefore direct that there should be a resumed hearing  before  me
         at Manchester on the first available date.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  7
         March 2017 is set aside.  The judge's findings on  the  appellant's
         asylum  appeal  shall  stand.   The  only  issue  remaining  to  be
         determined relates to the feasibility of  the  appellant  returning
         directly to live in the Independent  Kurdish  Region  (IKR).   That
         issue is adjourned to a resumed hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge
         Lane in the Upper Tribunal at Manchester  on  the  first  available
         date.  The parties may adduce fresh evidence relating to that issue
         provided that evidence is sent to the Upper  Tribunal  and  to  the
         other party no less  than  10  clear  days  prior  to  the  resumed
         hearing."

 2. Matters have moved on since I wrote that decision.  In particular, some
    of the assumptions which I have made at [4] no longer pertain.   As  at
    the date of writing, it is not now possible for the appellant to  enter
    the IKR by flying into Erbil directly.  Following  the  September  2017
    Kurdish Independence Referendum, the Federal  Government  of  Iraq  has
    banned international flights into and out of  the  IKR  through  Erbil.
    Only domestic flights are now allowed.  Mrs Aboni, for the Secretary of
    State, submitted that the Secretary of State would not seek  to  return
    the appellant to Iraq until it would be safe to do so.   She  submitted
    that the ban on international  flights  into  Erbil  is  likely  to  be
    temporary and, when such flights resume, it would be possible  for  the
    appellant to be returned to the IKR directly from the United Kingdom by
    that route.  Mr Hussain, for the appellant, relied upon  the  Court  of
    Appeal's grant of permission in AA (Iraq) [2016] EWCA Civ 779 and  also
    the substantive decision of the Court of Appeal in that case.  Granting
    permission, the Court of Appeal identified the  tension  which  existed
    between HF (Iraq) [2013] EWCA Civ 1276 and HH Somalia [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    426.  In the permission grant, the Court of Appeal wrote:

         "There is also, he  submits,  an  illogicality  in  the  Tribunal's
         approach. It recognised that,  since  AA  could  not  currently  be
         returned, "it could be said to be unnecessary  to  hypothesise  any
         risk to him upon his return". (Such a proposition would  indeed  be
         consistent with what Elias LJ said in HF: see [15](a)  above).  But
         in fact the Tribunal  decided  that  an  applicant  should  not  be
         precluded from pursuing a claim to international  protection  where
         the asserted risk of harm was not (or not solely) based on  factors
         (such as lack of documentation) that currently rendered a  person's
         actual return unfeasible. It gave the  example  of  Jews  and  Nazi
         Germany and went on to remit the matter to  the  FtT  to  make  the
         further necessary findings. One of the matters of  factual  dispute
         was as to AA's claimed inability to speak Arabic,  the  whereabouts
         of his family members and possibly his ability to enter and  remain
         in the IKR.

         The illogicality is said to be this. One approach is to  say  that,
         if someone cannot be returned, it is inappropriate  to  hypothesize
         about what risk there will be to his safety if he is returned,  not
         least because circumstances (whether personal to him or  applicable
         in the country of intended return) may change by the time he can be
         returned. Another is to say that all matters relating to safety  on
         return should be decided without delay. What  is  illogical  is  to
         decide all matters relating to safety with  one  exception,  namely
         questions relating to whether, if returned, the appellant will have
         a CSID or will be able to obtain one and the risk of destitution if
         he cannot.

         I was originally of the view that permission should be  refused  on
         the ground that the matter  was  determined  by  HF  and  that  the
         decision in HH did not lead to any different conclusion because (a)
         it was obiter; (b) it concerned safety  on  passage  from  port  of
         arrival to place of safety rather than an impediment to return; and
         (c) it was overtaken by HF.

         I have, however, come to the conclusion that  AA  should  be  given
         permission to appeal on ground 1, namely  whether  as  part  of  an
         assessment as  to  whether  an  individual  required  international
         protection a decision maker is (a) bound to  consider  whether  the
         individual concerned had in his possession or could obtain  a  CSID
         either before he returned to Iraq  or  within  a  short  period  of
         returning there, failing which (in the absence  of  an  alternative
         means of support) his circumstances were  likely  to  amount  to  a
         breach of Article 3 and (b) not entitled to postpone  any  decision
         on that question if it was not feasible from him to be returned  to
         Iraq.

         I have reached that view because it seems to me  arguable  (with  a
         realistic prospect of success) that the issue  is  not  necessarily
         determined by HF; and that HH, which does not appear to  have  been
         cited in HF, may be said to point to  a  different  result  in  the
         circumstances of this case (which are not the same as those in HF).
         The  question  is  an  important  one  of  principle  or   practice
         applicable to many different individuals and  merits  consideration
         as a second appeal. The answer may be that a decision-maker  should
         leave out of consideration any risk of harm attributable to want of
         a CSID because the fact that its absence creates a risk  to  safety
         as well as an impediment to return should not mean that  that  risk
         has to be considered when return is not possible. But it  does  not
         seem to me that that result is necessarily mandated  by  HF,  which
         concerned only an identity document whose absence was an impediment
         to return, and may be contra-indicated by HH.  In  addition  it  is
         desirable for the court to address  the  arguable  illogicality  to
         which  I  referred  in  [28]  above,  which  did  not   arise   for
         consideration in HF."

 3. At the substantive hearing of the appeal, the Court of Appeal found  as
    follows:

         "In reaching this part of their conclusions,  the  UT  equated  the
         CSID simply to a return document. On that basis, they  applied  the
         approach outlined by Elias LJ in HF (Iraq) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1276; [2014]  1  WLR  1329.  In
         that case, the  point  at  issue  was  whether  an  Iraqi  national
         returned to Iraq without a  passport  or  laissez-passer  would  be
         detained at  Baghdad  airport  and  subjected  to  Article  3  ill-
         treatment. However,  the  risk  rose  from  the  absence  of  those
         documents, without which the Appellant could  not  be  returned  at
         all. In that context, the Court concluded  that  the  question  was
         redundant. Elias LJ expressed his conclusion as follows:

         "98.  ...  [Counsel  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr   Eadie]'s
         contention  is  that,  properly  analysed,  the  practice  of   not
         returning  those  without  the  appropriate  documents  is  not   a
         voluntary policy of the Secretary of State  at  all.  The  lack  of
         documentation creates an impediment to return which  the  Secretary
         of State cannot circumvent. Iraq will not receive anyone  from  the
         UK  without  the  relevant  travel  document.  If  an  unsuccessful
         applicant for asylum refuses to co-operate to  obtain  the  laissez
         passer document, he is in precisely the same situation as any other
         failed asylum seeker whom the  Secretary  of  State  is  unable  to
         return for one reason or another. The assurance of the Secretary of
         State that she  would  not  return  someone  to  Iraq  without  the
         relevant  documents  is  of  no  special  significance;  it  simply
         reflects realities. ...

         99. Mr Eadie submits that these appellants  are  precisely  in  the
         situation of any other failed asylum seekers who would  not  be  at
         risk in their  own  state  but  cannot  for  technical  reasons  be
         returned home.  The  existence  of  technical  obstacles  does  not
         entitle them to humanitarian protection. ...

         100. Mr Eadie says that this is not like the J1  case  [2013]  EWCA
         Civ 279 or the sur place cases where, if returned,  the  appellants
         would potentially face ill-treatment meeting Article  3  standards.
         They can only be returned with the necessary documentation, and  if
         and  when  the  impediment  caused  by   lack   of   the   relevant
         documentation is overcome, they will be safe on return.

         101. In my judgment, this analysis is  correct.  I  accept,  as  Mr
         Fordham submits, that it  would  be  necessary  for  the  court  to
         consider whether the appellants would be at risk on return if their
         return were feasible, but I do not accept that the Tribunal has  to
         ask itself the hypothetical question of what would happen on return
         if that is simply not possible for one reason or another. ..."

         The position with a CSID is different.  It  is  not  merely  to  be
         considered as a document which can be  used  to  achieve  entry  to
         Iraq. Rather, it may be an essential document for life in Iraq.  It
         is for practical  purposes  necessary  for  those  without  private
         resources to access food and basic services. Moreover, it is not  a
         document that can be automatically acquired after return  to  Iraq.
         In addition, it is feasible that  an  individual  could  acquire  a
         passport or a laissez-passer, without possessing or being  able  to
         obtain a CSID. In such a  case,  an  enquiry  would  be  needed  to
         establish whether the individual would have other means of  support
         in Iraq, in the absence of which they might be at risk of breach of
         Article 3 rights.

         As the Appellant reminds us, decision-makers must take decisions on
         entitlement to protection within a reasonable period of  time,  and
         must not decline to address a material element of a claim  such  as
         this: see AG (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2006] EWCA Civ 1342 at [29]; HH (Somalia) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 426 at [63] and JI v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 279, [42]-[54], in
         addition to  Council  Directives  2004/83/EC  and  2005/85/EC.  The
         Secretary of State agrees with this analysis.  Hence,  it  will  be
         wrong indefinitely to postpone the enquiry.

         Since the parties are agreed as to the error of law in  this  case,
         and what needs to be done to correct  it,  there  is  no  point  in
         remitting the case  to  the  UT.  The  correction  to  the  country
         guidance can be made by this court. Following submissions as to the
         best procedure to adopt, the parties are  agreed  that  the  safest
         course is to append to this judgment  a  complete  revised  Country
         Guidance, with the amended text highlighted.  By  this  means,  the
         revisions will be evident, but practitioners will have ready access
         to the Guidance in one document,  avoiding  the  inconvenience  and
         risk of confusion which might otherwise arise. The amended  country
         guidance appears as the Annex to this judgment.  Paragraph  170  of
         the UT's judgment should be read in the light of  and  consistently
         with this amended guidance."

 4. In the light of the reasoning of the Court of Appeal,  I  find  that  I
    agree with Mr Hussain that this  appellant  cannot  be  kept  in  limbo
    indefinitely whilst the Secretary of State waits for country conditions
    to change in Iraq enabling return directly  to  Erbil.   The  appellant
    does not have a CSID card and removal to Iraq can only be via  Baghdad.
    Mrs Aboni did not challenge the submission of Mr Hussain that return to
    Iraq for this appellant with no CSID card through Baghdad would  expose
    her to a real risk of harm.  The Sectary of State has not  argued  that
    the appellant could, without a CSID card or any other form of  identity
    document be on the laissez passer (which would have  only  enabled  the
    appellant's return from the United Kingdom to  Baghdad)  the  appellant
    would not be able to access a flight immediately from Baghdad to  Erbil
    and that taking an overland  route  from  Baghdad  to  Erbil  would  be
    exceedingly hazardous.   Mr  Hussain  fully  acknowledged  that  a  new
    decision could be issued by the Secretary of State if conditions change
    and return directly to Erbil became possible.  He accepted that,  given
    the fluid nature of events in Iraq,  any  protection  afforded  to  the
    appellant in the United Kingdom may be of  only  very  short  duration.
    However the fact  remains  that  (a)  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  now
    consider the risk to this appellant of returning to  Iraq  via  Baghdad
    and (b) such a return would expose the  appellant  to  Article  3  ECHR
    risk.  In the circumstances, her appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

 5. This appeal is allowed on Article 3 ECHR grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 23 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
