
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00200/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th June 2019                    |On 10th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                   mr K Y
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Ali (Counsel) instructed by Aman Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1. Anonymity having previously been ordered in the First-tier Tribunal and
    there being no application to remove the order, I see no reason  to  do
    so and the order remains in place.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
    court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any
    member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Turkish appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Cary promulgated on 22 Feb 2019 whereby he dismissed the appeal against
    the decision to refuse to grant asylum or ancillary protection  on  the
    basis of his perceived political opinion through association  with  the
    Gulenist movement.  Permission to appeal was granted at the  First-tier
    Tribunal by Judge Parkes on 08 May  2019  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  not  given  adequate
    reasoning in respect of the asserted raid on the father's home and  the
    issuance of an arrest warrant.

 3. In substance the 1st ground is a challenge to the  judge's  credibility
    findings.

 4.  The  first  particularisation  complains  that  having  identified  at
    paragraph 37 that the Gulenist movement is not a political party nor  a
    religion but  accused  of  having  the  aim  of  toppling  the  Turkish
    government through insiders in the police and other state institutions,
    at paragraph 40 the judge was contradictory when he  held  against  the
    appellant that  he  was  unable  to  describe  the  political  aims  or
    motivation of the Gulenist movement. The  ground  mischaracterises  the
    judge's consideration. Rather than being contradictory the judge  shows
    in his decision that he had a thorough  grasp  of  the  nature  of  the
    Gulenist movement. Contrary to the grounds the judge  was  entitled  to
    find that the appellant was vague in his descriptions of his activities
    and motivations. There is no suggestion that the evidence to which  the
    judge refers at paragraph 40  and 41 is  inaccurately  stated  and  his
    statements that "they support education and support students"  and  his
    reference to  "the  constant  activities  that  they  arrange  such  as
    picnics,  expeditions  and  because  they  help  people  who   are   in
    difficulty" can properly be described  as  vague  and  lacking  detail.
    Further  the  paragraph  is  but  one  small  part   of   the   judge's
    consideration of the entirety of the appellant's evidence of his actual
    and perceived association with the movement which extends over  several
    pages and many more paragraphs, with cogent explanations as to why  the
    judge found that his evidence lacked coherence and consistency  (41,40,
    42,43, 44,45).

 5. The next criticism is that the judge is  speculative  at  paragraph  41
    when he criticises the appellant for describing a  Gulenist  charitable
    organisation Kimse Yok Mu as little more than a local charity  when  in
    fact it is an international aid organisation with world wide  activity.
    Again the ground mischaracterises the judge's consideration. The  judge
    has accurately summarised the  difficulties  with  the  appellant  oral
    evidence at 9 and 10 before his consideration at  paragraph  41,  which
    extends to a second paragraph  at  42,  and  accurately  describes  the
    limitations of the appellant's own evidence about his activities in the
    organisation, and notes that that lack of detail  is  mirrored  in  the
    letter of support  from  the  organisation,  the  author  of  which  is
    misnamed by the appellant, and that the  details  about  obtaining  the
    letter  appear  incoherent  in  the  context  of  the  appellant's  own
    chronological account, compounded by the fact that the  writer  of  the
    letter does not assert any risk to the appellant on the  basis  of  his
    activities, and who although in the United Kingdom did not  attend  his
    hearing.

 6. The 3rd challenge complains that the judge should not  have  criticised
    the letter the appellant produced from the Dialogue Society because the
    respondent did  not  question  him  about  it.  That  ground  fails  to
    recognise that the appellant chose to rely on the letter, it was before
    the judge, he was  under  a  duty  to  assess  it.  But  in  any  event
    paragraphs 14 and 15 revealed he was asked about his activities in  the
    UK at the hearing, and the judge was entitled to find at 43 that it was
    noticeable that when he was asked he made no mention of his  membership
    of the Dialogue Society.

 7. The 4th challenge criticises the judge's rejection  of  the  Photograph
    Identification Record that the appellant relied on to show that one  of
    his friends had been arrested and  named  him,  identifying  him  as  a
    Gulenist. The ground  oversimplifies  the  judge's  consideration  when
    stating that it was rejected on an irrational basis because it was  not
    an original and there was delay. Whilst contrary to  the  grounds  both
    are valid criticisms, the reasoning for rejecting the evidence set  out
    between paragraphs 44 to 46, and again at 48. is far more  wide-ranging
    and detailed than the ground suggests. The appellant's  claim  is  that
    the friend who has named him had  been  interviewed  in  2016  and  the
    record is dated 2018, with the document only produced at the hearing in
    February 2019. The incoherence and inconsistency with  the  appellant's
    account are clearly identified as well as  issues  of  provenance.  The
    judge's consideration follows correct self-direction in respect of  the
    case Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00439.

 8. At paragraph 6 the grounds complain that the judge  failed  to  make  a
    finding as to whether or  not  the  police  and  gendarme  visited  the
    appellant's home looking for him in September 2018.  At  47  the  judge
    notes the contrary evidence  that  the  arrest  warrant  the  appellant
    claims was handed to his father at the time of the raid had been thrown
    away/mislaid, the failure of the father to  make  any  mention  of  the
    arrest warrant in his letter, or in that of the uncle, as well  as  the
    failure of the  Istanbul  lawyer  to  mention  any  such.  The  grounds
    complain that even if there was no arrest warrant the judge should have
    expressly found whether or not the  visit  from  the  police  occurred,
    because as the judge correctly self-directed, it is  possible  for  the
    judge to find that the appellant lacked  credibility  in  part  of  his
    account but was telling the truth about the another and so  accordingly
    even though the arrest warrant did  not  exist  the  judge  might  have
    thought that the visit occurred and needed to say expressly one way  or
    the other. A fair reading of the decision  clearly  reveals  that  this
    warrant was not a peripheral part of the appellant's account  which  if
    disbelieved might nonetheless leave the core of his account intact. The
    judge has done more than enough to  explain  why  at  paragraph  53  he
    concluded  that  he  had  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  that   the
    authorities came looking for him on September 21, 2018.

 9. The final particularisation complains that the judge has put weight  in
    paragraph 50 on the fact that the authorities are not interested in him
    because there  is  no  evidence  the  authorities  have  rescinded  his
    passport. The grounds they that the  judge  had  not  taken  that  into
    account as it is not clear how people who  are  abroad  find  out  that
    their passports have been rescinded. Again the  ground  simplifies  the
    judge's consideration by failing  to  take  account  of  the  preceding
    paragraph at 49 to the point that the appellant  was  issued  with  his
    passport and used it to leave, which clearly shows that in the  context
    of his simply being a  military  student  who  the  government  decreed
    should  transfer  from  a  presumed  Gulenist  sympathetic  educational
    institution to the Turkish government educational institution, did  not
    put him as any risk and contrary to the claim that the judge has failed
    to identify the source of that information the judge clearly  sets  out
    the reference to the 2000 CPIN at paragraph 49 and 50.

10. The  grounds  also  fail  to  recognise  the  force  of  other  adverse
    credibility findings which are not challenged including for example his
    claim in interview that  he  went  to  Moldova  and  protested  against
    President Erdogan, a trip organised through the encrypted  app  Bylock,
    itself said to  be  a  Gulenist  indicator,  although  it  subsequently
    transpired that he did not, and the only explanation he has is that  he
    said it because of nerves, which as the judge notes is  no  explanation
    at all.

11. The 2nd ground is that the judge failed to have regard to  the  current
    country guidance case of Turkey IK  (Returnees  -  Records  -  IFA)  CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00312. The grounds do not explain what the case says  that
    would be relevant in the context of the case as it  was  argued  before
    the judge, and it had not been referred to. Before me Mr Ali  submitted
    that the country guidance case sets out a process that the  judge  must
    adopt in assessing what questions are likely  to  be  asked  during  an
    investigation on return and how a returnee would respond without  being
    required to lie. Quite how that fitted in with the case as it was being
    made for the appellant is unclear because his own evidence was that his
    risk did not arise  from  being  a  transferred  military  student  but
    because of  being  identified  to  the  authorities  as  a  significant
    Gulenist by others so that he was the subject of an arrest warrant. His
    claim was disbelieved. Before me  it  was  not  explained  how  if  the
    appellant were to reveal the facts as found by the judge he would be at
    any real risk, so that the  complaint  appears  irrelevantly  formulaic
    rather than having any substantive merit.

Decision

12. I find no error of law and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal stands.

Signed [pic]           Date 28 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


