
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00734/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 16th June 2017                             |On 26th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between


                                    M I M

                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, Solicitor, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. This appellant,  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  appeals  with  permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bartlett  dismissing
    his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  of  asylum,
    humanitarian protection or leave to remain on human rights grounds,  as
    set out in her refusal letter of 11 January 2017.

 2. The basis of the appellant's claim for protection is that he is  a  gay
    man and an atheist, with a blog and articles in his own  name  exposing
    both those  circumstances,  which  carries  the  appellant's  name  and
    photograph.   The appellant has a wife, but it is his case that he  was
    forced to marry her in 2011 before coming to the United  Kingdom,  that
    she is aware of the blog and informed his family and friends that he is
    in fact gay, and writes an atheist blog, putting him at risk on return.
     The appellant has not divorced his wife: he says that he cannot afford
    to do so.

    First-tier Tribunal decision

 3. The  First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  the  appellant's  account  as  not
    credible and in particular, regarded the appellant's  gay  relationship
    as a fabrication.  The Judge also rejected the applicant's claim to  be
    an atheist, although the respondent (and the Judge)  accepted  that  he
    had deserted Islam.   At [29], the Judge said this:

         "29. I accept that there is a blog on Blogspot called  [appellant's
         name].  I accept that this has  atheist  writings  and  some  anti-
         Islamic writings.  However, I do not accept that the  appellant  is
         identifiable as the author of this  blog.   No  evidence  has  been
         provided to me that his photograph has been linked to the blog.   I
         specifically asked the appellant how he  was  identifiable  as  the
         author of the blog and all the appellant could refer me to was  the
         details that he provided to the blog site to start  the  blog,  and
         his email ID.  Having seen some of the translations, I accept  that
         in earlier blog post [sic] the appellant's name [name supplied]  is
         set out at the start of a number  of  posts.   However,  I  do  not
         accept that these factors are  enough  to  link  the  blog  to  the
         appellant,  such  that  he  would  be   a   target   from   Islamic
         fundamentalists or others seeking  to  harm  individuals  who  make
         statements critical of Islam.  It has not  been  claimed  that  the
         appellant's name is exceptionally unusual and I consider that there
         are many individuals with the appellant's name in Bangladesh and it
         has not been claimed that the  appellant's  name  is  exceptionally
         unusual and I consider that there are  many  individuals  with  the
         appellant's name in Bangladesh and the Bangladeshi diaspora."

 4. The First-tier Tribunal considered that the appellant  would  have  the
    help of his family in reintegrating on return to Bangladesh.   At  [30]
    and [31], the Judge refused to accept the appellant's evidence that his
    deserted wife told his family, his friends and  the  police  about  the
    blog and found as a fact that the appellant's wife had not done so  nor
    that she had disclosed his sexuality. I have some difficulty with  that
    finding but I note that at the end of  [31],  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    said this:

         "Even on the appellant's own evidence and taking his  case  at  its
         highest that the family and the police were aware  about  the  blog
         the police did not make any threats against him and were not  upset
         by his blog.  The appellant does not fear his family and they  have
         not made threats against him despite [the] blog."

 5. At [33], the judge considered that the blog was just one among millions
    of blogs and there was no reason why it would be drawn to the attention
    of anybody who would cause the appellant harm.  The First-tier Tribunal
    Judge did not accept that the  appellant  had  lost  contact  with  his
    family members and dismissed the protection claim  on  the  basis  that
    there was no risk in the home area and that as  he  did  not  hold  the
    views or the orientation asserted no risk at all.

 6. In the alternative at [37], the Judge  considered  that  the  appellant
    would be able to relocate to a different part of Bangladesh where there
    would be  no  risk.   Finally,  at  [38],  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Bangladeshi authorities would be willing and able to protect him to the
    Horvath standard both in relation to his atheism and by implication  to
    his sexuality.

    Permission to appeal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal. The grounds  for  permission
    are somewhat diffuse.  There was mention of hostility from  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge at  the  hearing,  and  of  the  Judge's  erroneous
    approach in equating  the  appellant's  beliefs  with  his  matrimonial
    dealings with  his  spouse.   At  [5],  the  appellant  challenged  the
    credibility findings about his relationship in the United Kingdom.   At
    [6]-[7] of the grounds, the appellant  contended  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred at [29] as to the absence of photographs,  and  at
    [9] in the grounds, the appellant relies  on  somewhat  sparse  country
    evidence that atheist writers have  been  murdered  in  Bangladesh  for
    propagating atheist beliefs in  lesser  known  mediums,  arguing  that,
    regardless of the number of followers which this  particular  blog  may
    attract, the existence of the blog puts the appellant in danger.  There
    was also a challenge to the  First-tier  Tribunal's  rejection  of  his
    sexual orientation.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the following basis:

         "2.  Whilst the grounds, on the whole, appear  to  be  little  more
         than a disagreement with the adverse credibility findings  made  by
         the Judge, there is one aspect of the grounds which merits  further
         consideration.  Paragraph 6 of  the  grounds  refers  to  newspaper
         articles which it asserts the Judge had failed to consider.  Whilst
         these appear to be the documents referred to at [28] of the Judge's
         decision,  as  there  is  mention  of  translations   by   Oriental
         Translation, it is possible that the Judge arguably confused  these
         with the appellant's blogs.  There are photographs appearing in the
         documents on pages F21, F24, F28, F33 and F37 of  the  respondent's
         bundle and it is not clear if these are of the appellant.  If  they
         are, the Judge may arguably have erred in considering at [29]  that
         there were no photographs linking the appellant  to  the  articles,
         which may, in turn, arguably  affect  his  overall  findings.   For
         these reasons, further clarification would assist and  I  therefore
         grant permission."

 9. The bundle before the First-tier Tribunal contained untranslated copies
    of blog posts, which did carry a photograph,  and  translations,  which
    did not.

    Rule 24 Reply

10. The respondent filed a Rule 24 Reply.  She noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had not accepted that the appellant was an  atheist,  as
    he claimed.  The Reply continues:

         "... 4.  The Judge has taken into  account  the  relevant  evidence
         that was presented with regards to appellant and has noted at  [27]
         that the photographs the appellant  provided  had  shown  him  with
         friends and nothing other than friendship was discerned from  them.
         The Judge has taken note of the blogs provided by the appellant and
         indicated why he  doesn't  accept  the  appellant  is  identifiable
         (Determination [27]).  It is not clear at this stage whether  these
         are the same photographs  referred  to  at  [2]  of  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal and as such the Secretary  of  State  reserves
         the right to address any issues raised on  this  point  during  the
         impending hearing. ..."

11. The Reply further  asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings
    regarding the appellant's wife and family are adequate and  'take  into
    account cultural sensitivities in terms of  accessing  the  appellant's
    claimed  account  of  his  wife's  actions'.  Finally,  the  respondent
    considers that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  came  to  sustainable
    conclusions  about  the  appellant's  shared  accommodation   and   his
    rejection of the appellant's claimed sexuality.

12. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal
    for decision.

    Upper Tribunal hearing

13. As far as the anti-Muslim, un-Islamic and/or atheist blogging which the
    appellant is said to have undertaken, the  respondent  did  not  accept
    this because of an error in the blog address that she  examined.   That
    was an error by the caseworker and the  conclusion  drawn  was  plainly
    erroneous. Mr Clarke now accepts that the blog exists and  is  publicly
    available. At the hearing today, Mr Clarke, who has the original colour
    photographs and the opportunity of seeing the appellant sitting in  the
    court, accepted that the photographs in the untranslated  documents  in
    the bundle were those of the appellant.

14. It is clear, therefore, that the First-tier Judge made an error of fact
    as to the existence of those photographs on the blog, which is said  to
    have had 3000 hits.  The respondent now  accepts  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's self-direction that the appellant's photograph was not
    linked to the atheist anti-Islamic blog posts, one  of  which  is  also
    strongly pro-LGBT, is erroneous.  The  question  remains  whether  that
    error of fact is sufficiently serious to amount  to  an  error  of  law
    applying the R (Iran) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982 standard, I find that it  is  capable  of  being  a
    sufficiently serious oversight, if  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

15. I approach the question of materiality on the assumption that  had  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge directed herself properly in relation to  the
    photographic evidence she would have accepted that the blogs  did  link
    the appellant's name and physical appearance to  the  things  he  wrote
    online.  I also approach it on the now undisputed basis that  there  is
    least one long post about gay rights and some evidence of the emergence
    of a homosexual narrative for this appellant in his home  country.   On
    that basis, it is at least possible that  a  judge  properly  directing
    herself would have reached a different conclusion as to the appellant's
    sexual orientation.

16. The First-tier Judge did not err in considering that there  are  likely
    to be thousands of such blogs and there  is  nothing  in  the  material
    before me to say that this one has  any  particularly  extended  reach.
    The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that  it  had  received
    3000 hits: the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that it would  have
    been quite possible for the appellant  to  have  made  all  those  hits
    himself.

17. I asked Mr Shah to assist me by identifying the country evidence in the
    bundle which would have enabled a judge finding those  facts  to  reach
    the conclusion that this appellant was at risk  on  return.   There  is
    some evidence of non-state actors causing harm both to atheist bloggers
    and to gays in Bangladesh, but no clear evidence as  to  the  level  of
    risk which this generates.  The press articles included in  the  bundle
    relate to a narrow range of incidents

18. The appellant did not put  before  the  Tribunal  adequate  country  of
    origin evidence to support the claimed risk  throughout  Bangladesh  to
    persons who are gay and atheist.  I would have expected to see the full
    Home Office Country Report (not an excerpt) and the latest  U.S.  State
    Department Report. Having regard  to  the  inadequacy  of  the  country
    evidence which the appellant advanced, I consider that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge would have been entitled to reach the  same  conclusion,
    that the risk did not meet the international protection  standard.   It
    follows that the error of fact at [29] is not material to  the  outcome
    of this appeal.

19. It remains open to the appellant to make further  submissions  directly
    to the respondent, supported by coherent evidence, but as far  as  this
    appeal is concerned no  material  error  of  law  has  been  shown.   I
    therefore dismiss the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                    Date:         25 July 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
