
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00205/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12 May 2017                        |On 1 June 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                  miss z  a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Roberts, Legal Representative, instructed by
                  Cromwell Wilkes
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox dismissing her appeal against the refusal
    of the respondent to grant her asylum in the United Kingdom.

2.    The  judge's  original  decision  which  the  appellant  appealed  was
    promulgated on 27 February 2017.  The judge's decision was subsequently
    withdrawn, and an amended version was promulgated  on  20  April  2017.
    Both Mr R Roberts for the appellant  and  Mr  T  Wilding,  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer agreed that as the legal issues remained  the  same,
    they were content to proceed with the appeal on the  grounds  on  which
    permission was granted.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on [ ] 1998.  She  arrived  in
    the UK in 2014 as her mother's dependant.  She made an asylum claim  in
    her own right, on  the  basis  that  she  will  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution on return to Iraq, by reason of imputed political opinion.

4.   She was granted permission on a  ground  that  argued  that  the  judge
    erred in finding on the one hand, that the appeal fell to be  dismissed
    and on the other hand, that it was not appropriate to consider risk  on
    return as the appellant's case ought properly to  be  considered  as  a
    linked appeal, with those of her close family members.

5.   In granting permission to appeal, FtTJ Campbell said that at  paragraph
    55 of  the  decision,  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  an
    unreliable witness and had "failed to demonstrate  a  subjective  (sic)
    fear of harm in Iraq."  At paragraph 56 he  continued,  "the  issue  of
    risk upon return is left outstanding on the basis that the appeal shall
    be linked to the other appeals."  Immediately  thereafter  the  parties
    are given notice that "the appeal is dismissed in accordance  with  the
    Refugee Convention" and also that "the appeal  remains  outstanding  in
    relation to Articles 2 and 3  ECHR,  humanitarian  protection  and  the
    Qualification Directive."  Human rights were in  issue  in  the  appeal
    (see the Secretary of State's decision letter at paragraphs 66, 67  and
    68 to 79; note also, however, the scanty  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    absence of any express mention of human rights on page 10 of form AEFT-
    5).  It is arguable that the judge's approach is inconsistent with  the
    Tribunal's duty under Section 86(2) of the 2002  Act,  as  amended  and
    permission is granted on this basis.

6.   I note that the judge said under "Further Directions" that  the  appeal
    shall be linked with other appeals [A, B, C] with  the  issue  of  risk
    upon return to be determined collectively.

7.   Mr Roberts submitted that the appellant's case stands alone; it  cannot
    be linked.  He had  submitted  the  determination  of  the  appellant's
    mother, [SM] under reference [A].  The appellant's mother's appeal  was
    dismissed on asylum grounds.  Her  onward  appeals  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal were refused.  In the circumstances the
    appellant's appeal could not be linked to her mother's appeal.

8.   Mr Roberts said that the appeal under reference [B]  was  that  of  the
    appellant's aunt, [Y].  Mr Roberts said that [Y]'s case  still  remains
    outstanding as it has been remitted back to the Secretary of  State  on
    Section 55 grounds.  Accordingly, the appellant's  case  could  not  be
    linked to that of [Y]'s.

9.   With regard  to  the  third  case,  [C],  Mr  Roberts  said  that  this
    particular applicant's  appeal  was  successful  and  consequently  not
    outstanding.  Again, it means  that  the  appellant's  case  cannot  be
    linked to this case.  Accordingly, I find that the judge erred  in  law
    in requiring the appellant's appeal be linked to these other cases.

10.  I find that the judge also erred in law in failing  to  determine  risk
    on return in respect of the appellant's  appeal.   By  not  determining
    this issue I find that the judge's decision was incomplete.

11.  The appellant's appeal was put on the basis that on return to Iraq  she
    would be regarded as a lone female.  She will  have  no  assistance  or
    support.  She has always been under the  protection  of  others  whilst
    resident in Iraq historically.  Therefore, on return as a  lone  female
    she would be at risk of persecution.

12.  I find that the judge failed  to  consider  the  appellant's  case  and
    consequently erred in law.

13.  For the above reasons, the judge's decision cannot stand.   It  is  set
    aside in order to be re-made.

14.  The appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for re-hearing by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than FtTJ Fox.








Signed                                  Date: 31 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

