
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00473/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 27 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                 Ms Aziz [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Elder Rahimi
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen  of
    Iraq, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum.

 2. The application under  appeal  was  refused  on  6  January  2019.  The
    Appellant exercised her right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. The
    appeal came before Judge Parkes on 22 March 2019 and was dismissed. The
    Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  The
    application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Keane  on  8  May
    2019 in the following terms

         "The judge arguably accorded weight to irrelevant considerations in
         deciding that the appellant had not given a credible account of her
         experiences before leaving her country."

Background

 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Iraq from the Kurdish autonomous region (IKR) born on 8  May
    1988. She arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  16  April  2016  and  she
    claimed asylum on arrival. The basis of her claim was that  she  feared
    being harmed by her uncle and cousin as the result of her  relationship
    with a  colleague  at  work  and  her  refusal  to  cooperate  with  an
    arrangement to marry her cousin and that the state could not offer  her
    effective protection.

 4. The Respondent refused the application not accepting that the Appellant
    had given a true account or was in fear of  her  uncle  and  cousin  as
    claimed. In dismissing her appeal, the Judge found that the Appellant's
    account was not credible and that she was not at risk of  honour  based
    violence and not in need of international protection on any basis.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal decision concludes by saying that 'As explained
    above Article 8  does  not  arise  in  this  appeal'.  There  being  no
    explanation 'above' Mr Gayle confirmed  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    granted discretionary leave to remain as she has a British child and is
    married to a British citizen and this is the reason why  Article  8  is
    not in issue.

Submissions

 6. For the Appellant Mr Gayle relied on the grounds of appeal.  The  Judge
    fails to provide adequate reasons for his adverse credibility findings.
    Paragraph 18 and 19 of the decision place  significant  weight  on  the
    Appellant's  failure  to  mention  a  prior  visa  application  and  of
    discrepancies between that application and her current claim. When  she
    was initially interviewed, she was stressed and nervous and she had  no
    reason to conceal this application. It is peripheral to her  claim  and
    the Judge placed undue weight on this and this constitutes an error  of
    law. Paragraph 20 shows that the Judge found the Appellant's claim of a
    relationship with a work colleague to  be  incredible  because  of  the
    controlling behaviour of her uncle. This  is  not  justified,  and  the
    Judge should recognise that people develop relationships in all kind of
    circumstances.  The  Appellant  explained  in  her  statement  how  the
    relationship developed. Similarly, at paragraphs 22 and 23 as explained
    in the grounds the Judge makes  adverse  credibility  findings  without
    proper justification.

 7. For the Respondent Mr  Avery  said  that  the  grounds  amounted  to  a
    disagreement with the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
    visa application is a relevant factor and essentially  shows  that  the
    Appellant has given two different accounts. If  the  Appellant's  uncle
    was as controlling as she says then it is very difficult to  understand
    how she could have embarked upon and continued a  relationship  as  she
    claims. The interview record shows how this relationship was described.



 8. I reserved my decision.

Decision

 9. The facts of the Appellant's claim are relatively straightforward.  She
    claims that her father died many years ago and after his death she, her
    mother and her younger sister went to live with her paternal uncle. Her
    father had been very strict (interview  record  question  59)  and  her
    uncle along with her cousin was even more strict (question 63). At  the
    beginning of 2015 the  Appellant  obtained  employment  as  a  teacher.
    Shortly  after  commencing  this  employment  she  met  and   began   a
    relationship with a PE teacher  at  the  school.  She  never  saw  this
    teacher outside the school environment and, when not at  school,  would
    contact him by text using her mother's mobile phone.  Her  uncle  found
    out about the relationship when her boyfriend came to the house to  ask
    for her hand in marriage. The Appellant escaped Iraq with her boyfriend
    but became separated from him in  Turkey  and  travelled  on  alone  to
    Denmark. Whilst in a refugee camp in Denmark the Appellant  saw  a  man
    who looked like her cousin and, fearing that it was indeed him, she  no
    longer felt safe in Denmark and so travelled on to the United Kingdom.

10. In making an adverse credibility finding  the  judge  relied  on  three
    primary aspects of her account. These were a visa application submitted
    in her name in 2014, the  relationship  that  she  developed  with  her
    boyfriend in Iraq and the reason given  for  leaving  Denmark.  In  his
    grounds of appeal Mr Gayle suggests that the judge's  finding  in  each
    respect is inadequate. I will deal with them in turn.

11. The visa application, to visit her brother in the UK, was made  in  the
    Appellant's  name  in  2014  at  the  British  Embassy  in  Amman.  The
    application showed the Appellant's  previous  address  (where  she  had
    lived before the claimed death of her father) rather than  the  address
    where she lived with her uncle. It showed her employment as  a  teacher
    when, according to her account she did  not  commence  this  employment
    until January 2015. The Appellant's explanation for  the  discrepancies
    in the application and indeed her failure to mention it  was  that  her
    controlling uncle had made the application on her behalf  and  she  had
    known very little if anything about it. The Judge did not  accept  this
    explanation and explains his reasoning at paragraphs 18 to  20  of  his
    decision. There  is  in  my  judgement  no  irrationality  or  lack  of
    explanation for the Judge's findings in this respect. He has not placed
    undue weight on  a  peripheral  matter  as  suggested  but  indeed  has
    identified discrepancies which go to the heart of the Appellant's claim
    being her residence at her uncle's home and  the  commencement  of  her
    relationship during a new employment. There is no error of law.

12. The Appellant claimed to have commenced employment as a teacher at  the
    beginning  of  2015  and  shortly  thereafter  commenced   a   romantic
    relationship with a fellow teacher. She said that this relationship was
    confined to the school and the only communication outside school was by
    text message using her mother's telephone when she was in  the  toilet.
    The Judge did not find this credible bearing in  mind  the  controlling
    behaviour of her  uncle  the  limited  opportunities  to  continue  the
    relationship at the school and the arrangements made  for  leaving  the
    country. In my judgement these are findings that the Judge was entitled
    to make  on  the  evidence  that  was  before  him.  The  core  of  the
    Appellant's claim was that her uncle was  significantly  stricter  than
    her father and that he would not even allow her  to  purchase  her  own
    clothing. In her short time  as  a  teacher,  timing  which  any  event
    conflicted with information contained in the visa application the Judge
    was entitled to find that it was implausible that she had been able  to
    commence and continue an illicit relationship as claimed.  The  finding
    is explained at paragraph 21 and it is not in my judgement perverse  or
    inadequately reasoned.

13. The grounds of appeal suggest that an adverse credibility  finding  was
    made on the Appellant's failure to explain how she  funded  her  onward
    journey from Turkey to Denmark. This is a misreading of  the  decision.
    Paragraph 22 of the decision merely comments that it is not  clear  how
    her onward journey was funded. There is no error  of  law  revealed  by
    this statement.

14. Having arrived in Denmark and claimed asylum the Appellant  claimed  to
    have seen a person who looked like her cousin and for this  reason  did
    not feel safe to remain in Denmark. The Judge explains at paragraph  23
    that there was no suggestion at this stage  she  was  in  contact  with
    anyone in Iraq or that there was any way in which people in Iraq  would
    know that she was in Denmark. The grounds of  appeal  assert  that  the
    Judge erred by  failing  to  consider  how  Kurdish  communities  place
    emphasis on knowing where their members are and to  which  family  they
    belong. It is asserted that the  Judge  was  inevitably  influenced  by
    British customs as well as his own background. In my judgement there is
    no perversity or irrationality in the judge's conclusion.

15. The explanation given by the Judge for his adverse credibility  finding
    in all respects is adequately  reasoned,  clear  and  in  my  judgement
    unimpeachable. There is no error of law material  to  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Summary of Decision

16. Appeal dismissed.


Signed                                  Date: 21 June 2019
[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
