

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number:
PA/00465/2015






                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31st March 2016                     |On 18th April 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     J K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Rees instructed by Hoole & Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698), I make an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Respondent  (JK).   This
      direction applies to both the appellant and to the  respondent  and  a
      failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of  Court
      proceedings.

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge N  J  Osborne)  allowing  the  respondent's
      appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 27  June  2015  to
      refuse his international protection claim.

   3. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

   4. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of  Congo  (DRC)
      who was born on [ ] 1990. On 21 May 2013, the appellant was  convicted
      at the [  ]  Crown  Court,  [  ]  of  possession/control  of  identity
      documents with intent and was sentence to 12 months imprisonment.

   5. That conviction triggered the automatic deportation provisions in  the
      UK Borders Act 2007.  On 16 August 2013, the appellant made an  asylum
      and human rights claim.  On 19 March 2015, a decision  to  deport  the
      appellant was made.  However, the appellant's asylum and human  rights
      claim remained outstanding.  On 27 June 2015, a  further  decision  to
      deport the appellant was made and  his  international  protection  and
      human rights claims were  refused.    A  deportation  order  was  made
      against him as a "foreign criminal" on 22 June 2015.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

   6. The appellant appealed against the refusal of his protection and human
      rights claims under s.82(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
      Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014).

   7. The basis of the appellant's claim for  international  protection  was
      that he was a refugee because he would be at risk on return to the DRC
      because of his political activities in the UK where he was a member of
      APARECO and because he would be at risk of imprisonment as having left
      the DRC with false documents.  The appellant relied upon  the  country
      guidance case of BM and Others (Returnees - Criminal and Non-Criminal)
      DRC CG [2015] UKUT 293.

   8. In relation to the  first  basis  of  his  claim,  the  risk  category
      recognised by  the  Tribunal  in  BM  and  Others  and  summarised  in
      paragraph 3 of the headnote of that case as follows:

           "A national of the DRC who has a significant and visible profile
           within APARECO (UK) is, in the event of returning to his country
           of origin, at real risk of persecution for a  Convention  reason
           or serious harm or treatment proscribed by  Article  3  ECHR  by
           virtue of falling within one of the risk  categories  identified
           by the Upper Tribunal in MM (UDPS  Members  -  Risk  on  Return)
           Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  CG  2007  UKAIT  00023.   Those
           belonging to this category  include  persons  who  are,  or  are
           perceived to be, leaders, office bearers or spokespersons.  As a
           general rule, mere rank and file members are  unlikely  to  fall
           within  this  category.   However,  each  case  will   be   fact
           sensitive, with particular  attention  directed  to  the  likely
           knowledge and perceptions of DRC state agents."

   9. Judge Osborne accepted the appellant's evidence  that  he  had  joined
      APARECO (UK) and had been involved in that organisation as  an  active
      member albeit for  a  relatively  short  period  of  time  before  the
      hearing.  At para  32,  Judge  Osborne  summarised  his  findings  and
      conclusion that the appellant fell within the risk category set out in
      para 3 of the headnote in BM and Others as follows:

           "...Although  none  of  those  individuals  appeared   to   give
           evidence,  the  documentary  evidence   from   three   different
           individuals within  the  organisation  is  at  least  consistent
           evidence that the Appellant has  joined  APARECO  and  has  been
           given an organising role within the city  of  Bristol.   I  have
           seen photographs of the Appellant engaged in local activities in
           Wales for APARECO.  At least one of those photographs  has  been
           uploaded onto the internet.  It shows the Appellant with others,
           including Oliver whom the  Appellant  has  enlisted  in  Bristol
           within the last month.  Although the Appellant has not  yet  had
           the opportunity of carrying out any  significant  activities  on
           behalf of APARECO, I find that he may well be perceived to be  a
           leader, office  bearer  or  spokesperson  at  least  within  the
           Bristol/Wales and the West  area  as  he  has  already  attended
           publicised meetings in  Cardiff  and  successfully  enlisted  at
           least one member in  Bristol.   To  that  extent  the  Appellant
           fulfils the requirements of headnote 3 of  BM  and  Others  (see
           above)."

  10. In relation to the second basis upon which the  appellant  claimed  to
      fear persecution on return to  the  DRC,  the  appellant  relied  upon
      paragraph 4 of the headnote in BM and Others that he would be at  risk
      of imprisonment in breach of Article 3 as a result of leaving the  DRC
      on a false passport.  The headnote is in the following terms:

           "The DRC authorities  have  an  interest  in  certain  types  of
           convicted  or  suspected  offenders,  namely  those   who   have
           unexecuted prison sentences in the DRC or  in  respect  of  whom
           there are unexecuted arrest warrants in the DRC or who allegedly
           committed an offence, such as document fraud, when departing the
           DRC.  Such persons are at real risk of imprisonment for  lengthy
           periods and, hence, of treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR."

  11. Judge Osborne dealt with this aspect of the appellant's case at  paras
      33-34 as follows:

           "33.  Yet further, as I have already found that the Appellant is
                 a DRC national and as I find to that standard which has  to
                 be applied in these appeals that his account fits with  the
                 background  information  that  relates  to  children  being
                 captured and forced into labour for periods of years in the
                 DRC by various armed groups including the FDLR,  I  further
                 find  that  taken  in  the  round  with  the  rest  of  the
                 Appellant's evidence, it is likely that the Appellant  left
                 DRC  with  false  documents.   That  being  the  case   the
                 Appellant may well be perceived by the DRC  authorities  as
                 having committed document fraud when departing the DRC.  In
                 those circumstances the Appellant is a  person  who  is  at
                 real risk  of  imprisonment  for  lengthy  periods  and  of
                 treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.

           34.   It is well-documented in the  objective  information  that
                 prison conditions are severe and life-threatening.   During
                 2010 the UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon reported  to  the
                 UN Security Council that the prison system required  urgent
                 reform as it continued to be characterised by  catastrophic
                 conditions of detention, including severe overcrowding  and
                 lack of medical facilities, and that in several  instances,
                 detainees died  from  starvation.   The  penal  system  was
                 underfunded  and  most  prisons  were  overcrowded,  poorly
                 maintained and lacked sanitation facilities.  I  find  that
                 detention and/or  imprisonment  in  such  an  establishment
                 would in itself be likely to amount to persecution. "

  12. Consequently, Judge Osborne allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  the
      basis that his deportation would breach the UK's obligations under the
      1951 Refugee Convention.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

  13. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on two grounds.

  14. First,  the  Judge  had  been  wrong  to  find  that  the  appellant's
      activities in the UK with APARECO (UK) amounted to "a significant  and
      visible profile"  which  would  come  to  the  "likely  knowledge  and
      perceptions of DRC state  agents"  so  as  to  fall  within  the  risk
      category in paragraph 3 of the headnote in BM and Others.

  15. Secondly, the Judge had been wrong to find that,  merely  because  the
      appellant had exited the DRC using false documents put him within  the
      risk category identified in paragraph 4 of  the  headnote  in  BM  and
      Others.  The Judge's decision was inconsistent with the  approach  set
      out by the Upper Tribunal in BM (False Passport) DRC [2015]  UKUT  467
      (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal had required an "intense  focus"  on  a
      number of matters and had found that merely to have left  on  a  false
      passport would  not  without  more  bring  an  individual  within  the
      relevant risk category in BM and Others.

  16. On 17 September 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Grant-Hutchison)
      granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal on both grounds.

  17. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

  18. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards  submitted  that  the
      Judge's conclusion in paragraph  32  of  his  determination  that  the
      appellant  fell  within  the  risk  category  of  someone  who  had  a
      "significant and visible profile" within APARECO (UK) was inconsistent
      with his finding that the appellant had not as yet had an  opportunity
      to carry out "any significant activities on behalf  of  APARECO".   Mr
      Richards submitted that the Judge had erred in law in concluding  that
      the appellant fell within this risk category and his  decision  should
      be set aside.

  19. Mr Richards did not seek to rely further on the second ground.

  20. On behalf of the appellant, Mr  Rees  submitted  that  the  Judge  was
      entitled to find that the appellant  fell  within  the  risk  category
      based upon his involvement with APARECO in  the  UK.   The  Judge  had
      specifically considered that the appellant had only been involved  for
      a short period but he had considered  all  relevant  factors  and  had
      correctly identified the risk category  set  out  in  para  3  of  the
      headnote in BM and Others.  He referred me to para 87 of BM and Others
      in respect of the monitoring of sur place activities in the UK by  the
      DRC authorities.  Mr Rees submitted that the Judge had  been  entitled
      to find that the appellant would be perceived as a leader or spokesman
      and that his involvement would be known to the authorities  given,  at
      least one photograph had been uploaded onto  the  internet.   Mr  Rees
      submitted that the Secretary of State's challenge was in  essence  one
      of irrationality and, having  properly  directed  himself  and  having
      taken into account all relevant factors, he  submitted that  it  could
      not be said that the Judge's finding that the  appellant  fell  within
      the risk category in para 3 of the  headnote  in  BM  and  Others  was
      irrational.

  21. In respect of the second basis upon which Judge Osborne found  in  the
      appellant's favour,  Mr Rees submitted that the Judge was entitled  to
      conclude that the appellant fell within the risk category  because  he
      had used false documentation to leave the DRC.

Discussion

  22. I deal first with the Judge's  conclusion  in  paragraph  32  and  the
      Secretary of State's first ground challenging that conclusion.

  23. I have already set out the relevant risk category summarised in para 3
      of the headnote in BM and  Others.   That  risk  category  includes  a
      person who has a "significant and visible profile" with APARECO  (UK).
      That category includes persons "who are, or who are  perceived  to  be
      leaders, office bearers and spokesman. The category does not, however,
      include mere rank and file members".  The  Upper  Tribunal  recognised
      that the assessment  of  risk  was  inevitably  "fact  sensitive"  and
      particular attention had been directed to  the  likely  knowledge  and
      perception of DRC state agents.

  24. There is no doubt that Judge Osborne had well in mind in reaching  his
      decision the country guidance case of BM and Others and  the  relevant
      risk  category  identified  by  the  UT  in  para   88(iii)   of   its
      determination (and summarised in para 3 of the headnote).   The  Judge
      accepted the evidence before him that the appellant had joined APARECO
      in the UK and had an organising role within the city  of  Bristol  and
      had engaged in local activities in Wales.  He had attended  publicised
      meetings and had successfully enlisted at least one  new  member.   He
      had an organising role and there were photographs  of  the  appellant,
      one of which (at least) had been uploaded onto the internet.

  25. None of those factual findings are  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
      State.  What is challenged is the Judge's conclusion  that  this  fell
      within the rubric of the relevant risk category.  That  challenge  is,
      as Mr Rees submitted, one of irrationality.  That is, it must be shown
      that no reasonable Judge properly directing him or herself could  have
      reached  the  conclusion  that  on  the  facts  (not  challenged)  the
      appellant was a person who has a  "significant  and  visible  profile"
      within APARECO (UK) and there is a real risk that he will come to  the
      attention of the DRC authorities as such.

  26. Judge Osborne was clearly aware that the risk did not run to  a  "mere
      rank and file member".  In my judgement, Judge Osborne was entitled to
      conclude that the appellant was more than that.  He had an  organising
      role and had enlisted at least one new member.   The  evidence,  which
      the Judge accepted, was that the appellant on joining the  association
      was asked to mobilise potential members in Bristol  where  there  were
      currently no members.  Again that evidence is not challenged.    Also,
      the appellant's evidence was that he  had  approached  in  the  street
      approximately fifty people with "glossy APARECO publicity  cards"  and
      had succeeded in attracting and signing up  one  member.   Again,  the
      Judge's acceptance of that evidence is not challenged.

  27. In [87] of BM and Others the Upper Tribunal dealt with the interest of
      the DRC authorities in sur place activities involving APARECO and  the
      monitoring undertaken, in particular in the UK:

           "87.  We address the discrete question of risk to those who  are
                 considered to be opponents of the Kabila regime  by  reason
                 of their sur place activities in the  United  Kingdom.   In
                 addressing and  determining  this  question,  we  make  the
                 following specific findings:

                  i) APARECO is a cohesive, structured  organisation  which
                     has its main  base  in  France  and  strong  basis  in
                     certain other European countries, including the United
                     Kingdom.  It also operates in Canada  and  the  United
                     States.

                 ii)  APARECO  is  implacably  opposed  to  the  regime  of
                     President Kabila which has  governed  DRC  during  the
                     past decade.  Its overarching aims are the  defeat  of
                     this regime and the re-establishment of the state on a
                     different basis.

                iii) APARECO  has  no  overt  presence  in  DRC,  where  it
                     operates underground.

                 iv)  The external opposition of APARECO to  the  governing
                     regime of DRC  is  overt  and  visible.   Its  highest
                     profile activities unfold in public places, accessible
                     to all.  Activities of this nature are accompanied  by
                     advance publicity.

                  v) In common with many comparable regimes throughout  the
                     world, both present and past, the DRC Government has a
                     strong interest in opposition organisations, including
                     APARECO.  Such organisations are monitored and data is
                     recorded.   This  includes   information   about   the
                     identities of  the  most  prominent  members  of  such
                     organisations, that is to say  their  leaders,  office
                     holders and spokespersons.

                 vi) The  monitoring  of  APARECO  (UK)  is  likely  to  be
                     undertaken by and on behalf  of  the  DRC  Embassy  in
                     London.  This is the  agency  with  the  most  obvious
                     motivation to carry out and co-ordinate such scrutiny.
                      Such scrutiny is likely to generate periodic  reports
                     to the DRC Government, in particular its ANR  and  DGM
                     agencies.

                vii) It is likely that  the  leaders,  office  bearers  and
                     spokespersons of APARECO (UK) are known to the DRC  UK
                     Embassy and the DRC Government, in particular ANR  and
                     DGM."

  28. There, in particular, the monitoring of APARECO (UK)
      is noted and that its "leaders,  office  bearers  and  spokesmen"  are
      likely to be known to the DRC embassy in the UK and, as a result,  the
      authorities in the DRC.  In  my  judgement,  given  that  the  Judge's
      finding that the  appellant  has  a  significant  visible  profile  in
      APARECO (UK) was properly open to him on  the  evidence,  it  was  not
      irrational to find that there was a risk of him being perceived  as  a
      "leader,  office  bearer  or  spokesperson".    Those   findings   are
      consistent with BM and Others.  Having regard to [87(vi)  and  (vii)],
      the judge was entitled to find that there is  a  real  risk  that  the
      appellant's activities will be (or  will  become)  known  to  the  DRC
      authorities and that the consequent risk of harm to him will arise  on
      return to the DRC.

  29. I reject ground 1 of the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal

  30. In my judgement for these reasons, Judge Osborne was entitled to  find
      that the  appellant  fell  within  the  risk  category  identified  in
      paragraph 3 of the headnote of BM and Others.   That finding  was  not
      irrational or otherwise unsustainable in law.

  31. Turning to ground 2, Mr Richards did not seek to pursue this with  any
      vigour before me.  Indeed any error by the Judge  in  concluding  that
      the appellant fell within the risk category  in  paragraph  4  of  the
      headnote in BM and Others is immaterial  given  that  I  have  already
      concluded that he was entitled to find in the  appellant's  favour  on
      the basis of the risk category in para 3 of the headnote.

  32. That said, however, I do not consider  that  the  Judge's  finding  in
      relation to the risk category in para 4 of  the  headnote  in  BM  and
      Others is not sustainable in law in the light of the Upper  Tribunal's
      decision in BM (False Passport) to which the Judge was  not  referred.
      The headnote of that decision is in the following terms:

           "The mere fact that an asylum claimant utilised a false passport
           or kindred document in departing the DRC will not  without  more
           engage the risk category specified in [119(iv) of BM and  Others
           (Returnees: Criminal and Non-Criminal) DRC CG [2015] 293  (IAC).
           The application of this guidance will be dependent upon the fact
           sensitive context of the individual  case.   The  Tribunal  will
           consider, inter alia, the likely state of knowledge of  the  DRC
           authorities pertaining to the  person  in  question.   A  person
           claiming to belong to any of the risk categories will not be  at
           risk of persecution unless likely to come to  the  attention  of
           the DRC authorities.  Thus  in  every  case  there  will  be  an
           intense  focus  on  matters  such   as   publicity,   individual
           prominence, possession of a  passport,  the  standard  emergency
           travel document arrangements (where these  apply)and  how  these
           matters impact on the individual claimant."

  33. If the appellant's claim is stripped of his involvement  with  APARECO
      in the UK, in my judgement, the appellant is someone who does not fall
      within the risk category in para 119(iv) of BM and Others  (summarised
      in para 4 of the headnote) since he is a person who would simply be  a
      returnee who left the DRC on a false passport.

  34. Of course, in reality, given the Judge's sustainable findings  on  the
      appellant's political involvement in the UK, he would not be a  simple
      returnee of that sort.  However, as a discreet  basis  for  concluding
      that the appellant would be at risk on return, the  Judge's  reasoning
      in paras 33 and 34 of his determination (which I  set  out  above)  is
      inconsistent with BM and others as explained in  BM  (False  Passport)
      since the only basis that he would be at risk is because he exited the
      DRC using a false passport.  Were that the only basis  upon  which  he
      claimed to be at risk on return to the DRC, then his claim  could  not
      succeed.  owebv However, the Judge's error  is  not  material  to  the
      decision as the appellant properly succeeded in establishing  he  fell
      within the risk category based upon his political activities in the UK
      with   APARECO.

Decision

  35. For the above reasons, the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
      allow the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his  protection
      claim on the basis that his deportation to the DRC  would  breach  the
      Refugee Convention did not involve a material error of  law  and  that
      decision stands.

  36. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
      dismissed.






                               Signed








                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















