
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00345/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th December 2016                       |On 10th January 2017            |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                               HOSHYAR KHALID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M Christopher, Legal Representative of Burton &
                    Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. In a renewed application for leave  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McGeachy gave permission on all grounds to appeal against the  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robertson who dismissed the  appeal
    on all grounds against the decision of  the  respondent  taken  on  5th
    January 2016 to refuse asylum, humanitarian and human rights protection
    to the appellant, an adult citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.

 2.  Judge  McGeachy  noted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had   granted
    permission on the basis that the judge had applied the  wrong  standard
    of proof in using words such as "compelling" and "more likely than not"
    when deciding whether the appellant was at risk of serious  harm  under
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  Judge  McGeachy  thought
    it appropriate to grant permission on all grounds referred  to  in  the
    renewed application albeit that they might be dealt with briefly  at  a
    hearing.

 3. The additional grounds upon which permission was  sought  contend  that
    the judge  had  reached  inconsistent  and  contradictory  findings  in
    relation to the core of the appellant's claim to  have  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution from ISIS on return to  Iraq.   In  particular,  in
    paragraph 15(iii) of the decision, the judge  accepted  that  ISIS  may
    have been watching the appellant and may already know his identity  and
    family circumstances but then, in paragraph 17, did not accept that the
    appellant's identity was known to ISIS.  Further, in paragraphs  14  to
    17, the judges conclusion did not show that objective material had been
    taken into consideration which showed  that  the  appellant  originated
    from  the  contested  area  where  there  was  indiscriminate  violence
    amounting to serious harm.  That objective evidence was acknowledged by
    the judge in paragraph 18 but apparently not taken  into  consideration
    when credibility findings were made.

 4. At the hearing Mr Bates handed over a  copy  of  the  response  of  8th
    November 2016 and contended that the judge had made  findings  open  to
    him. He thought the words used in paragraph 20 did not show a  material
    error as the judge had already indicated the lower  standard  of  proof
    applying in the appeal.  He suggested that the words "more likely  than
    not" were a figure of speech and not indicative of a higher standard of
    proof. The response also comments that the contested  area  from  which
    the appellant comes has been returned into Iraqi government hands.

 5. Mrs Christopher confirmed that the renewed grounds  were  relied  upon.
    She also added that the appellant would be unable to return to his home
    town of Erbil in  the  Kurdish  region  without  the  necessary  travel
    documents.

Conclusions

 6. After I had considered the matter for a few moments I announced that  I
    was satisfied that the decision showed errors on  points  of  law  such
    that it should be set aside and the  appeal  heard  afresh  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  My reasons for that conclusion follow.

 7. Whilst, in normal circumstances, it can be accepted that  a  judge  who
    correctly sets out the relevant standard and burden of  proof  in  self
    directions is unlikely to depart from  them  when  reaching  subsequent
    credibility findings, I conclude that this case is an exception to that
    normal rule.  Reference has been made to the judge's use of  the  words
    "compelling" and "more likely than not" in paragraph 20 thus  inferring
    that a higher standard of proof has been applied. However, that is  not
    the only location in the decision which shows such a misdirection.   In
    paragraph 14 the judge also states:

         "Overall I do not find the appellant's evidence to be convincing".

 8. The use of the word convincing also suggests that too high  a  standard
    of proof was in the  judge's  mind  at  the  time  he  was  considering
    credibility issues.  When these misdirections  are  considered  in  the
    light of the apparent contradiction between the findings  in  paragraph
    15(iii) and paragraph 17 where, on the one  hand,  the  judge  suggests
    that ISIS may already know the identity and family circumstances of the
    appellant but, on the other, that his identity is not  known  to  ISIS,
    then the decision becomes unsafe in relation to all credibility issues.
     Further, although paragraph 18 shows  that  the  judge  was  aware  of
    country guidance in relation to Article 15(c), it  is  not  clear  that
    this guidance was applied to  the  conclusions  about  credibility  and
    reasons given for its rejection.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows errors on points  of  law  and
is set aside.  The appeal is to be  re-made  afresh  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  Bearing in mind that the appellant lives in Stoke-on-Trent it  is
appropriate that the re-making of the appeal should take place at the  Stoke
Hearing Centre.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested before the Upper Tribunal nor do I  consider  it
appropriate.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Stoke  for
    hearing afresh on all issues.

 2. The time estimate is three hours.

 3. A Kurdish (Sorani) interpreter will be provided for the hearing  unless
    representatives indicate to the contrary.

 4. The re-hearing of the appeal should  not  take  place  before  Judge  J
    Robertson.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

