
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00152/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 October 2018                             |On 17 October 2018            |
|Extempore                                     |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     M N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal in which both parties appeal with permission  against
    a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands promulgated on  1  May
    2018.  The judge concluded that the appellant's appeal failed on asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds but  allowed  it  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The appellant challenges the finding on asylum grounds.   The
    Secretary of State challenges the finding with respect to human  rights
    grounds.

 2. I considered that it is appropriate to consider the issue of whether or
    not the decision to refuse the asylum  claim  involved  the  making  of
    error of  law  before  proceeding  whether  to  determine  whether  the
    decision in that removal of the appellant would be a breach of  article
    3 on health grounds did involve the making of error of law.

 3. I heard submissions from Mr Bandegani on behalf of  the  appellant  and
    from Mr Bramble from the Secretary of State and for the reasons which I
    now give I was satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error of  law.   I  then  proceeded  to  hear
    submissions with regard to the remaking of the decision on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds.

 4. There is a long history to this case which is set out in  the  decision
    of Judge Rowlands. That history is not in  any  way  controversial  and
    there is no need to reproduce that here.  In summary,  the  appellant's
    claim is that she whilst in Kenya in 1998 her husband decided  to  join
    the Mungiki sect and that she was also expected to join.  She was badly
    treated by the sect including being forced to undergo FGM  as  part  of
    their initiation process and some years  after  joining  the  sect  she
    defected fleeing both from them and her  husband.   She  tried  to  get
    assistance from the Kenyan police but was unsuccessful and twice had to
    move before being tracked down.  She then fled to  the  United  Kingdom
    arriving roughly in 2000.  Her current fear is that she  would  not  be
    safe if returned to Kenya as the Mungiki is still able to kill  people,
    will track her down and it was also  said  that  she  presents  a  real
    present risk of suicide were she forced to return to Kenya. There is as
    Judge Rowlands noted a detailed statement of all the facts set out in a
    witness statement of 29 March 2018.

 5. The Secretary of  State  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  claim  and
    concluded that in any event the Mungiki were no longer a threat to  her
    the reasons set out in the refusal letter dated  in this case a further
    submissions decision of 2016.

 6. The judge accepted the appellant's credibility.  He did so having taken
    into account various  reports  including  that  of  an  expert  on  FGM
    accepting that this had been performed and  noting  that  the  starting
    point was the findings made in the past by Judge Prior.

 7. The judge directed himself at paragraph 24 that there is some objective
    evidence of the activities the Mungiki in Kenya, the  Country  Guidance
    case being VM (FGM, risks,  Mungiki,  Kikuyu/Gikuyu)  Kenya  CG  [2008]
    UKAIT 00049 which confirmed there was evidence the Mungiki organisation
    seeks to impose FGM and other forms of violence of women  and  children
    other than those who have been initiated into their sect.

 8. The judge concluded at paragraph [25] having set out how the  appellant
    was harmed in the past, that  he  was  satisfied  she  told  the  truth
    despite the inconsistencies about her experiences in Kenya.

 9. The judge then went on to consider whether or not she would be at  risk
    on return noting the claim Mungiki have a presence throughout Kenya and
    that they will try to find her and as a lone woman with no support  she
    would be unable to resist and would be at risk of persecution.

10. The judge at [27] states

         "I have looked at the available  objective  evidence  and  consider
         that the Mungiki are not, following  government  crack  downs,  the
         force they used to be.   It  is  also  a  fact  that  her  previous
         problems occurred whilst her husband is alive and part of the  sect
         himself.  That is no longer the case.  I also note that it is about
         20 years since her problems occurred and I am  not  satisfied  that
         they would have interest in her at all.  It would be reasonable  to
         expect her to return to the capital if she could not return to  her
         home area.  Even without any kind of support there she ought to  be
         able to survive especially with the help of church authorities."

11. The judge then went on to state that how he had regard to the  totality
    of the evidence both oral and documentary he was  not  satisfied  there
    was a real risk of harm.

12. The grounds of challenge are that the judge

    (i) failed to have proper regard to and follow the decision in VM  that
    being a country guidance; and,

    (ii) failed properly to take into account the expert report prepared by
    Professor Nasong'o and also more recent  newspaper  reports  indicating
    that the Mungiki are still active in particular with regard to the most
    recent election campaigns.

13. Permission was granted on 18 July by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley.

14. Having considered the material I conclude that the judge erred in  that
    while it may have been open to him no longer to follow VM he would have
    to have explained in detail why and with reference to the  material  on
    which he concluded that that case would no longer be followed.  He  did
    not do so.

15. There are references to the totality of the evidence but it is  unclear
    on what evidence the judge concluded that  the  Mungiki  were  a  spent
    force.  Although it is, as Mr Bramble submitted, evident from a passage
    set out in the refusal letter at paragraph 37 that there had been  some
    diminution in the presence of the  Mungiki  and  that  they  have  been
    targeted by the state, that is not properly referenced  by  the  judge.
    Nor are there references  to  more  recent  up-to-date  material  which
    indicates in s newspaper reports from 2016 and 2017  that  the  Mungiki
    are indeed still active.

16. Further the judge does not appear to have taken  account  of  Professor
    Nasong'o's report in which he  deals  specifically  with  the  apparent
    diminution in the effectiveness of the Mungiki. He  accepted  that  the
    government appeared to target them but the position  had  now  changed.
    This is set out in some detail at paragraph 23 of his report and it  is
    important to note here that the order to shoot to  kill  referenced  by
    the respondent in the refusal letter is said essentially to be  a  ploy
    to eliminate Mungiki elements who were likely ICC witnesses against the
    president, but that once this  was  accomplished  attacks  against  the
    Mungiki and they emerged stronger than ever both  organisationally  and
    financially.  This is referenced  with  which  refer  to  the  enduring
    vibrancy from the Mungiki and their activities.

17. For these reasons I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  failing
    properly to explain why he had not followed VM and  taking  account  of
    her evidence.  Further this error  is  clearly  material  and  properly
    analysed is certainly capable  of  showing  that  VM  should  still  be
    followed.

18. In terms of remaking the decision Mr Bandegani took me to the  passages
    set out above.  He submitted that the Mungiki had not been  stopped  in
    any real sense, that they  were  still  present  and  still  present  a
    threat.  He submitted also that they are as is  set  out  in  Professor
    Nasong'o's report at paragraph 17 a ruthless organisation whereby if  a
    member disobeys they would have their head cut off and put  in  public.
    He submitted also that an individual cannot really leave  the  gang  in
    any way other than by death,  again  relying  on  Professor  Nasong'o's
    report.

19. Mr Bandgani submitted that in circumstances there was still a real risk
    to the appellant notwithstanding the fact that she has been out of  the
    country for twenty years as on the basis of  the  country  guidance  VM
    there is still a realistic prospect  that  she  would  be  detected  on
    arrival either in Nairobi or elsewhere in Kenya and as a lone woman she
    would be more likely to come to the attention of the Mungiki and suffer
    again the ill-treatment she had suffered in the past which she  submits
    amounts to persecution.

20. For the respondent Mr Bramble submitted that account needs to be  taken
    of the lapse of time since the appellant left Kenya and that there is a
    realistic prospect she would not be at risk.  He relied  in  particular
    on passages already cited in the refusal  letter  submitting  that  the
    appeal should be dismissed.

21. Having considered the material for myself I conclude first  that  there
    is no sufficient basis in the material provided for not  following  the
    country guidance decision VM.  Twelve  years  has  elapsed  since  that
    decision was handed down but I consider that on the basis of the report
    of Professor Nasong'o, the position has  not  materially  changed.  His
    report is a reliable source. The  report  is  properly  referenced  and
    contains the appropriate self-direction with regards the Ikarian Reefer
    test.

22. I consider further  that  whilst  there  may  well  have  been  as  the
    respondent indicates some targeting of the Mungiki cult or sect  a  few
    years ago, the position has now changed and if anything has reversed. I
    am satisifed from paragraph 23 of Professor Lasongo's report that  they
    are now stronger than before.  I consider also that there  is  evidence
    that they were involved in electoral campaign violence  in  the  recent
    past.

23. It is nearly twenty years since the appellant left and that  does  give
    me some cause for concern. In many cases one would  have  thought  that
    after twenty years' absence from a country somebody would no longer  be
    of interest.

24. In this case I bear in mind the nature of the Mungiki  organisation  as
    set out in Professor Nasong'o's report and also referred to VM.   There
    are passages in which it is referred to as mafia like and  that  it  is
    not possible to leave the gang.  It is clear that those who attempt  to
    do so are made examples of.  This illustrates two things:  first,  that
    they are prepared to use extreme violence and can do so with  impunity,
    and second, there is a tendency to make examples of people to show what
    happens if you do try to leave the organisation.

25. Given also the ruthlessness within which they operate and their ability
    to gather information about people, I conclude that there  is  still  a
    reasonable  likelihood,  first  of  the  appellant's  return  to  Kenya
    becoming known despite where she goes  given  the  Mungiki  are  active
    across the whole territory as is their information  gathering  network.
    There is therefore a real risk that she would be subjected again to the
    level of ill-treatment she was subjected to in the past if not worse.

26. Accordingly, I am satisfied with the appellant has a well-founded  fear
    of persecution in Kenya on the basis  of  membership  of  a  particular
    social group and Mr Bramble accepted that there was no  dispute  as  to
    whether the Refugee Convention  was  engaged  for  the  purposes  of  a
    Convention reason.  I therefore allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  the
    appellant is a refugee.

27. Further and in any event for the sake of completeness  I  am  satisfied
    that in the circumstances the removal of the appellant to  Kenya  would
    be in breach of Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention and the appeal
    will fall to be  allowed  on  that  basis  also.   Given  that  I  have
    concluded that the appellant is a refugee she  is  not  for  that  fact
    alone entitled to humanitarian protection so  I  formally  dismiss  the
    appeal on that basis.

28. As I have concluded that the appellant's removal would be in breach  of
    Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention and that she is a refugee, any
    error in the judge's reasoning that the appellant's removal would be in
    breach of article 3 on health  grounds  is  not  capable  of  making  a
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal. I therefore  formally
    dismiss the respondent's cross appeal as the pleaded  errors  were  not
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.


Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights
    grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 12 October 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
