
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/00824/2020
                                                               PA/01712/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers under rule  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 28th June 2021                    |On 15th September 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                 MAB & KMADM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Burnett promulgated on 10 February 2021,  in  which
    the Appellants appeals against the decision to refuse their  protection
    and human rights claim dated 14 and 27 January 2020 were dismissed.

 2. The grounds of appeal were  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially
    erred in law in (i) setting out the First Appellant's claims  from  his
    asylum statement only without any reference to the later statements  or
    asylum interviews; nor to the oral evidence of either  Appellant;  (ii)
    dismissing the whole of the Appellants' claims of events  in  Mande  by
    reference only to the First Appellant entering Pakistan on the same day
    as the authorities visited his sister-in-law as the basis  for  finding
    that the First Appellant was not of interest  to  the  authorities  and
    without setting out the discrepancies and inconsistencies  said  to  be
    relied upon, overall a lack of adequate reasons  being  given  for  the
    adverse credibility findings made; (iii) failing to make individual  or
    specific  findings   on  the  claimed  events  in  relation   to   each
    Appellant's credibility; (iv) making inadequate findings on the claimed
    sur place activities and making no reference to the  written  and  oral
    evidence given by the witness, the President of the BRP in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. In a rule 24 notice dated 23 March 2021, the Respondent indicated  that
    the appeal was not opposed and invited the Upper Tribunal to set  aside
    the decision and remit the appeals to the First-tier  Tribunal.   There
    followed some further correspondence on this from  the  Respondent  but
    ultimately the position was maintained.

Findings and reasons

 1. Prior to the hearing I indicated to the parties that  the  Respondent's
    position as set out in the rule 24 notice was entirely appropriate upon
    a preliminary review of the appeal files and that if the  parties  were
    content, the hearing could be vacated on  this  basis  and  the  appeal
    remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing.   The
    approach was agreed and the hearing then vacated.

 2. In light of the above I do not give detailed  reasons  for  finding  an
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision but  in  summary,  I
    find all of the grounds of appeal  identified  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision which require it to be set aside.   The  decision  makes  only
    selective reference to the evidence  before  it  without  any  reasoned
    basis for doing so and whilst a Tribunal is not required  to  refer  to
    each and every piece of evidence before it; a Tribunal is expected, not
    least in reaching credibility findings that as a  minimum  the  witness
    evidence is referred to and/or reasons given for rejecting the same  if
    that is the case.  The Tribunal is required to make  an  assessment  of
    the evidence in the round and reach findings upon the key parts of  the
    claim, whereas in  these  appeals,  the  Tribunal  makes  only  limited
    findings on certain aspects and relies on a  very  limited  finding  or
    matter only (in relation to claimed events in Pakistan  and  sur  place
    activities) upon which to base much broader conclusions as a reason for
    dismissing the appeals.  That is wholly insufficient and a clear  error
    of law.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  (Taylor  House  hearing
centre) for a de novo hearing before any Judge except Judge Burnett.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   G Jackson                               Date 1st July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

