
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00797/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On : 10 November 2020                |On 20 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     HK
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was Skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  of  7
January 2020 refusing his asylum and human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq  from  Halabja,  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,
whose date of birth is given as 1 January 1989. He arrived in the  UK  on  4
September 2015, having left Iraq on  22  July  2015  and  travelled  through
several countries, and claimed asylum on arrival. His claim was  refused  on
16 February 2016 and an appeal against that  decision  was  dismissed  on  9
October 2017. The appellant then made further submissions  on  27  September
2019 which the respondent treated as a fresh claim, but then  refused  on  7
January 2020.

The basis of the appellant's initial claim, as summarised by the  First-tier
Tribunal in the decision of 9 October 2017, was that  he  feared  return  to
Iraq as a result of a relationship  he  had  had  with  the  daughter  of  a
powerful PUK leader in Sulemaniya who had refused his request to  marry  his
daughter and had caught him at their home and shot  at  him.  The  appellant
claimed to have escaped and to have gone into  hiding  after  that  incident
and then fled to Turkey.  The  appellant's  claim  was  disbelieved  in  its
entirety  by  the  respondent  and  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   owing   to
inconsistencies in his account. The Tribunal concluded  that  the  appellant
had family who continued to reside in Halabja/ Sulemaniya and that he  would
be able to contact his family to obtain details  about  his  identity  card,
which he had left  with  them  at  his  home,  in  order  to  obtain  travel
documentation from the Iraqi Embassy in London. It  was  concluded  that  he
was at no risk on return to Iraq. That decision  was  upheld  by  the  Upper
Tribunal in a decision of 3 April 2018.

In the further submissions of 27  September  2019  made  on  behalf  of  the
appellant it was claimed that he had attempted to obtain  new  documentation
from the Iraqi Embassy in London in September 2019, but  had  been  informed
that he would have to obtain the documents in Iraq as he did  not  have  the
two original  supporting  documents  required  in  order  to  obtain  travel
documentation in the UK. He claimed to have no contact with  his  family  in
Iraq and to have been unsuccessful in his attempt to trace them through  the
Red Cross. Accordingly he had no one in Iraq to  assist  him  with  his  re-
documentation. As such, it was claimed that  his  return  to  Iraq  was  not
feasible. In addition he claimed to be unable to relocate  to  another  area
in Iraq as he would be persecuted by Shia militias. He would be at  risk  on
the basis of his Kurdish ethnicity and as a Sunni  Muslim.  The  submissions
relied on new country guidance since the previous  appeal  in  AA  (Iraq)  v
Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  and  BA
(Returns to Baghdad Iraq CG) [2017] UKUT 18, the latter in relation  to  the
risks involved in relocation to Baghdad, an  expert  report  dated  27  July
2015 on the general risks to Kurds returning to Iraq, a statement  from  the
appellant,  a  statement  from  the  interpreter  instructed  by  his  legal
representatives who had accompanied him to the Iraqi Embassy in  London  and
some photographs of the appellant attending at the Iraqi Embassy.

In the decision of 7 January 2020 refusing the fresh claim,  the  respondent
considered that the appellant would not need to return to Baghdad and  could
return to his home area or relocate within the KRI, to where  he  could  fly
directly. It was accepted that he did not have the relevant  Iraqi  identity
documentation in the UK but it was not accepted that he had no contact  with
his family and  it  was  therefore  considered  that  he  could  obtain  the
required identity documents in Iraq from his family in order to  enable  him
to obtain the travel documentation in the UK.

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and his appeal  was
heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 26 February 2020 by First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Ross. He produced an appeal bundle and a supplementary bundle for  the
appeal, which included his witness statement, a letter from the  Mukhtar  of
his local area, a statement  from  his  friend  SI,  a  statement  from  AA,
internet articles about the father of his claimed  girlfriend  in  Iraq  and
witness   statements   from   interpreters   instructed   by    his    legal
representatives in relation to the visit to the Iraqi Embassy in London.

The judge heard from the appellant and from  AA  in  person.  The  appellant
explained that SI was a friend of his whom he had  known  since  he  was  12
years of age who had informed him that he had been to his (the  appellant's)
family home several times but nobody was there. SI  had  also  obtained  the
letter from the Mukhtar and had sent it to him. SI had told him that his ex-
girlfriend's father was still looking for him. AA gave evidence that he  had
met with his friend SI in Halabja during a visit in July or August 2019  and
SI had given him a letter for the appellant, which he gave to  him  when  he
returned to the UK in  November  2019.  He  had  not  previously  known  the
appellant, but he had read the letter out of curiosity.

Judge Ross applied the  principles  in  Devaseelan,  having  regard  to  the
findings made in the appellant's  previous  appeal  and  then  going  on  to
consider the new documentary evidence and submissions.  The  judge  did  not
find the letter from SI to be a reliable document and  found  AA's  evidence
to be lacking in credibility. He found the evidence  from  the  interpreters
instructed by the appellant's solicitors to be  totally  unreliable  and  he
accorded no weight to the internet articles. The judge  concluded  that  the
situation was no different for the appellant than it was in  2017  and  that
he could obtain the required documentation from his family who  remained  in
Halabja. He therefore considered that the appellant could return to the  IKR
or to Baghdad and that his removal would not breach  his  human  rights.  He
accordingly dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought permission to  appeal  Judge  Ross's  decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on the following grounds: that the judge's finding about  his
Iraqi documentation being in his family home was contrary  to  the  evidence
he had given at the hearing; that the judge's consideration of the  evidence
of SI was flawed; and that the judge  made  irrational  findings  about  the
witness statement from the two interpreters in regard to the  visit  to  the
Iraqi Embassy.

Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but was  granted
by the Upper Tribunal on 22 July 2020. In the  grant  of  permission,  Upper
Tribunal Judge Blundell indicted that  counsel  for  the  appellant  at  the
First-tier Tribunal hearing, Mr Tawiah, would need to produce  his  note  of
the evidence and a statement in regard to grounds 1 and 2.

The matter came before me. A further bundle was produced for  the  appellant
containing a witness statement from Mr Tawiah, in which he  stated  that  he
had been unable to locate his note of the appellant's evidence but  that  he
was producing his skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal  and  his
attendance  note  emailed  to  his  instructing  solicitors  following   the
hearing.

Mr  Tawiah  gave  evidence  before  me,  remotely,   confirming   that   the
appellant's evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, when asked  to  clarify
his previous statement that his CSID document was  in  his  family  home  in
Halabja, was that he meant that the document was left with his family,  with
whom he no longer had any contact. Mr Tawiah said that the visits by  SI  to
the appellant's family home had been the main part of  the  evidence  before
the First-tier Tribunal  and  that  the  appellant  had  said  that  he  had
communicated with SI through Viber. The appellant  had  been  cross-examined
about the whereabouts of his CSID and it was at that point  that  the  judge
had intervened to clarify the evidence as to whether  the  document  was  in
his family home. It was then that the appellant said that he meant that  the
document was with his family. When cross-examined by Mr Lindsay,  Mr  Tawiah
said that he did not have his notes from the hearing when  he  prepared  the
grounds of appeal but the appellant's evidence had been fresh in his mind.

Both parties then made submissions. With regard  to  the  first  ground,  Ms
Anzani asked  me  to  accept  Mr  Tawiah's  evidence  and  accept  that  the
appellant had made it clear that his evidence was  that  his  CSID  document
was left with his family rather than in the family home. Since he no  longer
had contact with his family, that was a material matter and  it  meant  that
he was not able to locate his CSID. As for  the  second  ground,  Ms  Anzani
submitted that the judge's findings, that it was not credible  that  IS  and
AA would not know each other if they were mutual friends  of  the  appellant
and that it was not credible that AA  would  have  read  SI's  letter,  were
irrational and unreasonable. She submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to
consider the evidence that SI had asked a neighbour  about  the  appellant's
family's whereabouts and that he was wrong to  find  that  the  Mukhtar  had
given no information about the appellant's  family.  As  regards  the  third
ground, the judge had given no reasons for finding that the evidence of  the
appellant's  attendance  at  the  Iraqi  Embassy  with  an  interpreter  was
unreliable.  Mr Lindsay resisted all three grounds, submitting that  grounds
one and three  were  immaterial  as  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
appellant's family had left their home and therefore the appellant would  be
able to access the required documentation from Iraq.

Discussion

As Mr Lindsay submitted, grounds one and three fall away if the  judge  made
no errors in rejecting the appellant's claim that he had lost  contact  with
his family. Indeed, much has been made  about  the  judge's  record  of  the
appellant's evidence as to the whereabouts  of  his  CSID  document,  namely
whether he had properly clarified that the document had been left  with  his
family or that his evidence was that he had left the document in his  family
home. Yet that was plainly immaterial if the appellant remained  in  contact
with his family and they still remained in the family home.

I therefore turn to the second ground,  relating  to  the  evidence  of  the
whereabouts  of  the  appellant's  family.  The  findings  of  the  previous
Tribunal, which Judge Ross  took  as  his  starting  point,  were  that  the
appellant had family who remained in Halabja/ Sulemaniya, that he  had  left
his identity card with his family at home and that there was no  reason  why
he could not contact  his  family  with  a  view  to  obtaining  details  in
relation to his identity card. The appellant's evidence for his fresh  claim
was that he had lost contact with his family and therefore could not  access
the documentation and was  unable  to  obtain  new  identity  documents  and
travel  documents  from  the  Iraqi  Embassy  without  the  information  and
documents from Iraq. In support of that  claim  the  appellant  relied  upon
documents produced for the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal,  namely  a
letter from the Mukhtar of his local area dated 29 July 2019  and  a  letter
from his friend  SI.  Judge  Ross  found  neither  to  give  weight  to  the
appellant's claim and found the latter to be unreliable  and  to  have  been
made up to assist his claim.

In my view the judge was fully entitled to accord the weight that he did  to
the documents and he gave  clear  and  cogent  reasons  for  doing  so.  The
grounds simply quibble with his reasoning but  do  not  provide  any  proper
challenge. Sub-paragraphs (a) to (d) of [10] of  the  grounds  address  each
separate reason given by the judge at [18]  to  [20]  of  his  decision  for
rejecting the evidence  as  unreliable,  and  assert  that  each  reason  is
irrational. However it  seems  to  me  that  when  the  reasoning  is  taken
together the judge was fully entitled to make the adverse findings  that  he
did, bearing in mind also the previous significantly adverse  findings  made
against this appellant. With regard to  the  assertion  at  [10(d)]  of  the
grounds that the judge was "plainly wrong" to say that the Mukhtar  gave  no
information about the appellant's family,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge's
findings are taken out of  context,  as  the  judge  found  that  there  was
nothing in writing from the Mukhtar about the appellant's family,  which  is
perfectly correct - the letter purportedly from the Mukhtar,  translated  at
page 6 of the appeal bundle, says nothing about the appellant's  family.  In
so far as the grounds appear to be referring to paragraph 3  of  the  letter
from SI, it is not at all clear that the latter part of  that  paragraph  is
the evidence of SI or of the Mukhtar, but in  any  event  when  taken  as  a
whole together with all the  evidence,  the  judge  was  fully  entitled  to
conclude that there was not anything in that evidence  of  any  weight.  The
appellant's challenges to the judge's adverse  findings  simply  go  nowhere
near meeting the high threshold required for  a  rationality  challenge  and
the judge was perfectly entitled to find that his fresh claim to  have  lost
contact with his family had been made up in order to assist  his  case  that
he could not obtain the required documentation to travel to Iraq.

As Mr Lindsay submitted, in such circumstances the  third  ground,  relating
to the visit to the Iraqi Embassy in London,  also  falls  away,  since  the
reasons the appellant gave for the Iraqi Embassy not being willing to  issue
him with documentation were  of  no  weight  when  he  was  able  to  obtain
documentation from  his  family  in  Iraq.  In  any  event  I  find  nothing
unreasonable or irrational in the  judge's  criticisms  of  the  appellant's
evidence in support of his visit to the Embassy. That evidence consisted  of
three statements: the first, dated 27 September 2019 and produced  with  the
appellant's further submissions of 27 September 2019, was from Mrs  Gulallah
Ahmadi who confirmed that she was instructed by the  appellant's  solicitors
to accompany the appellant to the Iraqi Embassy as his interpreter  and  she
provided details of that visit; the second was from  Mr  Bavel  Salam  whose
statement was in identical terms, confirming that  he  was  the  appellant's
interpreter during the visit to the Embassy; and  the  third  was  from  Mrs
Ahmadi again, to say that her first statement was made  in  error  and  that
she had not in fact attended the Embassy with the appellant. Given that  the
contents of the first statement from Mrs Ahmadi and the  statement  from  Mr
Salam were identical aside from the different names and signatures  and  the
date being a few months apart, and given that  Mrs  Ahmadi,  in  her  second
statement, stated that she attended many such  interviews  and  the  details
must have been mixed up with a different client, it is difficult to see  how
the appellant's representatives could have expected anyone to accord  weight
to the statements as reliable evidence of a visit to the Iraqi  Embassy.  Ms
Anzani sought to explain the matter as an "anomaly", but I can see force  in
the criticism made by the judge and I certainly do not agree that it was  an
irrational criticism.

In my view, the judge was perfectly entitled to conclude  that  the  further
evidence produced by the appellant was unreliable and did  not  support  his
claim to have lost contact with his family  in  Iraq  or  to  be  unable  to
provide the relevant documents and  information  to  enable  him  to  obtain
travel documentation from the Iraqi Embassy in the  UK.  For  all  of  these
reasons I find the grounds of challenge do not identify any  errors  of  law
in the judge's decision. I consider that the judge  was  perfectly  entitled
to make the adverse findings that he did and to conclude that the  appellant
would be able to return to Iraq with the relevant documentation.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.

      Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.



Signed:   S Kebede                                 Dated:      12 November
2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
