
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00659/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On Monday 26 September 2016                   |On Thursday 29 September 2016|


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     G T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, Counsel instructed by Linga & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Sweet promulgated on 22 July 2016 ("the Decision")  dismissing
       the Appellant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
       dated 12 January 2016  refusing  his  protection  and  human  rights
       claims.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He came to the  UK  as  a
       student in 2007 with leave which continued  until  August  2013.   A
       further application on that basis was refused on 15  November  2013.
       Thereafter he remained unlawfully as  an  overstayer  until  he  was
       encountered in July 2015. He claimed asylum on 17 August 2015


    3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that he was detained during  a
       visit to Sri Lanka in 2011 on the basis that  he  was  suspected  of
       being a supporter of the LTTE.  The Appellant says that he is not  a
       member of the LTTE nor has he ever taken part in  their  activities.
       He claims that the authorities' interest in him arises as  a  result
       of his father's activities with that  group.   His  father  died  in
       2007, the  Appellant  believes  at  the  hands  of  the  Sri  Lankan
       authorities.  The Appellant claimed to have  been  detained  because
       the authorities were interested in the Appellant's activities in the
       UK.  He claims to have been tortured and subjected to sexual assault
       during his detention.


    4. Judge Sweet did not believe the Appellant's claim and found that  he
       would not fall within any  of  the  categories  in  GJ  and  others.
       Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M
       Robertson on 15 August 2016 on all grounds.  The matter comes before
       me to decide whether the Decision contains a material error  of  law
       and, if so,  to  re-make  the  decision  or  remit  the  appeal  for
       rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

The grounds and submissions


    5. Ground one focusses on the Judge's treatment of documents  submitted
       by the Appellant.  At [52] of the Decision, the Judge referred to  a
       medical certificate of Dr Nazar dated 14 September 2011 confirming a
       number of injuries sustained by the Appellant.  He also refers to  a
       report from Dr AA Seneviratne dated 5 September 2016 relating to the
       Appellant's  brother.  That  report  records  that  the  Appellant's
       brother had been questioned about the Appellant's  involvement  with
       the LTTE in the past and had been detained for four  days  in  2016.
       The Judge in that paragraph expresses doubts as to the  authenticity
       of those documents.  The Appellant complains that the Judge did  not
       have any evidence to suggest that the documents were not  authentic,
       that the burden of proof is on the Respondent and that she  had  not
       discharged that burden.  Judge Robertson granted permission on  this
       ground on the basis it was not clear whether the  finding  was  that
       the  documents  were  unreliable  or  that  they  were   fraudulent.
       Accordingly, it was not clear what burden or standard of  proof  had
       been applied.


    6. The second ground concerns a failure by the Judge to  determine  the
       issue whether the Appellant was released in 2011 on the payment of a
       bribe by the Appellant's uncle.  The Appellant submits that, if that
       were accepted  or  given  any  weight  then  the  finding  that  the
       Appellant does not fall into any of the categories in GJ and  others
       is in error because it is accepted  by  the  Respondent  that  if  a
       person is detained in Sri Lanka, he remains at a real  risk  of  ill
       treatment.


    7. The third ground and the ground on  which  Mr  Mannan  focussed  his
       submissions is the Judge's failure to make any finding  in  relation
       to the medical report of  Dr  Gupta,  Consultant  Psychiatrist,  who
       deals  with  the  Appellant's  mental  health  and  finds  that  the
       Appellant is suffering  from  symptoms  consistent  with  PTSD.   Mr
       Mannan points out that, at [53] of the Decision, the Judge sets  out
       the content of that report but makes no finding whether the  content
       of the report is accepted or rejected  and  if  so  why.  Mr  Mannan
       submits that the report is capable of corroborating the  Appellant's
       account and therefore undermining the  Judge's  adverse  credibility
       findings.  Mr Mannan submits  that  if  the  factual  basis  of  the
       Appellant's claim is made out then, applying GJ and  others,  he  is
       likely to be found to be at real risk on return and  his  appeal  is
       likely to succeed.


    8. Mr Kotas did not accept that there is any merit in grounds  one  and
       two.  The Judge considered the authenticity of the documents in  the
       round as he was required to do.  However, he accepted that there  is
       an error in the Judge's failure to make a finding in relation to the
       medical report of Dr Gupta.  He conceded that the error  may  impact
       on the credibility findings and that accordingly the Decision should
       be set aside and the appeal be remitted.  He submitted however  that
       certain findings could be preserved namely that the Appellant has no
       connection with the LTTE ([36]) and that he is not a member  of  the
       LTTE ([56] and [48]).  Mr Mannan submits that it  is  not  necessary
       that any findings be preserved.  The Appellant has never claimed  to
       be a member of or to have any connection to the LTTE.   If  he  were
       now to change his case in that regard, that inconsistency  would  be
       likely to weigh against him.


    Decision


    9. The Decision contains an error of law on ground three.  At  [53]  of
       the Decision, the Judge set out the content of  Dr  Gupta's  report.
       However, he did not go on to make any  finding  in  relation  to  Dr
       Gupta's  evidence.   Dr  Gupta's  opinion  that  the  Appellant   is
       suffering from symptoms consistent with PTSD and as  to  the  likely
       cause of  those  symptoms  is  evidence  which  may  be  capable  of
       corroborating the Appellant's account.  As such, it was incumbent on
       the Judge to say what he made of that evidence, whether he  accepted
       it and if he did not, why he did not.  If that evidence is accepted,
       it needs  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  assessment  of  the
       Appellant's credibility.


   10. I agree with Mr Kotas' submission that grounds one and two  are  not
       made out.  However, I do not  agree  that  any  findings  should  be
       preserved.  The issue in relation to which I have found an error  is
       one which may be capable of affecting the findings  on  credibility.
       It  is  not  useful  to  constrain  another  Judge's  assessment  of
       credibility when the appeal is re-heard.  I also accept Mr  Mannan's
       submission that it is not necessary to preserve the  findings  which
       Mr Kotas suggests should be  preserved.   It  has  always  been  the
       Appellant's case that he has never been a member  of  the  LTTE  and
       that he has no connection (personally) with them.   If  he  were  to
       change that case at any further  hearing,  it  is  likely  that  the
       inconsistency would adversely  impact  on  his  credibility  in  any
       event.  It is therefore not helpful to preserve findings and  to  do
       so would be artificial in circumstances where credibility  needs  to
       be reconsidered on the Appellant's case as a whole.


   11. Both parties agreed that, since  the  evidence  which  needs  to  be
       considered as a result of the error may impact the  Judge's  adverse
       credibility findings, the appropriate course is to remit the  appeal
       to the First-tier Tribunal.  I  have  had  regard  to  the  relevant
       Practice Direction and I agree that this is the appropriate  course.
       I therefore remit the appeal for re-hearing by a different Judge.


   DECISION
   I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error  of  law.  The
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet promulgated on 22  July  2016
   is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-
   hearing before a different Judge.


      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  29 September 2016


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
