

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/00495/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination and Reasons Promulgated|
|on 11 July 2019                      |on 17 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 LAWREEN [J]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals against the decision of FtT Judge  Agnew,  promulgated
    on 20 March 2019, dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection  grounds,  but  allowing  it  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. The SSHD's grounds of appeal are set out in the application filed on  2
    April 2019.

 4. Mr Diwyncz sought to  raise  two  additional  matters,  as  below.   He
    accepted that  these  came  late,  but  explained  that  the  file  was
    available to him only late on the day before the hearing:

      i) The two villages which the  appellant  mentioned  as  covering  his
         place of origin were not outside the IKR, as  wrongly  accepted  in
         the refusal letter and subsequent proceedings to date,  but  inside
         it.  That undermined his claim.  The matter was an  objective  fact
         of geography and readily verifiable.

     ii) The FtT accepted that the appellant  was  validly  married  to  his
         wife, who had entered the UK unlawfully  to  join  him  during  the
         proceedings.  The marriage was said  to  have  been  contracted  by
         telephone while his wife was in Turkey.  There had been no evidence
         to suggest that such a marriage was valid in the law of  Turkey  or
         for present purposes.  The issue was so  obvious  that  it  was  an
         error for the FtT not to take  it,  even  in  the  absence  of  any
         submission.

 5. Mr Diwyncz relied also upon the  original  grounds,  to  which  he  had
    nothing to add.   He  submitted,  finally,  that  the  case  should  be
    remitted for a fresh hearing.

 6. Mr Caskie submitted along these lines:

      i) The proposed amendments to the grounds came too late.

     ii) It was not clear from information on file  that  the  two  villages
         were in the IKR, as they were said to be in Ninewah, which was  not
         listed as one of the governorates making up the IKR.

    iii) Whether the marriage was formally valid made no difference  to  the
         outcome, as it was the relationship which counted.

     iv) In any event, the appeal was  allowed  on  private  life,  a  point
         missed entirely by the grounds.

      v) The decision was not one which  might  have  been  reached  by  all
         judges, but it was not perverse or irrational.  The grounds and the
         grant of permission  verged  on  that  proposition,  without  quite
         making it, but it was not advanced by the presenting  officer,  and
         could not be supported.

 7. Having reserved my decision, and  after  consideration,  I  prefer  the
    submissions for the appellant.

 8. Mr Diwyncz is not personally responsible for the  very  late  stage  at
    which amendment was sought, but these are points which  the  respondent
    could and should have advanced long ago.

 9. The two villages may well be in the  IKR,  a  matter  which  should  be
    resoluble beyond doubt  by  objective  information;  but  that  is  not
    something which the FtT could be expected to pick up for itself.

10. The "marriage", on the evidence before the FtT, is almost certainly not
    valid.  That point is obvious, and should have been picked up  even  in
    absence of any comment by the representatives in the FtT.  However, the
    submission for the respondent did not show it to  be  material  to  the
    outcome.

11. The judge at paragraph 42 effectively found that the  appeal  succeeded
    on private life, before turning to family life.

12. The original  grounds  do  not  expressly  say  that  the  decision  is
    perverse, but  in  substance  they  describe  the  claim  as  "entirely
    unmerited", overstate the SSHD's side, and  recognise  nothing  in  the
    claim or in the decision on the appellant's side.

13. This was, as Mr Caskie recognised, a case which might have gone  either
    way; but the respondent has not shown that the FtT's resolution  of  it
    was perverse, or that it involved the making of any error on a point of
    law, by which it should be set aside.

14. The SSHD's appeal to the UT is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal stands.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]
      12 July 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




