
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/00636/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th September 2017                        |On 25th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                 ms A.A.H.M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Moran
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Iraq (born [ ] 1953) appeals with permission
    against  the  decision  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Devittie)
    dismissing her appeal against the Respondent's decision of 11th January
    2017 refusing to grant her asylum.  The Appellant's appeal came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House on 20th February 2017  and  the
    decision was promulgated on 14th March 2017.

 2. The grounds seeking permission are short,  focussing  upon  one  narrow
    issue.  The FtT judge, after hearing evidence from the Appellant,  says
    at paragraph 6 of his decision;

         "I accept the core of the Appellant's account of  the  events  that
         caused her to seek asylum in the UK ..."

    He then says at [10]

         "I am satisfied for reasons that I now set out that  the  Appellant
         does have a well-founded fear of persecution in Baghdad: ....

         (ii) I do not consider that it would be reasonable  to  expect  the
             Appellant to locate within Baghdad.  Firstly if  she  were  to
             obtain employment in Baghdad,  the  same  risk  factors  which
             caused her to seek asylum in the first instance  would  apply.
             ...... I am satisfied that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
             expect this Appellant  to  locate  either  within  Baghdad  or
             outside Baghdad."

 3. Following those findings the judge then set out a  heading  "Decision."
    Under that heading in an apparent contradiction  to  what  he  set  out
    above, he says the following.

         "The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds."

UT Hearing

 4. Before me Mr Moran appeared for the Appellant, Ms Willocks-Briscoe  for
    the Respondent.  Mr Moran, following the lines of the  grounds  seeking
    permission, submitted that it was clear that the  judge's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal was  in  contradiction  and  inconsistent  with  the
    findings made in the substantive body of the  decision.   He  submitted
    that clearly this was an error and that the appropriate course would be
    to set aside  the  decision  preserving  all  findings  and  remake  it
    substituting my own decision allowing the appeal.

 5. Ms Willocks-Briscoe accepted that the findings of Judge  Devittie  were
    sustainable and that there was no challenge  to  those  findings.   She
    said that in these circumstances, she accepted that the decision notice
    set out by the judge was in error.  She acknowledged that the reasoning
    contained  within  the  body  of  the  FtT's  decision  justified   the
    Appellant's appeal being allowed and accepted that I should  find  that
    the judge had erred and I should remake the decision by substituting my
    own, allowing the appeal.

 6. Following that concession by the Respondent I find I  am  in  agreement
    with the course set out by both representatives.  The decision of Judge
    Devittie is hereby set aside  for  material  error  and  I  remake  the
    decision allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal to grant her asylum.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT is hereby set aside for material  error.   I  remake
the decision.  The appeal  of  Ms  A.A.H.M.  against  the  decision  of  the
Respondent dated 11th  January  2017,  refusing  her  claim  to  asylum,  is
allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     23 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts



