
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00680/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th July 2019                    |On 15th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Hopkinson, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  refer  to  him.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  1st  April  2019,
    dismissed his claim for protection.

The factual background:

 3. The background to the Appellant's protection claim is set  out  in  the
    determination of the FtTJ at paragraphs 5-10 and in the decision letter
    of the Secretary of State issued on 10th January 2019.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Iraq. He entered the United  Kingdom  on
    27th  January  2018  and  made  an  application   for   asylum   and/or
    humanitarian protection. His claim was based on his assertion  that  he
    was at risk on return to Iraq as a result of political opinion  imputed
    to him  by  the  Iraqi  authorities,  his  Sunni  faith  and  the  Shia
    militia's. It was said  that  his  father  was  a  high-ranking  police
    officer in the government and it also works for the  regime  of  Saddam
    Hussein. His father was imprisoned by  the  Shia  militia  in  2013  in
    Baghdad for two months  because  he  refused  to  work  for  them.  The
    appellant had lived in Hawija for two days whilst  it  was  under  ISIS
    control, but he left in 2014 to work in Kirkuk. Alternatively, he  left
    Hawija as his father advised him to  leave  due  to  ISIS.  The  family
    disappeared from there in 2014 and the appellant's uncle's  friend  was
    taken for ransom. It was claimed that the Shia militia came looking for
    him at his uncle's house in August 2017. He was told to  leave  but  he
    did not know why the militia  was  looking  for  him  specifically  for
    stopping the alternative, the militia told his uncle they suspected  he
    worked for the ISIS. He claimed to fear the Shia militia because he was
    a Sunni Muslim but had not experienced any  problems  specific  to  his
    religion. He claimed that on  return  it  we  persecuted  by  the  Shia
    militia as they had imprisoned his father in the past been looking  for
    him and on account of his religion and they  suspected  he  worked  for
    ISIS.

 5. In a decision letter dated 10th January 2019 the Respondent refused his
    claim for asylum. It was accepted that he was a national  of  Iraq  and
    also a Sunni Muslim. It was not accepted that he had given  a  credible
    and consistent account of  his  father's  employment  and  it  was  not
    accepted that he had any high-profile role in government, the  military
    or that he previously worked for the  regime  of  Saddam  Hussein.  His
    claim to be at risk of adverse attention from the Shia militia was also
    not  accepted  at  paragraphs  59  -  67.  In  determining  his  claim,
    consideration was given to section 8 of the 2004 Act on the basis  that
    before arriving in the United  Kingdom  he  travelled  through  France,
    Greece and Italy which were considered safe countries. He was in a safe
    country for a significant amount of time  and  it  was  not  considered
    plausible that he was consistently under the supervision  of  an  agent
    and unable to claim asylum.

 6. The  decision  letter  considered  that  he  did  not  have  a  genuine
    subjective fear on return to Iraq. However, whilst it was not  accepted
    that he had come to the adverse attention of the Shia  militia  due  to
    his father's employment, consideration was given to the risk  posed  by
    the militia because of his identity as a Sunni Arab. The respondent  to
    set out the country materials and the CPIN  dated  June  2017  and  the
    country guidance case of BA (returns to Baghdad) CG [2017] UKUT 18  and
    concluded that the appellant would not be at risk due to being a  Sunni
    Arab.

 7. Consideration was also given to Article  15(c)  in  the  light  of  the
    country guidance decisions in AA (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2015] KUT  544
    as amended by the Court of Appeal in AA Iraq v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944
    and AAH (Iraqi Kurds-internal relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 0212. Specific
    consideration was given to  documentation  and  feasibility  of  return
    (excluding the IKR) and internal relocation within Iraq (other than the
    IKR). Taking into account the factors identified in the  case  law  and
    country materials, it was noted that the appellant had photographs of a
    national ID card and  an  Iraqi  personal  identity  card  although  he
    claimed to have lost the original, it was noted he had a friend in Iraq
    and was in contact with his uncle whilst he was in France. Thus it  was
    considered they would be able to  offer  assistance  in  obtaining  new
    documents in Iraq, particularly as the translations contain the details
    used by the authorities to reissue such documents (as set  out  in  the
    CPIN Iraq; internal relocation,  civil  documentation  returns  version
    8.0, October 2018). It was also considered that his uncle in Iraq  with
    whom he was living with three years prior to leaving the country  would
    be able to provide him with support and accommodation.  His  claim  was
    therefore dismissed on all grounds.

 8. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal against that decision came before the FtTJ on the 7th March 2019
    and in the decision promulgated  on  1st  April  2019  his  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 9. The FtTJ set out his findings of fact at paragraphs 31 - 41.  They  can
    be summarised as follows:

      a) his two brothers did not go with him to his paternal  uncle's  home
         in Kirkuk as his father told them to stay and he was the  only  one
         who was told to leave.

      b) When he went to his uncle's home in Kirkuk,  his  father  gave  him
         money for the journey, and he took his CSID card with him but  lost
         it on the way to the UK when he was in Greece.

      c) His uncle is a Sunni Muslim who still lives in Kirkuk with his wife
         and two sons.

      d) There is a photograph of his CSID stored on  his  mobile  telephone
         and a photocopy of his CSID card was taken from this.

      e) He was from the Al Jaboor tribe which is the second largest in Iraq
         mostly live in Hawija and to create but also at a  place  close  to
         Baghdad.

      f) The appellant  stated  he  had  been  employed  as  a  labourer  in
         brickworks and was not required to produce his CSID card to  obtain
         that employment. He worked 20 minutes away from his  uncle's  house
         by car.

      g) The appellant accepted that he had not been  threatened  personally
         by anyone in Iraq including ISIS.

10. At paragraph [42] he recorded the concession  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent  that  it  was  not  submitted  that  the  appellant   could
    internally relocate to the  IKR  region  in  the  north  of  Iraq.  The
    Secretary of State's case was that he could return to Baghdad city  and
    the southern governorates as set out in the decision letter.

11. The judge then  turned  to  the  particular  issues  relevant  to  this
    appellant's claim. At  paragraphs  [43]-[45]  the  judge  set  out  his
    assessment of the risk to the appellant  on  account  of  his  father's
    asserted position in the Ba'athist regime. For the  reasons  given,  he
    rejected the appellant's account that  is  father  was  a  high-ranking
    member of the regime who had been actively pursued by the Shia Militia.
    The background material did not indicate that  the  family  members  of
    former Ba'athists were actively being sought by  anyone  and  that  the
    appellant was a very young boy at the time of the Baathist  regime  and
    had failed to show that he would be at  risk  from  harm  as  a  family
    member of a former or current Ba'athist.

12. At [46] he rejected the claim that the appellant would be  at  risk  of
    harm on account of being regarded as a collaborator with ISIS. He found
    that on the appellant's account he only spent two days in his home area
    before he fled to his  paternal  uncle's  home  in  Kirkuk  after  ISIS
    arrived in his village in 2014. He then spent until August 2017 at  his
    uncle's home without any difficulty and travelled on a daily  basis  to
    Erbil to work as a labourer. He then fled Iraq to avoid  ISIS  arriving
    in January 2018.

13. At [47 - 51] he considered the risk on return as an Arab Sunni  Muslim.
    He took into account the CPIN Iraq: Sunni(Arab) Muslims dated June 2017
    on the basis of his findings of fact that the appellant did not face  a
    real risk of being perceived as a  collaborator.  The  decision  of  BA
    (returns to Baghdad) was also  considered  which  found  that  although
    Sunni men are more likely to be targeted  as  suspected  supporters  of
    Sunni extremist groups such  as  ISIL,  Sunni  identity  alone  is  not
    sufficient to give rise to a real risk of serious harm (paragraph 107).

14. At [48] he turned to the appellant's individual characteristics; a  20-
    year-old Sunni Arab who was educated for 10 years in Iraq and worked as
    a "building instructor" before leaving the  country.  He  rejected  the
    submission that the appellant was a young man of  low-level  education.
    He spoke Arabic and that he was not an ethnic Kurd.

15. At [49] he concluded that there was a significant Sunni  population  in
    Baghdad and did not  find  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to relocate to that area.  He  took  into  account  that  the
    appellant's uncle, on the evidence before him was still living in  Iraq
    as he supported the appellant from 2014 to 2017 and he  concluded  that
    he  could  provide  support  to  the  appellant  both  financially  and
    emotionally whilst  the  appellant  is  in  Baghdad.  In  addition,  he
    rejected the appellant's evidence that he could not seek help from  the
    elders or a committee of his own tribe which is, on the appellant's own
    account, the second largest in Iraq. The FtTJ found  that  support  and
    assistance to members of the tribe would  be  traditional  and  in  the
    absence of credible and reliable evidence to the contrary, he concluded
    that it would be available to the appellant on return stop he  rejected
    the appellants evidence that his father never  took  him  to  meet  any
    fellow  members  of  their  tribe  or  participated   in   any   tribal
    celebrations.

16. As to the issue of whether the appellant could obtain a CSID, at  [52],
    he set out that it was accepted by both parties that the appellant  had
    a photograph of his original authentic CSID on his mobile telephone and
    that a copy of it was submitted for the appeal and is in the bundle. He
    concluded that the appellant would be able to visit the  Iraqi  embassy
    in London to obtain a replacement CSID, if, in fact, he  did  lose  his
    original CSID as he claimed. Failing that, he would be able to obtain a
    replacement CSID in Iraq at the Baghdad office or with  the  assistance
    of his uncle from the relevant office in Kirkuk.

17. He concluded at [51] and [53] on the basis of the evidence taken  as  a
    whole that the appellant's personal circumstances  were  such  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh for  the  appellant  to  relocate  to  either
    Baghdad or  to  the  southern  governorates  where  there  is  a  Sunni
    presence.

18. At paragraphs [56]-62] the FtTJ considered the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant could travel safely from Baghdad and  return  to  Kirkuk.  He
    resolved this issue in favour of the appellant and  concluded  at  [62)
    that  in  the  absence  of  significant  reasons  supported  by  cogent
    evidence, he did not find that the situation in Hawija  or  Kirkuk  had
    changed since the assessment carried out by the  Upper  Tribunal  which
    had confirmed that both of those areas remained "contested areas".

19. At [63] the FtTJ set out that the appellant would not be  destitute  on
    removal to Iraq because he would be able to obtain a  replacement  CSID
    and that he was a young, physically able Sunni Muslim who spoke  Arabic
    and had experience in the building industry and therefore would be able
    to obtain employment and accommodation and would not  be  destitute  or
    face undue hardship on return.

20. There was no claim made on Article 8 grounds (see [68]).  He  therefore
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

21. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and granted  and  on  the
    13th May 2019 by FtTJ Grimmett.

22. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper Tribunal.  Ms  Warren,
    who did not appear before the FtTJ, appeared on behalf of the appellant
    and Ms Hopkinson, senior presenting officer, appeared on behalf of  the
    respondent.

23. A preliminary point was raised in respect of the ambit of  the  grounds
    and that there appeared to be a partial grant of permission rather than
    on all grounds. Having considered the grounds in the light of the grant
    of permission, I reached the conclusion that they did not properly deal
    with the all the issues raised and that the way in which  it  had  been
    drafted was ambiguous. For example, there were three  specific  grounds
    raised; Ground 1 related to an error in the FtTJ's consideration of the
    appellants  "personal  circumstances"  before   concluding   he   could
    internally relocate to Baghdad, ground two related to  his  ability  to
    obtain a replacement CSID and ground three referred to the error in the
    approach taken by the FtTJ to the issue of internal relocation  to  the
    southern  governorates.  In  respect  of  ground  one,  Judge  Grimmett
    appeared to reject paragraph 4 (although referring to it as  ground  4)
    but  granting  permission  in  respect  of  paragraph  5  but  made  no
    assessment of paragraph 6 which made reference to tribal support. As to
    ground two, it was stated that ground eight relied on outdated case law
    and in respect of ground three it was stated that paragraph  sought  to
    reargue the appeal. No reasons were given in respect of grounds two and
    three and the specific points  raised.  Furthermore,  grounds  two  and
    three also relied upon the findings of fact which  were  challenged  in
    ground one upon which permission was  granted.  For  those  reasons,  I
    reached the conclusion that the appeal should proceed on  all  grounds.
    If that had caused difficulties for the presenting officer, I indicated
    that either time could be provided  to  consider  any  submissions  she
    would wish to make or in the alternative, an adjournment. Ms  Hopkinson
    informed the court that those points had all been prepared  by  her  in
    any event and no further time was necessary.

24. I am grateful for  the  submissions  heard  from  Ms  Warren  and  Miss
    Hopkinson on the issues that arise in the grounds advanced on behalf of
    the appellant. I confirm that I have considered  those  submissions  in
    accordance with the decision of the FtTJ and the grounds which had been
    filed before the Upper Tribunal. I further confirm that  I  have  given
    full consideration to those submissions  which  I  have  heard,  and  I
    intend to incorporate those submissions into my analysis of the grounds
    that are relied upon by the appellant.

25. There is no challenge made to the FtTJ's  findings  of  fact  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on the basis of his father's profile or as a
    collaborator. Nor is there any challenge made to  the  assessment  that
    the appellant cannot return to his home area or internally relocate  to
    Kirkuk or the IKR.

Ground 1:

26. This is a  challenge  to  the  FtTJ's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    "personal circumstances" relevant to the issue of  internal  relocation
    generally. Ms Warren submits that the FtTJ's findings at [48] and  [49]
    were material errors of fact or were  perverse  findings  made  by  the
    FtTJ.

27. She submits that the rejection of previous Counsel's submission that he
    was a man of low-level education was not open to the FtTJ and that  the
    FtTJ failed to  explain  how  he  came  to  that  conclusion  when  the
    appellant was 18 years of age when he left Iraq and 20 years of age  at
    the hearing. She also states that  the  judge  referred  to  him  as  a
    "building instructor" when the appellant's evidence was, he had been  a
    labourer.

28. The second error of fact/perverse finding  was  the  FtTJ's  assessment
    that the appellant's uncle  could  support  him  in  Baghdad  when  the
    appellant's evidence was that he had had  no  contact  with  his  uncle
    since arriving in the UK  in  2017  and  this  was  not  disputed.  She
    submitted it was material to his assessment of  relocation  as  the  CG
    decision requires the appellant to have  a  family  member  in  Baghdad
    (reference made to AA (Iraq) CG).

29. The third error relates to the FtTJ's findings that the appellant could
    draw upon some support from members of his tribe. It is submitted  that
    there was no evidence or support for any conclusion  in  the  objective
    material or the country  guidance  caselaw.  Furthermore,  he  gave  no
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's evidence that  he  had  not  been
    introduced to any of the elders or others  from  his  tribe  whilst  in
    Iraq.

30. I am not satisfied that the judge fell into error in the  way  advanced
    by Ms Warren. As to the appellant's personal circumstances, the  FtTJ's
    findings at [48] and [49] were properly drawn from the evidence  before
    him. At [48] the FtTJ set out that  the  appellant  was  a  20-year-old
    Sunni Arab. There can be no argument about that  description.  He  also
    found that the appellant had been educated in Iraq for a period  of  10
    years. This finding was based on the appellant's own evidence  set  out
    in his screening interview at paragraph 2.6. Whilst he referred to  him
    as a "building instructor" that  was  a  term  used  by  the  appellant
    himself in the screening  interview  paragraph  1.14.  This  was  later
    clarified (see letter at D1) as a reference  to  his  employment  as  a
    labourer which the judge plainly made  reference  to  at  [38]  in  his
    findings of fact and credibility, that he was employed as a labourer in
    such work and therefore the judge considered  his  previous  occupation
    correctly. All of those findings were evidence-based and therefore open
    to the FtTJ to find as a fact.

31. I am also satisfied that it was against that background  evidence  that
    the FtTJ was entitled to reject Counsel's submission that he was  young
    man of low-level education. The FtTJ had proper regard to his age  (20)
    and when considering the education that he had received  in  Iraq;  the
    appellant's own evidence was that he had received 10 years of education
    (see question  16  of  the  AIR).  As  Miss  Hopkinson  submitted,  the
    appellant's own evidence of 10 years of  education  when  seen  in  the
    context of Iraq could not properly be  considered  low-level  education
    where not all its citizens have had access to education. In my judgment
    there is no error, nor can any perversity be shown in those findings at
    [48] which, taken as a whole, show a picture of a  healthy  20-year-old
    Sunni Arab male  with  an  educational  background  of  10  years  with
    employable skills (see omnibus conclusion at [63]).

32. As to the second error, I accept the submission made  by  Ms  Hopkinson
    that the judge was entitled to reach the finding of fact as to  contact
    with relatives in Iraq when considering the evidence as a whole and  in
    the context of the appellant's general credibility. The FtTJ had  given
    adequate and sustainable reasons for rejecting the appellant's  account
    of why he would be at risk in Iraq on  account  of  his  father's  past
    activities and on account of being perceived  as  a  collaborator  with
    ISIS. The assessment made at [49] in my judgment properly reflected the
    evidence. The appellant's uncle was still living in Iraq. It  was  open
    to the FtTJ to consider the issue of further contact in the context  of
    the evidence that whilst he claimed not to have had  any  contact  with
    his uncle since his arrival, he had spoken with  him  and  had  contact
    relatively recently in France. This was supported  by  the  appellant's
    own evidence at Q 142 in the asylum interview. At question 144  he  was
    asked if he had had contact with his uncle he said he had but  that  he
    did not know how to get in touch with him and stated "I know  nothing",
    which is undermined by having contact with others in Iraq who had  sent
    in pictures and information (see question 150 of the asylum interview).
    Whilst the judge did not expressly refer to this, it was set out in the
    asylum interview and demonstrates that the judge, when considering  the
    evidence in its totality, was entitled to reach the conclusion that the
    appellant, having been supported by his uncle for three years  when  he
    left his home area and had helped him leave Iraq, and had contact  with
    him when in France, would reasonably be likely to  provide  support  to
    the appellant both emotionally and financially. This  was  particularly
    so when there was no evidence from the appellant  for  example  in  the
    form of any Red Cross evidence that he had sought to contact his  uncle
    but was unable to do so and in the  context  of  his  lack  of  general
    credibility.

33. The third point relates to the judge's assessment that in  addition  he
    would be able to seek help from the elders or from a committee  of  his
    own tribe. The FtTJ's findings in this regard were again based  on  the
    appellant's own evidence that his tribal background was that of the  Al
    Jaboor tribe which was the second largest tribe in Iraq. Therefore  the
    appellant was able to identify his own tribal background and also  able
    to identify the area where they had lived (including the area close  to
    Baghdad). I would accept that the judge did not  recite  any  objective
    material in support of this but given the general importance of  tribal
    links in Iraq and the reference to this as "traditional" support, as  a
    general finding it was open to him to take this into account. Whilst Ms
    Warren submits that he gave no reason  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    evidence, that is incorrect. The FtTJ plainly rejected his account that
    is father had never taken him to meet any of the fellow members of  the
    tribe on the basis of the appellant's own evidence that he was able  to
    identify his own tribal background, where they lived and that they were
    the second largest tribe. Given the tribal background described by  the
    appellant, the judge did not find it plausible or credible that he  had
    had no meetings whatsoever with other members of the tribe. That was  a
    finding open to the FtTJ on the evidence before him.

34. Drawing those matters together, in my judgment ground one is  not  made
    out and the FtTJ's assessment of the appellant's personal circumstances
    as found by him were properly open to him on the evidence and could not
    be classified as errors of fact or as perverse findings.

Ground 2:

35. The  written  grounds  relating  to  ground  2  challenge  the  judge's
    assessment at paragraphs 50 - 51 that it would not be unduly  harsh  to
    relocate to Baghdad. The judge at [50] set out his reliance on the CPIN
    as directed by  counsel  for  the  appellant  in  the  context  of  his
    background as a Sunni Muslim. The  FtTJ  also  took  into  account  the
    findings made earlier  at  [47]-[49]  which  related  to  his  personal
    characteristics which were summarised  in  his  omnibus  conclusion  at
    [63].

36. The basis of  the  challenge  relates  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant could obtain a CSID. Ms Warren submitted that  the  FtTJ  had
    found that the appellant could visit the Iraqi  embassy  in  London  to
    obtain a replacement CSID or that his family could obtain a replacement
    in the Baghdad office with the assistance of his uncle.  She  submitted
    that this was an error because there  was  no  functioning  archive  in
    Baghdad relying on paragraph 100 of AA(Iraq) and  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Fatah.

37. She further submitted that the evidence of Dr Fatah  stated  that  ISIS
    had closed down offices, which was relevant to Kirkuk, the offices were
    also in general disarray and that there was evidence that officials  do
    not provide helpful assistance in either Iraq or the UK. She  therefore
    submitted that the CG decision undermined  the  judge's  assessment  of
    being able to obtain a replacement CSID in either  Baghdad,  Kirkuk  or
    the UK.

38. She further submitted that the judge did not set out how the  appellant
    could obtain a CSID from Kirkuk and if this was on the basis  that  his
    uncle could go and obtain one for him, this would be undermined by  the
    country guidance decision AA (Iraq) at paragraph 18 and repeated in the
    later decision of AAH at paragraph 102.

39. She submitted the paragraph 181 doubted whether a CSID could be  handed
    over to an individual with a power of attorney and that also AA  quoted
    at paragraph 102 that the ability to  obtain  a  CSID  from  the  civil
    affairs office would be hampered in areas such as Kirkuk.

40. By way of reply, Ms Hopkinson submitted that  the  judge  had  set  out
    three options to  the  appellant  which  were  based  on  the  evidence
    accepted by both parties that the appellant had a copy of his authentic
    CSID on his phone and that he could either attend at the Iraqi  embassy
    in the UK or failing that, obtain one in Baghdad or  from  Kirkuk.  She
    accepted that he did not specifically refer to the issue of the  office
    in Baghdad being in disarray, but he did refer to this option  and  the
    burden is upon the appellant to demonstrate that  he  cannot  obtain  a
    CSID and explore the avenues open to him.

41. It is clear from the country guidance decision  in  AA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944, where the amended country guidance set out  in  an
    Annex, that:

         "an international protection claim made  by  P  cannot  succeed  by
         reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of  a
         current or expired Iraqi passport  or  a  laissez  passer,  if  the
         Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account
         of a lack of any of those documents."

42. The basis for that guidance, amended  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
    consensual basis, is set out at [36]-[41] of the judgment. It is  based
    upon that court's earlier decision in HF (Iraq) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1276 (see [38]-[39] of AA). The  context  means  that  a  claim  cannot
    succeed where an individual assert  that  they  are  at  risk  in  Iraq
    because they lack the very documentation needed to return to Iraq,  the
    absence of which would put them at risk (see [38] of AA).  However,  if
    the absence of a document, once in Iraq, creates a risk in the country,
    then it is a live issue as to whether or not an appellant will be  able
    to obtain such a document. That, of course, is the basis of the country
    guidance in both AA and AAH, that possession of a CSID is an  important
    document when considering an international protection claim based  upon
    an individual's circumstances once in Iraq.

43. I have considered the following guidance from AA (Iraq) CG [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 944

         "D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


         14.  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
             harsh for a person  from  a  contested  area  to  relocate  to
             Baghdad City or (subject to paragraph  2  above)  the  Baghdad
             Belts.


         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
             P to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are,  however,
             likely to be relevant:


             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (see
                  Part C above);


             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are  less
                  likely to find employment);


             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in  Baghdad  able
                  to accommodate him;


             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
                  difficulties than men in finding employment);


             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or
                  rent accommodation;


             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;


             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind
                  there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers
                  are provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


         16.  There is not a real risk of an  ordinary  civilian  travelling
             from Baghdad airport to the southern  governorates,  suffering
             serious harm en  route  to  such  governorates  so  as  engage
             Article 15(c).


44. In AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 - in particular I note the following:

         "9.  Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
             necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
             obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. ...


         10.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
             as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil
             Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi
             passport (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does
             not have such a passport, P's ability to  obtain  a  CSID  may
             depend on whether P knows the page and volume  number  of  the
             book holding P's information (and that  of  P's  family).  P's
             ability to persuade the officials that P is the  person  named
             on the relevant page is likely to  depend  on  whether  P  has
             family members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch
             for P. "


45. Paragraphs 9 to 11 of the annex to AA (Iraq) CG  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944
    deals with the importance of, and availability of, a CSID.

46. As explained by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ
    944 "A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
    financial  assistance  from  the  authorities,  employment,  education,
    housing and medical treatment. If P shows there are no family or  other
    members likely to be able to provide means of support, P is in  general
    likely to fail and face a real risk of destitution amounting to serious
    harm if by the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary  of  State
    or agents to assist P's return have been exhausted,  it  is  reasonably
    likely that P will still have no CSID."

47. The  FtTJ  set  out  three  options  for  the  appellant  to  obtain  a
    replacement CSID which were based on the premise that the appellant had
    an authentic copy of his CSID on mobile phone.

48. The FtTJ considered that the appellant may be able  to  obtain  a  CSID
    from the Iraqi Embassy in London (see paragraph 52).   In  AA  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG it was said that a person  who  is  able  to  produce  a
    current or expired passport and/or the book in page  number  for  their
    family registration details may be able to obtain  a  CSID  in  the  UK
    through the consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in London.

49. Ms Hopkinson, for  the  respondent,  referred  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision of AA (Article 15(c) Iraq) CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC).  This
    decision has a section expressly devoted to 'Obtaining a CSID whilst in
    the UK'. It recites the expert evidence upon which the  judges  relied,
    which included the evidence of Dr Fatah and ties  the  various  strands
    together with a concluding paragraph [177]. This is replicated  in  the
    CG decision of AAH (Iraqi Kurds-internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 00212 and which reads:

         "177.    In summary, we conclude that it is possible for  an  Iraqi
         national living in the UK to obtain a  CSID  through  the  consular
         section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able to
         produce a current or expired passport  and/or  the  book  and  page
         number for their family registration details.".


50. Earlier in the evidence, Dr Fatah had referred to the necessity  of  an
    individual to obtain CSID as matter of urgency (if in  Iraq)  and  that
    the ideal means would be the production of an old or damaged CSID  (see
    paragraph 24 of AAH).  At [34] Dr Fatah's evidence was recorded that it
    would be for an individual to satisfy the  consular  staff  as  to  his
    identity and nationality but having a  CSID  or  passport,  current  or
    expired would be of great assistance. If the  applicant  did  not  have
    such  document,  he  could  demonstrate  his  identity  by  calling  on
    documented relatives to vouch for him.

51. On the evidence before the FtTJ the appellant can  provide  details  of
    the CSID card as he has an authentic  copy  on  his  mobile  phone  and
    therefore could make an  application  through  the  Iraqi  Embassy.  In
    addition he has the ability to contact his uncle. The judge found  that
    he had the ability to contact his Uncle who was confirmed to  still  be
    in Iraq and whom the appellant had been in contact with when in France.



52. In the alternative, the FtTJ considered that he could make a successful
    application to the central archive in Baghdad. Ms  Warren  relied  upon
    the evidence of Dr Fatah that he had never heard of anyone obtaining  a
    CSID from the central archive (see [29]). This was later referred to in
    the Tribunal's assessment in AAH at [103]-[106] although in the context
    of return to the IKR.

53.  However  the  FtTJ  placed  reliance  on  the  CPIN:  Iraq,   internal
    relocation, civil documentation and returns February 2019  Version  9.0
    (this was the only country material placed before the  FtTJ).  In  that
    document at paragraph 2.6.16 reference is made to the letter  from  the
    Iraqi Embassy dated October 2018 which noted that "there is  a  central
    register back up in Baghdad that includes all the civil records of  all
    the provinces in the event of any damage  or  destruction.  This  civil
    registration back up (microfilm) covers all records form 1957(Annex B).
     This document was not before the Tribunal  in  AAH  and  give  further
    evidence in this respect.

54. In the light of the factual findings made by the FtTJ, If the appellant
    was to attend the archive, he would be able to do so with his  personal
    details and also details of the registration  number  of  his  previous
    CSID card. This is therefore a realistic option for  the  appellant  as
    the judge set out.

55. As to the third option, the judge considered that the  appellant  would
    be able to obtain a CSID within a  reasonable  timeframe  if  in  Iraq.
    Looking at AAH, the guidance states that:

          1. Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances. Factors to be considered include:


               i)  Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or
                  an expired CSID would all be  of  substantial  assistance.
                  For  someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents the process should be straightforward. A laissez-
                  passer should not be counted for these purposes: these can
                  be issued without any other form of  ID  being  available,
                  are not of any assistance in 'tracing back' to the  family
                  record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;


              ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it
                  is in an area held  or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?


             iii) Are there male  family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his  CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage. It  must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that they could be of assistance. A woman without
                  a  male  relative  to   assist   with   the   process   of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all.


56. The FtTJ had taken into account the factual findings made  as  set  out
    earlier. At [47]-51] and at [52]  concluded  that  he  could  obtain  a
    replacement CSID in Iraq. Whilst he did not make specific reference  to
    the CPIN he had previously stated at [50]  and  at  [60]  that  he  had
    regard to this when reaching his assessment given the  reliance  placed
    on it by the respondent and also Counsel for the appellant.

57. On the basis of his factual findings the appellant was in possession of
    an authentic copy of his CSID and therefore was in  possession  of  the
    document which would  give  information  about  his  identity  and  the
    location of his entry in the civil register. The location of the  civil
    register was in Kirkuk and whilst the FtTJ  found  that  he  could  not
    depart from the CG (see [62], it was open to him to find that there was
    a male relative who would be willing and able to assist him.

58. However, even if it were right  that  the  appellant  would  have  more
    difficulties obtaining his CSID through his  Uncle,  in  light  of  the
    other findings and assessment that he could obtain his replacement CSID
    in the UK or when in Baghdad, those options still applied.

59. It was therefore open to the FtTJ to reach the conclusion that  it  had
    not been made out to the required standard that the appellant would not
    be able to obtain a replacement  CSID.  The  written  grounds  did  not
    expressly challenge the issue of internal relocation to Baghdad but  as
    set out in Ground 1 sought to challenge the FtTJ's consideration of the
    appellant's  "personal  circumstances"  before  concluding   he   could
    internally relocate. I have dealt with  Ground  1  above.  The  written
    grounds do  not  make  any  challenge  on  the  basis  of  the  factors
    identified in  AA  (Iraq)  (as  cited  above).  However,  for  sake  of
    completeness, and  in  the  light  of  the  oral  submissions,  I  have
    considered this issue. On the factual findings of the FtTJ  which  were
    open to him were that the appellant was of Arab ethnicity but was Sunni
    Muslim. The FtTJ cited the CPIN at [50] and the country materials which
    stated that a Sunni Muslim  will  generally  be  able  to  relocate  to
    Baghdad as long as it is  not  unreasonable  based  on  their  specific
    circumstances.  The  appellant  spoke  Arabic  and  had  the  level  of
    education identified  by  the  FtTJ  and  had  employable  skills  (see
    paragraph 48). Whilst he did not have any family  in  Baghdad,  or  any
    sponsor, the FtTJ found that he could access support from his Uncle. In
    addition, as set out in the decision letter,  the  respondent  provides
    returnees  with  a  rehabilitation  and  reintegration  package   which
    includes sufficient financial resources  to  assist  an  individual  in
    returning. The FtTJ's omnibus conclusion is at [63]. It  was  therefore
    open to the FtTJ to find that it would not be unduly harsh to  relocate
    to Baghdad against that background.

60. Whilst Ground 3 refers to the inability of the appellant to relocate to
    the Southern Governorates, I would accept that no assessment  was  made
    of the appellant's ability to travel from Baghdad (where  he  would  be
    returned) to any area in the South. However, in light of the assessment
    made of return to Baghdad, any error would not be material.

61. In summary, the assessment made was one reasonably open to the FtTJ  on
    the evidence, both oral and documentary, and I am  not  satisfied  that
    the decision of the FtTJ demonstrates the making of an error on a point
    of law. The decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

62. The decision of the FtTJ did not involve the making of an  error  on  a
    point of law; the appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 8/8/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
