










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00991/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 20 September 2017             |On : 6 October 2017                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                    [A T]
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, counsel (instructed by SBG Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of  Bangladesh,  born  on  [  ]  1986.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Clemes, promulgated on  24  March  2017  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent refusing  his  application  for
      asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights.

   2. Mr Lams, who represented the appellant at the hearing before the First-
      tier Tribunal, adopted his grounds of appeal. Mr Lams  contended  that
      the Judge was irrational in placing  weight  in  the  failure  of  the
      appellant to attend the screening  interview  scheduled  for  30  June
      2016. The appellant had prepared his case fully before the date  of  a
      doctor's appointment. He was interested in taking  his  case  forward.
      The appellant attended his appeal hearing and gave evidence.

   3. However, at [27b], the Judge stated in his  conclusions  and  findings
      that there was a delay after making his claim  as  the  appellant  was
      absent from his first asylum appointment.

   4. The Judge stated that if that were the sole issue or occasion where he
      had not maintained the prosecution of his claim, then it  would  be  a
      "minuscule point" but it is set against the background of the lateness
      of the claim in the first place. The Judge  stated  that  although  he
      claimed that his solicitors contacted the respondent to  explain  that
      he was ill, he had not seen any  satisfactory  evidence  of  any  such
      correspondence or indeed medical  evidence  to  back  up  the  claimed
      excuse  for  not  attending  the  interview,  namely  illness  through
      vomiting.

   5. Judge  Clemes  stated  that  after  he  failed  to  attend  the  first
      interview, the respondent was left wondering as to where  he  was  and
      why he  had  not  attended.  She  encountered  him  by  chance  on  an
      enforcement visit and he  revived  his  claim.  The  Judge  stated  at
      [27(b)] that if he was a genuine asylum seeker he would (now) have the
      medical evidence and proof of notification  of  the  reasons  for  his
      absence and would have been keen to set up an alternative appointment.
      He cannot objectively maintain that either of these  applied  to  him.
      The Judge was accordingly not satisfied that the appellant is credible
      and was not prepared to rely on what he told him about this issue.

   6. Mr Lams submitted that the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  not
      maintained the prosecution of his claim failed to take account of  the
      fact that he had himself initiated contact by  contacting  the  asylum
      intake unit to arrange an appointment on 24 June 2016. Further,  prior
      to this he had undertaken a considerable amount of preparation of  his
      claim. He had by then instructed solicitors, made a witness  statement
      dated 26 June 2016. Moreover, his solicitors had instructed an  expert
      who wrote a report dated 18 June 2016 which was produced.

   7. The chronology of these events has never been challenged  and  was  in
      any event clear from the material in the Home Office bundle.

   8. Nor was the appellant "encountered by chance"; in fact he was detained
      during a targeted enforcement visit to  his  home  on  26  July  2016,
      indicating that he had given his address to the Home  Office  and  had
      not sought to abscond.

   9. Mr Lams submitted that the Judge also  erred  in  his  conclusions  at
      [27(c)]. He stated that the  appellant  was  an  evasive  witness  who
      blamed others for shortcomings in his case. It was the  fault  of  the
      interpreters that there were  discrepancies  in  his  interviews.  The
      organisation Livewell have tried to support him on the  claimed  issue
      of interpretation from the appellant, with their  interview,  but  the
      Judge was satisfied that the appellant gave the answer recorded at the
      time, namely that he said that he  had  problems  with  his  sexuality
      whilst in Bangladesh, which was a lie. He found that the appellant was
      by February 2017, when his  appeal  hearing  was  looming,  trying  to
      eliminate  areas  where  he  might  have  been  inconsistent.  He  was
      satisfied that the appellant had no  issues  in  Bangladesh  with  his
      sexuality as he is not homosexual at all. He was trying to  exaggerate
      his claim when he saw Livewell in November 2016 and by  February  2017
      he had realised the effect of this.

  10. Mr Lams submitted that the Judge failed to place  any  weight  on  the
      letter  from  Livewell  who  pointed  out  the  difficulties  in   the
      interpretation. The letter which was in the appellant's  bundle  (page
      24) stated that it is recorded in the assessment paperwork that  there
      were  difficulties  in  attaining  an  interpreter  that  provided   a
      competent level of  translation  for  the  assessment.  The  appellant
      speaks  limited  English  and  he  requested  that  they  discuss  his
      sexuality without  an  interpreter  due  to  his  fears  of  potential
      repercussions and discrimination should he be recognised.

  11. Mr Lams submitted that this is confirmed in the Livewell notes,  which
      were in the Home Office  bundle  at  page  17.   He  referred  to  the
      assessment from Livewell at J1 onwards. It is recorded at H1 that  the
      assessment  was  completed  over  two  meetings  due  to  difficulties
      obtaining an interpreter that  could  provide  a  competent  level  of
      translation for the assessment. The appellant speaks  limited  English
      and  he  requested  that  they  discuss  his  sexuality   without   an
      interpreter. An interpreter was used to  communicate  between  English
      and Bengali and achieved a good level of understanding.

  12. Mr Lams submitted that the  negative  credibility  finding  hinged  on
      which  tense  had  been  used,  namely,  whether   he   would   suffer
      discrimination/persecution in  Bangladesh  due  to  his  sexuality  as
      opposed to whether he  had  suffered  discrimination  and  persecution
      there. That is referred to at paragraph [22] of the decision.

  13. Mr Lams submitted that the Judge  thus  ignored  the  independent  and
      contemporaneous  evidence  from  Livewell  relating   to   translation
      difficulties and addressing this issue.

  14. He further submitted that the Judge failed to take  into  account  the
      evidence of the appellant's cousin who stated that the  appellant  had
      never spoken about his sexuality to anyone in Bangladesh.  His  cousin
      was 8 months' pregnant at the time. The Judge erred in relation to her
      evidence by apparently dismissing the fact that she was  pregnant,  as
      "a justifiable reason" for not travelling from her home in East London
      to the hearing centre in Newport, South  Wales,  to  give  evidence  -
      [21].  Mr Lams submitted  that  on  its  own  this  might  not  be  so
      important. It is nevertheless another  unfair  point.  She  was  eight
      months' pregnant at the time. The hearing began  at  10am.  She  would
      have had to leave very early in the morning to undertake a  long  trip
      to South Wales. To state  that  this  was  "not  justifiable"  is,  he
      contended, "an unfair point."

  15. Mr Lams submitted that the approach to the evidence of  Mr  Ayres,  on
      the basis that he was not medically qualified, was flawed.  The  Judge
      stated that it is unlikely that someone without medical qualifications
      can speak authoritatively of another's  sexuality  based  on  limited,
      isolated and informal observations as he seeks to do. [27(e)].

  16. Moreover, the Judge was not even handed in this respect.  He  did  not
      apply the same cautious criteria to the  author  of  the  Home  Office
      refusal letter who, with no stated medical qualifications, and on  the
      strength of a single interview, made a highly  subjective  finding  on
      the issue of the appellant's sexuality, stating that: "the  fact  that
      you have shown little evidence of any developing self  awareness  with
      regard to your sexuality is considered to undermine your  credibility"
      (refusal letter, paragraph 30). The author also stated that there  was
      little evidence of introspection  and  self  awareness  regarding  his
      sexuality (refusal letter, paragraph 43).

  17. He submitted that the evidence of Mr Ayres  was  wrongly  given  short
      shrift. The Judge raised the  bar  too  high.  Mr  Ayres  was  in  the
      position to give meaningful evidence. It was wrong just to  write  off
      his evidence.

  18. He also submitted that the Judge failed to take into account the fact,
      as evidenced by Professor Menski's view, that it  was  plausible  from
      the appellant's background that there were strong cultural reasons for
      him not to reveal the nature of his claim.  At  paragraph  17  of  his
      report he stated that it is certainly plausible that  a  young  Muslim
      male from  Bangladesh  could  not  openly  discuss  and  disclose  his
      homosexual status and inclinations and would struggle with this.

  19. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response.
      He submitted that the Judge made adequate findings of  fact  and  gave
      adequate reasons for the adverse credibility  findings  set  out  from
      paragraph 27. The grounds amount to a disagreement with  the  findings
      made by the Judge.

  20. Mr Melvin submitted  that  regard  must  be  had  to  the  credibility
      findings "holistically". There were  numerous  findings,  not  in  any
      particular order.

  21. He referred to the decision in VHR (Unmeritorious grounds) [2014] UKUT
      367. The Tribunal there held that appeals should not be mounted on the
      basis of a litany of forensic criticisms of particular findings of the
      First-tier Tribunal whilst ignoring the basic  legal  test  which  the
      appellant has to meet.

  22. With regard to ground 1, he submitted that it is up to the Judge  whom
      he believes. Although an attendance note was  produced  prior  to  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  indicating  that  the  solicitors   had
      telephoned the Home Office seeking to arrange a further  interview  as
      the appellant was unwell, that note had not  been  placed  before  the
      Judge.

  23. The finding with regard to the Livewell letter was open to  the  Judge
      because he had rejected the evidence of the appellant, finding that he
      had exaggerated his claim.

  24. With regard to the Judge's approach to the evidence of his cousin,  he
      noted that it was the appellant who told her that he was  a  gay  man.
      This was accordingly second hand evidence.  She  did  not  attend  the
      hearing and therefore could not be tested.

  25. As to the evidence of  Mr  Ayres,  the  Judge  was  satisfied  it  was
      produced to bolster his claim. There was  no  other  evidence  of  his
      belonging to any other organisation. The finding was accordingly  open
      to the Judge.

  26. Mr Melvin also noted that the appellant had before then made  numerous
      applications.

  27. In reply Mr Lams submitted that there is no parallel between the facts
      of this case and VHR.

  28. The cultural issues bore upon the explanation for the  timing  of  the
      claim. That should have been considered. The Judge however ignored the
      cultural context. This does not constitute a  mere  disagreement  with
      the Judge's finding: The finding was  produced  following  a  material
      error.

  29. With regard to the Livewell assessment, this was not an ex-post  facto
      justification  relating  to  inconsistency.   There   was   indeed   a
      contemporaneous note recorded about  the  fact  that  the  interpreter
      should not be used. This is clearly set out in the  assessment  at  I7
      and I8. There was no reason to suppose that Livewell was  in  any  way
      biased. The letter from Livewell, dated 13 December 2016, followed  an
      assessment which took place on 29 November.

      Assessment

  30. The Judge found that the failure to attend his first interview damaged
      the appellant's credibility and showed that he had not maintained  the
      prosecution  of  his  claim  -  [27b].  The  Judge  did  not  in   the
      circumstances consider this to be a "minuscule point"  as  it  is  set
      against the background of the lateness  of  the  claim  in  the  first
      place.

  31. The Judge further stated  that  having  failed  to  attend  the  first
      appointment, the respondent was left wondering as to where he was  and
      why he had not attended.

  32. However, he was not merely encountered by chance at  his  house.  This
      was a targeted enforcement visit to his home at the  address  that  he
      had given to the respondent. He had never sought to abscond.

  33. The Judge considered that these matters affected  the  credibility  of
      his claim.

  34. However the Judge was required to consider the  evidence  as  a  whole
      before coming  to  such  an  adverse  conclusion.  In  particular,  as
      submitted by Mr Lams, the evidence was that  the  appellant  had  been
      prosecuting his claim. He had attended Livewell for an assessment. His
      assessment was completed over two meetings on account of  difficulties
      in obtaining a competent interpreter. The  organisation  provided  the
      mental health assessment to his GP on 13 December 2016. He had already
      produced an expert report from Professor Menski dated  18  June  2016.
      That report pre-dated the occasion that the  appellant  contacted  the
      asylum intake unit to  make  an  appointment  to  claim  asylum.  That
      contact occurred on 24 June 2016. He did not  attend  the  appointment
      which was arranged for 30 June 2016.

  35. Moreover, the appellant during his evidence informed the Tribunal that
      his solicitors did contact the respondent to explain that he was ill.

  36. Before making adverse credibility findings that the appellant was  not
      a genuine asylum seeker, the Judge should accordingly have  considered
      the amount of preparation that the appellant had  undertaken  at  that
      stage. As already noted  he  instructed  solicitors  and  had  made  a
      witness statement on 26 June 2016; an expert  was  instructed  in  the
      middle of June. Professor Menski wrote a report dated  18  June  2016.
      This evidence was not challenged and  was  part  of  the  Home  Office
      bundle. Moreover, the appellant was at home at his  address  which  he
      gave to the Home Office.

  37. The Judge had also before him the evidence from Livewell which pointed
      to  the  difficulties  that  the  organisation  experienced  with  the
      appellant with regard to interpretation. It  is  recorded  that  there
      were difficulties obtaining an  interpreter  to  provide  a  competent
      level of translation for the purpose of the assessment. The  appellant
      only spoke limited English. This  resulted  in  the  assessment  being
      completed over two meetings on account of the difficulty of  obtaining
      a competent interpreter.

  38. The Judge made a negative credibility finding  based  upon  the  tense
      that had been used as to whether he  would  suffer  discrimination  in
      Bangladesh, or whether he  had  suffered  discrimination.  That  issue
      should have been further explored before making  a  finding  that  the
      appellant had no issues in Bangladesh regarding his sexuality and that
      he was trying to exaggerate his claim when he saw Livewell [27c]. This
      might have been as a result of the appellant speaking himself or  that
      a substandard interpreter was being used when the statement was  made.
      The Judge however adopted an unwarranted scepticism, ignoring evidence
      relating  to  the  evident  translation  difficulties  identified   by
      Livewell.

  39. The Judge moreover did not have proper regard to the inconvenience and
      potential discomfort that his  eight  months'  pregnant  cousin  would
      suffer travelling from her home in East London to the  hearing  centre
      in Newport to give evidence.

  40. The Judge also failed to consider strong cultural  reasons  identified
      by Professor Menski relating to the appellant's reluctance  openly  to
      discuss and disclose his homosexual status.

  41. Moreover, he erred in dismissing the evidence of Mr  Ayers  simply  on
      the basis that he was not medically qualified, without considering the
      evidence of his  attending  a  gay  pub  with  the  appellant  on  two
      occasions as well as attendances at Pride. Mr Ayers gave  reasons  for
      his conclusion that he had no doubt that the appellant is a gay man.

  42. There is some force in Mr Lams' submission  that  the  Judge  did  not
      apply the same strict approach when assessing Mr Ayre's  evidence,  to
      the assessment of the author of the refusal  letter  who  made  highly
      subjective findings relating to the appellant's sexuality.

  43. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      involved the making of material errors on a point of law. I set  aside
      the decision.

  44. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision  to
      be made. The extent of judicial fact finding is extensive. There  will
      be a complete re-hearing with no findings preserved.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. The decision is set aside and is remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal, Newport, for a  fresh  decision  to  be  made
      before another Judge.


      No anonymity direction made.














      Signed                             Date 4 October 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

