
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00541/2019



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 June 2019                      |On 03 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                             Mr Isthiak Hussain
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mustafa, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who made  an  application  for
    international protection. It was refused and following a  hearing,  and
    in a decision promulgated on 18 March 2019,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal S J Clarke dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 2. He sought permission to appeal. It was initially refused but a  renewed
    application came before Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 22  May  2019.
    He granted it on the following basis: -

         "I believe that the first 9 paragraphs of  the  unnecessarily  long
         application fail to identify any properly arguable error of law  on
         the part of the First Tier Tribunal Judge, but I am concerned  that
         the judge may have erred in what he said about the Rule  35  report
         and on that and subsequent issues, I grant permission."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset Mr Mustafa accepted that at the core of  his  application
    was the issue of the Rule 35 report which was not before the  Judge  at
    the First-tier Tribunal. The impact of that not  being  considered  was
    such, alongside the Judge's approach to Section 8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004  was  to  render  his
    credibility findings unsafe. He accepted that the  Appellant  had  been
    represented at the hearing, that there was no  application  to  adjourn
    and that it was only after the hearing that the Rule 35 report had been
    made available. It ought, he submitted, to  have  been  considered.  He
    wished me to consider an application under Rule 15 (2A) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in relation to the Rule 35 report
    and other material.

 5. Ms Cunha urged me to accept that the issue of the Rule  15  application
    only came into play were I to find that the Judge's decision  contained
    a material error of law. She submitted that it  did  not.  This  is  an
    appeal that has gone through a case management  review  hearing,  there
    was opportunity at the substantive hearing to seek an adjournment which
    was not taken, and the Judge was entitled to  come  to  the  conclusion
    that he did in paragraph 11 of his decision.

 6. I find that the Judge has  not  materially  erred  as  asserted  by  Mr
    Mustafa. Paragraph 11 of his decision sets  out  his  approach  to  the
    issue in relation to the medical report. It states: -

         "11. The Appellant claims he was injured in the  leg,  and  fingers
         and a letter from a hospital has been  provided.  However,  in  the
         absence of any medical report from the UK  confirming  there  is  a
         scar from the claimed deep cut in his thigh I place  little  weight
         upon it. The Appellant said he  thought  the  Rule  35  report  was
         submitted after his asylum interview to  try  and  explain  why  he
         failed to provide it in his own bundle, but I do  not  accept  this
         explanation because if it is not  in  the  Respondent's  bundle  it
         could have been provided in a supplementary Appellant's bundle  and
         no application was raised at the  start  of  the  hearing  for  the
         report."

 7. The Judge was faced with no application to adjourn. He  approached  the
    issue of the absence of the Rule 35 report correctly,  considering  the
    submission by the Appellant for its absence. He was entitled to proceed
    on the basis that he did.

 8. As Mr Mustafa accepted, if I were  to  find  that  the  Judge  had  not
    materially erred in his approach to the Rule 35 report the appeal would
    fail. That is the position. The Appellant's remedy, given that there is
    no material error of law, is to make further submissions  to  the  Home
    Office supported by any fresh evidence.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                                    Date: 1 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

