
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA001782015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 8th June 2016                    |On 9th June 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     ARW
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a female national of Nigeria born in 1991. She  appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Heynes)[1]  to
    dismiss her appeal against a decision to deport her.

 2. The Appellant  faces  deportation  as  a  'foreign  criminal'.  She  is
    designated as such because on the 26th August 2014 she was convicted at
    Liverpool Crown Court of assisting  unlawful  immigration  into  an  EU
    member state for which she was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.  On
    appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant  sought  to  resist
    deportation on protection grounds. She  stated  that  she  had  a  well
    founded fear of persecution in Nigeria on grounds of her membership  of
    two particular social groups: as a bisexual/gay  woman  she  will  face
    serious harm as result of societal prejudice against homosexuals and as
    a woman she would be at risk of FGM.

 3. The Respondent refused the protection claim on  the  grounds  that  the
    Appellant was not believed.

 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant asked
    for an adjournment. She said that there were a number of witnesses that
    she would like to call but none could arrange  to  attend  the  hearing
    because of the short notice; one was unwell. There is a  dispute  about
    how many potential witnesses  there  were,  but  since  the  record  of
    proceedings mentions four I proceed on that basis.  In respect  of  one
    of these witnesses the First-tier Tribunal was handed an email  from  a
    woman in London [VL] who said that she had been unwell for a  few  days
    and would not be able to make the journey to  Manchester.  VL,  and  at
    least one other of  the  potential  witnesses,  were  being  called  to
    testify to the matter of the Appellant's sexuality. It was claimed that
    these were both women with whom she  had  had  sexual  relations.   The
    other two potential witnesses mentioned in the determination  were  the
    Appellant' sisters.  The Home Office Presenting Officer objected to the
    adjournment request on the grounds  that  as  the  witnesses  were  all
    friends or relatives of the Appellant they would not be reliable.   The
    First-tier Tribunal refused the adjournment. It took into  account  the
    fact that there would be a delay in determining the appeal  because  of
    the "parlous state of listing" and the fact that the email from VL  did
    not indicate when if at all she would  be  able  to  attend  a  further
    hearing. There was no communication at all from the  other  woman.   At
    paragraph 19 the determination concludes

         "Taking all of the above into account, I concluded that the  appeal
         could be justly heard without granting an adjournment  and  refused
         the application".

 5. The Tribunal proceeded to hear the evidence of the Appellant and having
    done  so  dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  she  had  not
    demonstrated that she was either gay or at risk of FGM.

    Error of Law

 6. Mr Nicholson drafted  the  grounds  of  appeal.  It  is  submitted,  in
    essence, that the Tribunal erred in its decision not to  adjourn.  That
    submission is advanced on two grounds.

 7. Firstly, as Judge Froom pointed out in granting  permission,  the  test
    applied by the Tribunal at paragraph 19  of  the  determination  is  no
    longer that to be applied when considering whether a hearing should  be
    adjourned.  The test set  out  at  paragraph  19  appears  to  be  that
    contained  at  rule  21(2)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005. The current procedure rules  are  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014.  These do not stipulate that a Tribunal must, before deciding  to
    adjourn, be  satisfied  that  the  case  "cannot  otherwise  be  justly
    determined".  There is instead the more nebulous  guidance  at  rule  2
    under the heading "Overriding objective and parties' obligation to  co-
    operate  with  the  Tribunal".   This  explains  that  the   overriding
    objective is to deal with cases fairly and  justly.  Five  factors  are
    identified - in the form of a non-exhaustive  list  -  which  might  be
    pertinent to that objective.  One of those is delay, a matter expressly
    considered by the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  others  include  "seeking
    flexibility" and ensuring that parties are able to  participate  fully.
    These are not matters which appear to have been addressed.

 8. The second limb of Mr Nicholson's submissions was that in  all  of  the
    circumstances it  was  manifestly  unjust  for  the  Tribunal  to  have
    proceeded in the absence of the witnesses. He drew my attention to  the
    chronology. On the 24th June 2015 there  was  a  CMR.    The  direction
    given by Judge Davies on that occasion was that there were to  be  five
    witnesses called and the case was therefore to be listed  for  1  whole
    day.  Mr Nicholson is instructed that the representative  who  attended
    the CMR took notes to the effect that the case would not be listed  for
    some months because of the delays in listing then being experienced  in
    the First-tier Tribunal. As it happens a notice of hearing was sent out
    two days later. It was received by the Appellant's  solicitors  on  the
    1st July 2015 and the hearing date fixed for  the  9th  July  2015.  An
    application was made for the matter to be adjourned on the grounds that
    with such short notice the appeal could not be properly  prepared.  The
    application  was  refused  on  the  grounds  that  there  had  been  no
    application for an adjournment at the CMR. As Mr Nicholson points  out,
    that was hardly surprising given that the representative was  given  to
    understand that it would be some months before a date could be set.  In
    any event, it was the Appellant' case before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that were numerous witnesses who wanted to give evidence going  to  the
    central matter in issue and that they  were  prevented  from  doing  so
    because of the short order of listing and the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal not to adjourn.

 9. I have had regard to the Presidential guidance in Ngaigwe (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). Whilst a decision to  adjourn  might
    involve consideration of a multitude of factors, the  central  question
    to be asked is whether or not a refusal to do so would deprive a  party
    of their right to a  fair  hearing.  I  am  satisfied,  given  all  the
    circumstances, that in this case that is precisely what  happened.   Mr
    Harrison was able to confirm that the Respondent had  known  since  the
    CMR that there were to be numerous witnesses  and  that  the  case  was
    supposed to be listed for a whole day: he also confirmed that as far as
    the Respondent was concerned this would be at a  date  sufficiently  in
    the future to  enable  the  SSHD  to  conduct  her  customary  'witness
    checks'. As it was none of that had been done.   The matter was  listed
    just two weeks after the CMR with a matter of days notice.  Instead  of
    the full day time slot agreed at the CMR it was only allocated 3 hours.
     I am satisfied that in the circumstances the First-tier Tribunal erred
    in proceeding on the day. A central matter in issue was the Appellant's
    claimed sexuality and the absent witnesses all wanted to speak to  that
    issue.  The decision is therefore flawed for procedural unfairness  and
    the matter is set aside.

10. In the circumstances the parties agreed that the appeal must  be  heard
    afresh and in the First-tier Tribunal.

    Decisions

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.

12. The Appellant having been deprived of a  fair  hearing  the  matter  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

13. Having regard to the nature  of  the  evidence  I  make  the  following
    direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders:

         "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify  the  Appellant.  This  direction  applies  to,
         amongst others, all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings"


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               8th June 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Determination promulgated 15th July 2015

