


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/00697/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On : 17 November 2017                 |         On : 28 November 2017       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     PB
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 31 May  1963.  She  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Blake dismissing her appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision of 24 July 2015 to refuse her  protection  and  human  rights
      claim and to maintain  an  earlier  deportation  order  signed  on  16
      December 1996.

   2. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 27 September 1994 as
      a visitor with six months leave to enter. In  December  1994  she  was
      arrested by police for drugs offences.  On  8  January  1996  she  was
      convicted of four counts of supplying a controlled Class  A  drug  and
      was  sentenced  to  four  years'  imprisonment.  She  did  not  oppose
      deportation and on 16 December 1996 a  deportation  order  was  signed
      against her and she was deported to Jamaica on 26 March 1997.


   3. The appellant then returned to the UK, she claims in June 1997,  in  a
      different identity, as DS. On 2 November 2001 she claimed asylum.  Her
      claim was refused and her appeal against that decision  was  dismissed
      on 30 October 2003. She became appeal rights exhausted on 13  November
      2003.

   4. On 3 May 2005 the appellant was convicted of conspiracy  to  supply  a
      controlled drug and was  sentenced  to  42  months'  imprisonment  and
      recommended for deportation. Arrangements were made  for  her  removal
      from the UK on 15 September 2006, but  the  removal  was  deferred  on
      receipt of further representations which were subsequently refused  on
      25 September 2006. On  3  October  2006  the  appellant  made  further
      submissions in which she claimed to fear  return  to  Jamaica.  On  16
      February  2009  she  was  issued  with  a  notice  of  liability   for
      deportation.


   5. On 24 July 2012 the appellant  was  convicted  of  supplying  Class  A
      controlled  drug  and  was  sentenced  to   5   years'   imprisonment,
      subsequently varied on 5 November 2013 to 40 months' imprisonment.  On
      15 April 2013 the appellant was issued with a notice of liability  for
      deportation which contained a section 72 warning, inviting her to make
      representations in response to the presumption under section 72(2)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration Act 2002 that she constituted a danger to
      the community of the UK. A further notice of liability for deportation
      was issued on 26 November 2013. The appellant  was  interviewed  about
      her protection claim and on 24 July 2015 a decision was made to refuse
      her protection and human rights claim and to maintain the  deportation
      order.


   6. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was  heard
      in the First-tier Tribunal on 6 July  2017  and  was  dismissed  in  a
      decision promulgated on 30 August 2017.


   7. Permission to appeal that  decision  was  granted  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on limited grounds and in the Upper Tribunal on further,  but
      also limited, grounds.

The Appellant's Protection and Human Rights Claim

   8. The appellant's claim, as set out in the decision letter  of  24  July
      2015, can be summarised as follows. She has four children in  the  UK:
      M, born in Jamaica on 6 May 1987, who has lived in the UK since  1997;
      N, born in Jamaica on 5 October 1993 who entered the UK  in  2002;  K,
      born in the UK on 13 April 1998, a British citizen; and O, born in the
      UK on 26 October 1999, who has ILR.  A  fifth  son,  KN,  born  on  23
      December 1981, died in September 2002. Her daughter lives in USA.  She
      has five grandchildren in the UK. Her son  O  has  special  needs  and
      requires additional care. Her partner KG, a Jamaican national, is  the
      father of O and has refugee status in the UK.

   9. The appellant claims that she left Jamaica because  of  the  political
      conflict there. She lived in a PNP area and voted PNP although she was
      not actively involved. She was attacked  by  Labour  supporters  at  a
      party in 1995. She left Jamaica as she feared for her life and came to
      the UK in September 1994. After being deported from the  UK  in  March
      1997 she left Jamaica and returned to the  UK  in  June  1997  as  the
      situation in Jamaica had not changed.


  10. In 2000 or 2002 her son KN's father, MN, was killed in  Jamaica  by  a
      gangster named KM, because he was a PNP  supporter.  On  19  September
      2002 her son KN was killed in the UK. He was kidnapped at gunpoint and
      shot. The people involved were arrested and  received  lengthy  prison
      sentences but were later released due to problems with the  witnesses'
      testimony. The appellant was not sure if the same people killed KN  as
      well as his father  MN.  In  2000/2002  the  appellant's  friend  SP's
      boyfriend J was killed at a nightclub by a man named  D.  She  and  SP
      contacted the police and showed them a video  from  the  club.  D  was
      arrested but escaped to Jamaica after being granted bail.  J's  mother
      had problems in Jamaica when she took J's body back there and she  was
      granted asylum on return to the UK. D knows that the appellant and  SP
      informed on him.


  11. The appellant's partner, KG, was shot in 2004 in a car park in Hackney
      by three gunmen when he was in a car with two children. He was shot in
      the face and one child was shot in the leg. He was subject to attempts
      to make him drop the charges and people came to their house. He  spoke
      to the police about it and had to have a panic button installed in the
      house due to the risk. The three gunmen were arrested and  imprisoned.
      One now lives in Jamaica and the other two  will  be  returning  there
      once completing their sentences.


  12. The appellant claims to fear the people  who  shot  her  son  and  his
      father, as well as the people who shot her partner.  She  had  already
      received threats from them and  they  would  come  after  her  if  she
      returned to Jamaica. She could not live safely in any part of Jamaica.
      She  also  feared  ill  treatment  as  an  informer  to   the   London
      Metropolitan Police due to her perceived  political  opinion  and  her
      friendship with other informants.


  13. In addition the appellant claimed to have had  a  sexual  relationship
      with MB who provided information to the police in 2006  about  a  high
      profile individual who was sentenced to 40  years'  imprisonment.  She
      was seen by this person at MB's house several times and  would  be  at
      risk of revenge attacks in Jamaica. She  would  also  be  at  risk  in
      Jamaica as a single woman.


  14.  The respondent, in refusing  the  appellant's  protection  and  human
      rights claim, concluded that she had failed to rebut  the  presumption
      in section 72(2) of the 2002  Act  and,  in  accordance  with  section
      72(9)(b), certified that the presumption  therefore  applied  to  her.
      With regard to the appellant's protection claim the  respondent  noted
      that the appellant had not been personally involved with the  PNP  and
      that the attack by Labour supporters was random. It was not considered
      that she was of any interest to the Labour Party or to anyone else  in
      Jamaica. There was no evidence to  show  that  the  appellant's  son's
      father MN was killed as a result of any political affiliation  and  no
      reason to conclude that she was at risk  because  of  her  association
      with MN. As for the appellant's fear of reprisals  from  gang  members
      due to her association with KG who gave evidence to  the  police,  the
      respondent did not accept that she received  a  sustained  pattern  of
      threats and considered her evidence to be  unclear  as  to  where  the
      threats had come from and if the individuals were actually in Jamaica.
      It was therefore not accepted that she was at risk in Jamaica on  that
      basis. As to the claimed risk of reprisal  for  assisting  the  police
      together with SP after the killing of her partner  J,  the  respondent
      had regard to the adverse credibility findings made by the Tribunal in
      the appellant's previous appeal in 2003 in that regard  and  concluded
      that she would be at no risk on return to Jamaica. With regard to  the
      claimed risk from the men  who  killed  her  son  KN,  the  respondent
      accepted that KN was killed in 2002 in the UK, but considered that the
      appellant's claim to be at risk herself was speculative and  concluded
      that she was not at risk on that basis. As to the appellant's claim to
      be at risk due to her association with MB,  a  police  informer,  with
      whom she had a sexual relationship, the respondent considered that she
      had failed to show that there was any adverse interest in her and  did
      not consider her to be at risk on that  basis.  The  respondent  noted
      that the appellant had not claimed to be at risk as a  result  of  her
      relationship with MB and did not accept that she was gay or  would  be
      perceived as gay in Jamaica. The respondent accordingly concluded that
      the appellant would not be at risk on return to Jamaica. It was  noted
      that she  was  excluded  from  humanitarian  protection.  It  was  not
      considered that her medical issues gave rise to an Article 3 claim.

  15. With regard to Article 8, the respondent  relied  on  the  appellant's
      previous four year sentence in concluding that she could  not  benefit
      from the provisions in paragraph  399  and  399A  of  the  immigration
      rules. The respondent considered the appellant's two children who were
      under the age of 18 years, K and O. It was accepted  that  she  had  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship with K, a British citizen, but  it
      was not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for K to live with  her
      in Jamaica or to remain in the UK without her. It  was  also  accepted
      that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  O
      but it was not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for  O  to  live
      with the appellant in Jamaica or to remain in the UK without her.  The
      respondent accepted that the appellant was in a genuine and subsisting
      relationship with her partner KG but did not accept that it  would  be
      unduly harsh for him to live in Jamaica or to remain in the UK without
      her. As for paragraph 399A, the respondent did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant had been lawfully resident in the UK for most  of  her  life
      and did not accept that she was socially and culturally integrated  in
      the UK or that there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
      integration in Jamaica. The respondent did not accept that there  were
      very compelling circumstances outweighing the public interest  in  the
      appellant's  deportation  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  398   and
      concluded that her deportation would not breach Article 8.

  16. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake on
      6 July 2017. The judge addressed the section 72 certification first of
      all. He noted the appellant's reliance upon the OASys assessment and a
      forensic psychologist's report concluding that  she  presented  a  low
      risk of re-offending, but considered that she had nevertheless  failed
      to rebut the presumption against her and upheld the  certificate.  The
      judge went on to  consider  risk  on  return.  He  did  not  find  the
      appellant to be a  credible  witness.  He  did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant would be at risk in Jamaica in relation to her connection to
      MN or KN and he relied on the adverse findings made in the appellant's
      previous appeal in regard to her connection to SP and  the  murder  of
      SP's boyfriend J. With regard to the appellant's connection to MB, the
      judge did not accept that she was involved in  a  sexual  relationship
      with MB and noted various inconsistencies between the evidence of  the
      appellant and that of MB. He did not accept that the  appellant  would
      be at risk due to her relationship to MB. The  judge  referred  to  an
      expert report produced before him, from Anthony Harriott PhD Professor
      of Political Sociology, but accorded it little weight as  it  did  not
      take account of the credibility  issues  arising  in  the  appellant's
      claim. The judge did not accept that the appellant's deportation would
      breach Article 3 owing to her medical condition. As for Article 8, the
      judge noted that paragraphs 399 and 399A did not apply, owing  to  the
      four year sentence of imprisonment in 1996. He did not  find  that  it
      would be unduly harsh for the appellant's  partner  or  family  to  be
      separated from her if she were removed from the UK and found  no  very
      compelling circumstances over and above those in  paragraphs  399  and
      399A. He dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

  17. The appellant then sought permission to appeal the judge's decision on
      six grounds: ground one was that the judge had erred in  his  approach
      to the expert evidence and had not engaged  with  the  expert  report;
      ground two was that the judge had erred in his assessment of  risk  on
      return, failing to give sufficient weight to the OASys report and  the
      forensic psychologist's report; ground three was that  the  judge  had
      failed to give adequate reasons for his adverse credibility  findings;
      ground four was that the judge erred by failing to take  into  account
      material considerations when assessing risk on return; ground five was
      that the judge  had  failed  to  apply  the  correct  test  under  the
      immigration rules and that the reliance  on  the  four  year  sentence
      which preceded the appellant's deportation was an  abuse  of  process;
      and ground six was that the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for
      concluding that there no very  compelling  circumstances  outside  the
      immigration rules.


  18. Permission was granted in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to
      grounds  2  and  3  only.  The  Upper  Tribunal  subsequently  granted
      permission on grounds 1, 4 and 6, given that they were all  tied  into
      the judge's findings on credibility, which  was  the  subject  of  the
      grant of permission by the First-tier Tribunal. Permission was refused
      by both Tribunals on the fifth ground.

Appeal Hearing

  19. At the hearing both parties made submissions before me.

  20. Ms Chapman submitted, with regard to the first ground, that the author
      of the expert report was well-qualified to provide such a report given
      his connections  with  Operation  Trident  in  the  UK  and  Operation
      Kingfisher in Jamaica. The expert noted that all the elements  of  the
      appellant's claim and the threats she received came back to  the  same
      organisation, the British Link Up Crew (BLUC), to which he referred at
      paragraph 6 of his report. Ms Chapman submitted that the judge  failed
      to give weight to the expert report and erred by failing to accept the
      expert's conclusions as to the risks to the appellant,  rejecting  the
      report solely because the expert said that he  was  unable  to  assist
      with the inconsistencies in the appellant's account relating  to  SP's
      boyfriend. With regard to the second ground, it was not  open  to  the
      judge to reach a different conclusion to the  forensic  psychologist's
      report and to the OASys report in regard to the risk of  re-offending,
      when those reports looked to  the  future  whilst  the  judge  wrongly
      relied on the appellant's past offending. Ms  Chapman  relied  on  the
      case of Mugwagwa (s.72 -  applying  statutory  presumptions)  Zimbabwe
      [2011] UKUT 00338 in submitting that the presumption in section  72(2)
      was rebutted by the OASys report and said that the judge had failed to
      deal with that decision. As to the third ground, the judge, in  making
      his adverse credibility findings, had failed to particularise how  the
      appellant was vague and inconsistent, had erred by  placing  too  much
      weight on the appellant's conduct and had failed to recognise that the
      evidence was mostly based upon established facts. With regard  to  the
      fourth ground, Ms Chapman submitted that the judge had failed to  take
      account of material considerations, as he had dealt inadequately  with
      the expert report of Professor Harriett, he had made a mistake of fact
      by stating that the appellant was not known to KG's attackers when her
      evidence was that she was, and he had failed to consider the  risk  to
      the appellant as a result of her association with MB. As to the  sixth
      ground the judge had failed to consider  the  best  interests  of  the
      appellant's youngest son who was a minor at the  time,  he  failed  to
      consider the appellant's relationship with her son K and he had failed
      adequately to deal with the social worker's report.

  21. Mr Melvin, in response, submitted that the judge had dealt  adequately
      with the expert report, that the judge had been entitled  to  conclude
      as he did with regard to the risk of reoffending, that there had  been
      a full credibility  assessment  by  the  judge,  that  the  judge  had
      considered all  material  matters  and  that  the  judge  had  reached
      sustainable conclusions on Article 8.

Consideration and findings

  22. Having carefully considered the submissions of both parties  it  seems
      to me that the grounds fail to establish that there were any errors of
      law in the judge's decision.

  23. Permission was granted on  essentially  two  main  bases,  firstly  in
      regard to the section 72 certification and secondly in regard  to  the
      judge's credibility findings. Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic made it clear
      in her decision that  she  was  granting  permission  on  the  further
      grounds, other than ground 5, on the basis that they were all tied  in
      with the findings on credibility.


  24. I turn first of  all  to  the  judge's  findings  on  the  section  72
      certification which the grounds challenge as having  given  inadequate
      weight to the OASys report and forensic psychologist's report.  Whilst
      the appellant relied on the case of Mugwagwa in so far as it was  said
      that the OASys report rebutted the presumption in section  72(2)  that
      she was a danger to the community, I agree with Mr Melvin's submission
      that that finding, as found at [36] of the decision, was quite clearly
      specific on its facts and would otherwise imply that an  OASys  report
      would always have to be accepted at  face  value.  Indeed  Ms  Chapman
      accepted that there was force in such an argument. I note further that
      the Upper Tribunal in Vasconcelos (risk- rehabilitation)  [2013]  UKUT
      00378 made it clear, albeit in an  EEA  case,  that  it  was  for  the
      Tribunal to consider such reports but was not bound by them and had to
      make its own assessment. It was Ms Chapman's submission that the judge
      nevertheless failed  to  give  cogent  reasons  for  reaching  a  view
      contrary to that in the OASys report and the  forensic  psychologist's
      report. However I do not consider that to be the case  and  note  that
      the judge provided detailed and cogent reasons, at [177] to [201], for
      according the limited weight that he did to those reports.  The  judge
      was entitled to have regard to the fact that  the  appellant  had  re-
      offended despite a previous OASys report assessing her as presenting a
      low-risk of re-offending and he was also entitled to take  account  of
      the various other factors which  he  set  out  from  [182]  to  [199].
      Accordingly I find no error of law in the judge's  conclusion  on  the
      section 72 certification.

  25. With regard to the grounds challenging the  judge's  approach  to  the
      expert report, it is clear that the  reason  the  judge  accorded  the
      limited weight that he did to the expert report was  that  the  report
      was  based  upon  an  assumption  that  the  appellant's  account  was
      reliable, whereas the judge found that it was not. It was Ms Chapman's
      submission that most of the issues in the appellant's claim were  fact
      based and proven by the news reports which had been produced and  that
      the expert properly assessed risk on return  in  the  light  of  those
      unchallenged facts and incidents. However the assessment by the expert
      of the risks to the appellant in Jamaica was plainly  based  upon  her
      account  of  the  threats  she  had  received  following  the  various
      incidents, the links that she had to the  various  incidents  and  her
      assessment of the risk she faced, as can  be  seen  in  particular  at
      [4.10], [4.12],  [4.14]  and  [4.18]  of  the  expert  report  and  in
      particular upon her claim to have cooperated with law enforcement  and
      the cooperation of her close associates with law enforcement, as  made
      clear at [8.01]. It was on that basis, and on the basis that the judge
      did not accept the appellant's account in  regard  to  those  matters,
      that he found himself unable to place weight upon the  expert  report.
      It seems to me that there was no error of law  in  such  an  approach,
      provided of course that the adverse credibility findings reached  were
      themselves not the subject of any errors of law.


  26. I turn, therefore, to the challenge to the judge's adverse credibility
      findings. I do not agree with the assertion in the  grounds  that  the
      judge failed to give adequate reasons for his findings. Neither  do  I
      accept that the judge's adverse findings were mostly  based  upon  the
      appellant's conduct at the hearing, although it is plain that that was
      a matter which he took into account when  assessing  credibility.  The
      judge was entitled to consider that the appellant's failure to take  a
      serious approach to the proceedings was relevant to his assessment  of
      her reliability as a witness, but it is clear that  that  was  in  any
      event only one of various reasons identified by the judge as adversely
      affecting her credibility. The appellant's conduct in returning to the
      UK in breach of her deportation order was plainly a  matter  that  the
      judge took into account, as he was entitled to do, when assessing  her
      reliability. In addition the judge identified various  inconsistencies
      and discrepancies in the appellant's evidence.


  27. At [214] to  [216]  the  judge  referred  to  inconsistencies  in  the
      appellant's account of  the  murder  of  her  former  partner  MN  and
      concluded that she had failed to show that she was  at  risk  on  that
      basis. At [217] to [222], when considering the  appellant's  claim  in
      regard to the murder of her son, the judge noted her evidence that she
      had not received any direct threats and that she was speculating as to
      who had killed her son and his father and concluded that she would not
      be at risk on that basis. It is perhaps relevant to note, as an aside,
      that the appellant made no claim to be at risk  as  a  result  of  the
      killing of her son and his father  when  she  presented  her  previous
      asylum appeal despite the fact that the events pre-dated  the  appeal.
      In any event it seems to me that the judge was  entitled  to  conclude
      that there was no credible basis for the appellant's claim  to  be  at
      risk as a result of the murder of her former partner and son and  that
      adequate reasons were provided for concluding as such.


  28. The judge then went on to refer to the adverse findings  made  by  the
      Tribunal in the appellant's previous appeal in regard to her claim  to
      be at risk as a police informer in relation  to  the  murder  of  SP's
      boyfriend. He considered the fact that SP's appeal had been successful
      but gave proper reasons for concluding that that did not undermine the
      adverse findings made about the appellant in her own  appeal.  Indeed,
      the decision in SP's appeal made no mention of the appellant  and,  on
      the contrary, suggested that  it  was  a  different  friend,  not  the
      appellant, who provided information to the police  together  with  SP.
      Accordingly  the  judge  was  entitled  to  make  adverse  credibility
      findings against the appellant arising from that part of her claim and
      provided full and proper reasons for so doing.


  29. At [233] and [234] the judge provided reasons why  he  concluded  that
      there was no credible evidence of  the  appellant  being  at  risk  in
      relation to the incident  in  which  her  partner  KG  was  shot.  The
      original  grounds  assert  at  [8(ii)],  ground  4,  that  the   judge
      materially erred in fact at [233] of his decision when he found  there
      to be no evidence that the appellant had met her partner's  attackers,
      given that the appellant's evidence and that of her partner  was  that
      she knew his  attackers.  However  the  judge,  at  [56],  was  merely
      recording the appellant's claim to have  known  the  identity  of  her
      partner's attackers. In his findings at  [233]  and  [234]  the  judge
      provided reasons why he did not accept that the appellant had met  her
      partner's attackers or that she was known to them so as to  give  rise
      to any risk to her. In so doing her took account of  her  evidence  at
      her interview about the nature of the  threats  she  claimed  to  have
      received, as referred to at  paragraphs  47  and  48  of  the  refusal
      letter, and clearly did not accept from that  evidence  that  she  had
      received any direct threats or had any reason to believe that she  was
      at risk on that basis. It is relevant to note, referring back  to  the
      expert report of Professor Harriott, that the assessment  of  risk  in
      relation to that  matter,  at  [4.10],  was  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant's claim of threats was accepted.

  30. At [236] to [248] the judge considered the appellant's account of  her
      relationship with MB and provided  various  reasons  why  he  did  not
      accept that he had been  provided  with  a  credible  account  of  the
      relationship, noting inconsistencies in the evidence as  to  when  the
      relationship had begun, who knew of the relationship  and  where  they
      had met. At ground 4, [8(iii)] of the original grounds, it is asserted
      that the judge failed to consider whether the appellant's  association
      with MB, which he found to be non-sexual, would put her at  risk,  and
      he merely considered the risk  to  her  as  a  result  of  the  sexual
      relationship. However plainly that is not the case. The judge rejected
      the appellant's account of there being a sexual relationship  with  MB
      and found she would be at no risk in Jamaica on  that  basis,  but  he
      also found at [249] that the appellant would be  at  no  risk  on  the
      basis of a mere association with MB. Clearly the judge did not  accept
      that the appellant and MB were as close as claimed and it was on  that
      basis that he found that she would not be at risk  from  those  people
      from whom MB required protection. That was plainly a conclusion  which
      was entirely open to him on the evidence before him.

  31. For all of these reasons I find no  merit  in  the  challenge  in  the
      grounds to the judge's adverse credibility findings. Contrary  to  the
      assertion in the grounds the judge provided cogent reasons for  making
      the  adverse  findings  that  he  did,  based  upon  the   appellant's
      immigration history, her criminal history and history of  reoffending,
      her lack of engagement in the seriousness of her position  in  respect
      of her appeal, and  the  various  inconsistencies  identified  in  her
      evidence. He plainly had full regard to the appellant's background and
      her own claimed links to drug dealers and took all  of  those  matters
      into account. For the reasons fully and properly given the  judge  was
      entitled to conclude that the appellant had not  provided  a  credible
      account of being at risk on return to  Jamaica  and  was  entitled  to
      accord the expert report the weight that he did. I find  no  merit  in
      the grounds asserting otherwise.


  32. I turn finally to the last ground of appeal upon which permission  was
      granted, namely ground 6, which asserts that the judge failed to  give
      adequate  reasons  for  finding  there  to  be  no   very   compelling
      circumstances over and above those set out in paragraphs 399 and  399A
      of the immigration rules. It is relevant to note that  permission  was
      granted on this ground only  in  so  far  as  it  was  linked  to  the
      challenge to the judge's credibility findings. Given my conclusion  on
      the credibility challenges,  I  concur  entirely  with  Judge  Kelly's
      reasons for refusing permission in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  namely
      that  none  of  the  matters  mentioned  in  the  grounds   constitute
      compelling circumstances. In any event the judge clearly addressed all
      relevant matters. He had regard to the circumstances of  the  youngest
      child and provided cogent reasons as to why it was  not  unduly  harsh
      for him to remain in the UK with  his  father  in  the  event  of  the
      appellant's removal. The grounds  assert  that  the  judge  failed  to
      consider the evidence of how the  appellant's  son  K  would  cope  in
      Jamaica, but K was an adult and there was no question of him moving to
      Jamaica with the appellant. The judge had regard  to  the  independent
      social worker's report in considering the position of the  appellant's
      youngest child and her grandchildren. For the reasons given the  judge
      was perfectly entitled, given the appellant's immigration and criminal
      history, to conclude that there were no very compelling  circumstances
      and to reject her Article 8 claim.


  33. For all of these reasons I find  no  merit  in  the  grounds.  On  the
      evidence available, and for the reasons fully and properly given,  the
      judge was unarguably entitled to reach the conclusions that he did and
      to dismiss the appeal on the basis that he did.


  34. I find no errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.  I  uphold  the
      decision.

DECISION

  35. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for  anonymity.  I  continue  the
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  27 November
2017
