
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00355/2020 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 October 2020                 |On 28 October 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                 MURAT KURT

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou of Counsel instructed by
                    Montague Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Easterman  on
         30 June 2020 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Meah promulgated on 13 March 2020 following  a  hearing  at  Taylor
         House on 28 February 2020.

      2. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Turkey born on 6  May  1976.
         He  initially  entered  the  UK  illegally  in   March   2005   and
         subsequently claimed asylum with his wife. He claimed to have  been
         politically active and provided a detailed account  of  persecution
         and torture at the  hands  of  the  Turkish  authorities  and  also
         claimed that his family had suffered persecution.  His  application
         was refused on 7 April 2005 and  the  joint  appeals  against  that
         decision were dismissed by Judge Woodhouse on  18  July  2005.  The
         judge found that the appellant had  fabricated  his  entire  claim.
         Following the loss of his appeal the appellant absconded  and  when
         eventually apprehended he was removed from the UK in November 2008.
         However, he re-entered the UK illegally once again. He claims  this
         was in November 2015 but he did not contact the Home  Office  until
         June 2017. His submissions were  accepted  as  a  fresh  claim  but
         rejected on 6 December 2019.  The appellant  claimed  that  on  his
         return to Turkey he had been detained and  tortured  and  that  the
         persecution continued.

      3. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Meah  at  Taylor
         House. The appellant was the only witness; although his brother and
         cousin were present at the hearing, neither gave oral evidence.

      4. The judge had regard to the oral and documentary  evidence  and  to
         the previous Tribunal's decision. He found that the  appellant  was
         lacking in credibility, that  his  explanation  for  not  referring
         anywhere in his application or witness statement to being  tortured
         undermined the account, that his documents were unreliable and that
         although evidence could have  been  provided  by  his  brother  and
         cousin, it had not. He noted that the appellant had failed to claim
         asylum on arrival and had waited for a year and a half before doing
         so.  He considered that the appellant could safely return to Turkey
         and accordingly dismissed  the  appeal.  No  article  8  claim  was
         pursued.

      5. The appellant successfully sought permission to appeal and I  shall
         deal with his grounds below. In granting permission Judge Easterman
         expressed the view that the judge was entitled to  take  the  first
         determination as his starting point on credibility and was entitled
         to reach some of the conclusions that he did,  but  he  found  that
         ground 4 was arguable. He did  not  limit  argument  on  the  other
         grounds.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      6. The  matter  would  ordinarily  have  been  listed  for  a  hearing
         following the grant of permission but due to the Covid-19  pandemic
         and need to take precautions  against  its  spread,  this  did  not
         happen and instead directions were sent to the parties on 11 August
         2020. They were asked to present any objections to the matter being
         dealt with on the papers and to make any further submissions on the
         error of law issue within certain time limits.

      7. The Tribunal has received written submissions  from  the  appellant
         dated 25 August 2020 and from the respondent on 3  September  2020.
         No further response has been received from the  appellant  to  date
         although he had  the  opportunity  to  reply  to  the  respondent's
         submissions.  I now consider whether it is appropriate to determine
         the matter on the papers.

      8. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      9. I have had careful regard to all  the  evidence  before  me  before
         deciding how to proceed. I take the view that a full account of the
         facts are set out in those  papers,  that  the  arguments  for  and
         against the appellant have been clearly set out and that,  contrary
         to what  the  grounds  maintain,  the  issues  to  be  decided  are
         uncomplicated. It is insufficient for the appellant to  claim  that
         an oral hearing is necessary because there  is  a  history  to  the
         appeal and the judge should be appraised of the full facts  without
         explaining why those facts cannot be ascertained from  the  papers.
         The appellant has been afforded the opportunity to  participate  by
         way of submissions. It is unclear what else would  be  achieved  by
         his participation given that no oral evidence would be required  at
         this stage. I am satisfied that I am able to fairly and justly deal
         with this matter on the papers and now proceed to do so.

         Submissions

     10.  For  the  appellant,  Ms  Panagiotopoulou's  submissions   are   a
         reproduction of the six  grounds  of  appeal  put  forward  in  the
         application for permission to appeal and add nothing  further.  The
         first was that the judge failed to refer to country  guidance  when
         assessing credibility and the risk on return. The second  complaint
         is that the judge placed undue emphasis on the first  determination
         when he was dealing with events that had occurred since that  time.
         The third ground is that the judge gave inadequate  or  no  reasons
         for rejecting the claim that the appellant was a HDP member, failed
         to apply Tanveer Ahmed principles to the assessment of the evidence
         and applied a higher standard of proof. Fourthly, it is argued that
         the judge erred in holding that the  statements  of  the  witnesses
         were unsigned. It is maintained that the bundle of 24 February 2020
         contained signed copies. The fifth ground  argues  that  the  judge
         failed to give the appellant an opportunity to respond  to  a  'new
         issue', i.e. the delay in  claiming  asylum.   Finally,  the  sixth
         ground  argues  that  the  judge  placed  undue  emphasis  on   the
         appellant's answers without having regard  to  Chiver  (10758)  and
         allowing his conclusions on one aspect of the  claim  to  influence
         his findings on other aspects.

     11. Attached to the submissions is a statement from the  representative
         who attended the hearing and three copy letters. I shall deal  with
         these documents below.

     12. Mr Tufan, for the respondent, confirms receipt of  the  appellant's
         submissions. With respect to the  basis  on  which  permission  was
         granted (ground 4), he is unable to comment on whether or  not  the
         statements in the bundle to the Tribunal were  signed  but  submits
         that even if the judge was mistaken about this, this could  not  be
         material as the judge considered the evidence  in  detail  and  was
         entitled  to  find  that  the  grant  of  refugee  status  to   the
         appellant's brother and cousin had  not  been  shown  to  have  any
         relevance to his own claim given the absence of evidence as to  the
         basis of their claims.  Mr Tufan points out that the findings  with
         respect to the  statements  were  only  one  part  of  the  adverse
         credibility findings made and that the judge was entitled  to  have
         regard to the appellant's previous failed  application  and  appeal
         and the fact that he had not been found  a  witness  of  truth.  Mr
         Tufan submits that the appellant's claim to have been  tortured  in
         Turkey after his removal from the UK had  been  mentioned  for  the
         first time at the hearing and that the judge was entitled to reject
         it as credible. He submits that  the  judge  did  consider  Tanveer
         Ahmed principles. It is submitted that the judge was  not  required
         to  give  reasons  to  deal  with  every  argument  and  that   the
         attribution of weight was a matter for the judge. The  grounds  did
         not disclose any material errors in the determination.

     13. The appellant's representatives  have  not  taken  the  opportunity
         offered to them to reply to the respondent's submissions which were
         forwarded to them by email on 3 September 2020.

         Discussion and conclusions

     14. I have had regard to the history of the appellant's claims  and  to
         the previous and present determinations and all the other  material
         before the Tribunal. As I indicated earlier, there  is  nothing  in
         that history that requires an oral hearing as the appellant sought.
         The facts are well set out in the papers and I have considered them
         with care.

     15. Judge Easterman singled out ground 4 as the most meritorious and  I
         have examined the papers on the file with  respect  to  identifying
         the statements referred to by the judge. As stated in the  grounds,
         these are contained in the appellant's  bundle  dated  24  February
         2020 which was delivered by hand to  the  Tribunal  and  marked  as
         received on 26 February 2020. The appellant's statement of evidence
         appears at pp.1-4 and is signed but the  two  statements  from  his
         brother and cousin at 6-7 and 8-9 respectively are not. The grounds
         appear to refer to two bundles with a  supplementary  bundle  being
         served on 24 February 2020 but no details are given of the when  or
         how the first one was served. The bundle of 24 February 2020  which
         is the one referred  to  as  having  the  signed  statements,  only
         contains unsigned statements and nothing  on  the  front  sheet  or
         index refers to it as a supplementary bundle. This was  the  bundle
         the judge  had  and  he  was  entirely  correct  to  say  that  the
         statements from the appellant's brother and cousin were unsigned.

     16. I note that with the appellant's written  submissions  there  is  a
         statement from Mr Sandhu  who  represented  the  appellant  at  the
         hearing. He states that two copies of what appears to be  the  same
         bundle were served; one prior to the hearing and one on the date of
         the hearing. It is not specified whether the signed copies were  in
         one or both of the bundles and if in one, whether it was the bundle
         served at the hearing. If the latter is  the  case,  that  copy  is
         missing from the Tribunal file and I have not had sight of it.

     17. However, even if the second copy of the bundle had contained signed
         copies of the statements, I cannot see how they would have  altered
         the outcome of the appeal. As the judge noted, the  statements  are
         extremely brief, and provide no  detailed  information.  The  judge
         also noted that  both  the  appellant's  brother  and  cousin  were
         present at court but chose not to give oral evidence even when  the
         option was canvassed by the judge (at  38).  The  contents  of  the
         brief statements, even if signed, were thus untested and the  judge
         was entitled to find that there was limited evidence before him  of
         the family's claims. He also properly noted that the absence of any
         direct engagement with how their claims impacted upon the appellant
         was a matter raised in the decision letter and that  the  appellant
         had, therefore, been put on notice that such  evidence  would  have
         been helpful. No reasons have been given for why oral evidence  was
         not  called  and  there  has  been  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
         conclusion that the  claims  of  the  two  relatives  may  well  be
         entirely different to what the appellant had  claimed  in  his  own
         application (at 37).   I note that family members  also  failed  to
         give evidence at the previous hearing and that this was remarked on
         by the judge on that occasion at paragraph 84 of her  decision.  It
         should be noted also that the  limited  evidence  concerning  other
         relatives' asylum claims was just one of numerous adverse  findings
         made.

     18. The same ground further argues that the nature of the  claims  made
         by the appellant's brother and cousin was irrelevant and  that  the
         mere grant of refugee status to them was an additional  element  of
         risk for the appellant. The grounds do not clarify  on  what  basis
         this assertion is made and nor were any  submissions  made  on  the
         matter to the First-tier Tribunal Judge. The  risk  factors  in  IK
         (Returnees - Records -  IFA)  Turkey  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00312  are
         alluded to in the grounds but the grounds do not point to one which
         would cover this and, although A (Turkey)  CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00034
         considered an appellant's  family  connections  with  a  separatist
         organisation as a risk factor, Judge Meah could not  have  assessed
         such a risk without evidence of the nature of the  claims  made  by
         the appellant's relatives over and  above  the  sparse  information
         contained in their written statements.

     19. The complaint  that  the  judge  placed  "undue  emphasis"  on  the
         previous Tribunal's determination is not made out. Firstly, a judge
         is required to take an earlier determination as his starting point.
         Secondly, the grounds fail entirely to provide any examples of  the
         emphasis given by the judge to Judge Woodhouse's decision.  Looking
         at his determination it may  be  seen  that  he  properly  directed
         himself in accordance with the Devaseelan principles  and  set  out
         the previous judge's findings (at 19-21). There then  follows  some
         26 paragraphs of findings on the present claim before reference  is
         made (at 48-49) to  the  previous  adverse  findings.   I  fail  to
         discern any emphasis being placed  on  the  previous  findings  let
         alone undue emphasis and in the absence of  any  reference  in  the
         grounds to specific examples of this, I conclude that  this  ground
         has no merit either. It is unhelpful for representatives to present
         such sweeping statements without clarification and, indeed, without
         any justification.

     20. It is also argued that inadequate or no reasons were given for  the
         judge's rejection of the appellant's claim  to  be  a  HDP  member.
         That is not correct. First of all, a paragraph cannot  be  read  in
         isolation. The judge noted that the appellant had  previously  been
         found to have fabricated an asylum claim,  that  he  had  absconded
         after his appeal was dismissed, that although  he  had  claimed  to
         have been arrested, detained and tortured upon removal to Turkey he
         had made no mention of that at all when he  claimed  asylum  for  a
         second time, either in his interview or  his  statements  and  that
         this was raised for the first time  in  oral  evidence.  The  judge
         rejected the claim that his solicitors (who were still representing
         him) had advised him to only mention his claim of  torture  at  the
         hearing, noting that this would  have  been  poor  advice  from  an
         experienced firm of representatives and  that  had  this  been  the
         case, no evidence to confirm it had been  offered  even  though  it
         could easily have been adduced. The judge noted that the  appellant
         had been able to return to his home  and  live  there  without  any
         difficulties  or  reprisals.  The   judge   also   considered   the
         documentary evidence of membership with Tanveer Ahmed principles in
         mind, contrary to what the grounds claim,  but  found  them  to  be
         unreliable. The issues surrounding the documents, as set out in his
         determination, were also  matters  that  had  been  raised  in  the
         decision letter and so the appellant had had ample  opportunity  to
         try and resolve them. It was in this context that the  judge  found
         that the appellant's claim to be involved in Kurdish  activism  was
         not made out. Again, it  is  not  helpful  for  representatives  to
         cherry pick a single paragraph  from  the  several  which  set  out
         findings and to complain that the reasons therein  are  inadequate.
         Determinations must be read as a whole.

     21. The judge is also criticised for not considering the principles  in
         Chiver  when  considering  the  appellant's  answers  however   the
         appellant gave wholly unsatisfactory evidence. It  cannot  be  said
         that he was in parts credible when his  entire  claim  was  riddled
         with difficulties. Nor is it helpful to single out paragraphs 40-43
         when the  preceding  paragraphs  also  show  that  the  appellant's
         evidence was unbelievable.  His  claim  to  have  decided  only  to
         mention the incident of torture at the hearing is a  prime  example
         of the incredible evidence given. When he made his asylum claim, he
         could not have known that he would be refused or have a hearing and
         it is ludicrous to suggest that he did not disclose the crux of the
         claim to the Secretary of State at his  interview  because  he  was
         saving this for a judge.

     22. It is argued that the judge unfairly raised a new point; the  delay
         in the making of the  asylum  claim.  It  is  maintained  that  the
         appellant had claimed through his solicitors in 2015 and  that  had
         this point been raised at the hearing he could have clarified this.
         The appellant would have been aware from the  decision  letter  and
         the COHID sheet that the respondent had recorded the  date  of  the
         second asylum claim as 29 June 2017. It would not, therefore,  have
         been news to him that there was no record of any 2015  application.
         In any event, he was questioned about this at the hearing  (at  39-
         45) and the issue was referred to in the  respondent's  submissions
         at the hearing. The judge's Record of  Proceedings  note  that  the
         Presenting Officer even asked for any evidence that he had  claimed
         asylum in 2015 and that Mr Sandhu in re-examination  asked  further
         questions about the making of the claim. It would have been open to
         the appellant's representatives to seek an opportunity  to  provide
         any evidence the solicitors had of earlier correspondence with  the
         Home Office or to raise objections to the matter being  raised  but
         he did not do so.

     23. I note now that with the appellant's submissions, Mr Sandhu in  the
         statement I have referred to above, also maintains that contact was
         made with the Asylum Screening Unit on 25 November 2015. Copies  of
         correspondence from the solicitors chasing up the application  (but
         omitting the unique reference number they say was given to him) are
         also provided. These documents were not before the judge  and  were
         not provided with the grounds for permission to appeal however I am
         prepared to accept that they were sent. Plainly they did not  reach
         the right department of the Home Office as there is  no  record  of
         any application having been made prior to June 2017.

     24. I now  consider  whether  this  matter  renders  the  determination
         unsustainable. I cannot find that it does. The judge made reference
         to the  delay  in  the  making  of  an  asylum  claim  towards  the
         conclusion of his findings and it is the final reason he  gave  for
         rejecting the appellant's claim. It is plainly not a  determinative
         issue in itself and I cannot see how a different  conclusion  would
         have been reached, given all the other serious issues raised,  even
         if the judge had accepted that an earlier claim had been made.

     25. The appellant also argues that the judge did not assess  his  claim
         in the context of IK. It would have been preferable had  the  judge
         considered the country guidance but given that  the  appellant  was
         devoid of credibility and had also previously been  found  to  have
         relied on a bogus claim, it is difficult to see how a consideration
         of IK would have assisted. The discrepancies were  so  glaring  and
         difficulties so serious that the  appellant  could  not  have  been
         credibly found to fall within any of the IK risk categories  except
         for being Kurdish and plainly that alone is insufficient to merit a
         grant of asylum. It is noteworthy that  the  appellant  appears  to
         have left his  wife  behind  on  this  occasion  and  there  is  no
         suggestion that she or any other family member  have  come  to  any
         harm or that there have been any attempts  by  the  authorities  to
         find him. As someone without any political  profile,  he  would  be
         able to safely return to Turkey and rejoin his family.

     26. It follows that  I  find  that  the  judge  reached  a  sustainable
         decision and that his determination does not contain any errors  of
         law.

     27. No article 8 claim was pursued.

         Decision

     28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any errors
         of law and it is maintained. The appeal is dismissed.

         Anonymity

     29. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, I continue the anonymity order made by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge.

     30. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no  reports
         of these proceedings of  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This  direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings. I do so in order to  avoid  a  likelihood  of
         serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  content  of  the
         claim.



         Signed




         R. Keki?

         Upper Tribunal Judge




         Date: 26 October 2020




