
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00977/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined Under Rule 34             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 November 2020                   |On 12 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     DK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This is a paper  determination  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of  hearing  was  P  (paper  determination  that  is  not
provisional). A face to face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
practicable, and all issues could be determined on paper.

The documents that I was referred to  were  primarily  the  application  for
permission to appeal and the supporting documents, the contents of  which  I
have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Khawar promulgated on 24  March  2020  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant on the papers.  At [6], the judge recorded  that  the  matter
    was being considered on the papers at the request of the appellant, and
    that there had been no objection raised by the respondent.

 2. Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on the basis that  she
    had erroneously selected that she sought a paper  hearing,  that  those
    representing her had written to the tribunal to  withdraw  her  request
    for a paper hearing, and that the request  to  withdraw  the  erroneous
    notification had not been put before the judge, who then  proceeded  on
    the mistaken basis that the appellant  had  chosen  to  have  her  case
    determined on the papers.

 3. On 10 July 2020, I granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    in the following terms:

         "It is strongly arguable that the  proceedings  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal were procedurally unfair  in  that  the  Tribunal  was  on
         notice that the appellant had erroneously selected that she  wanted
         a paper hearing and had sought to withdraw  that  notification.   A
         fax confirmation, email and witness  statement  has  been  provided
         with the renewal application  which  demonstrates,  to  a  strongly
         arguable  extent,  that  the  FTT  had  been  given  the  necessary
         notification from the appellant, and erroneously failed to list the
         matter for an oral hearing in defiance of those clear instructions,
         thereby failing to trigger the process by which the appellant would
         be invited to provide a bundle of supporting materials.

         DIRECTIONS

         It is my preliminary view that the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Khawar did involve the making of an error of law  capable  of
         affecting the outcome, and that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal should be set aside,  the  appropriate  course  of  action
         being to remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         determination on all issues.

         Unless within ten working days of the  issue  of  these  directions
         there is any written objection to this course of action,  supported
         by cogent argument, the Upper Tribunal will  proceed  to  determine
         the appeal without an oral hearing and will remit it to the  First-
         tier Tribunal.

         In the absence of a timely response by a party, it will be presumed
         that it has no objection to the course of action proposed."

 4. The notice within which the above decision, observations and directions
    was contained was served on the parties on 17 September 2020.   Neither
    party responded to the directions, and  neither  has  objected  to  the
    appeal being resolved in the manner proposed.

 5. In light of the procedural deficiency outlined above, I  consider  that
    it is in the interests of justice, and consistent with  the  overriding
    objective, for me to  determine  this  matter  on  the  papers  without
    further ado.  For the reasons  given  when  indicating  my  preliminary
    view, I consider that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law such that it must be  set  aside,
    on procedural fairness grounds.  I set the decision aside and remit the
    appeal to a  different  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  no
    findings of fact preserved.

 6. I maintain the order for anonymity made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law.

I set the decision aside and remit the appeal to a different  judge  of  the
First-tier Tribunal, with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Stephen H Smith             Date 9 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


