
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00077/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th June 2019                     |On 27th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                    V V L
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Clarke, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Hussain promulgated on 27 March 2019 dismissing his protection claim
on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and human rights
grounds.

2.   The Appellant appealed on four grounds. The judge had mistakenly
concluded that the Formosa protests were non-political and his finding that
only those who threw stones or insulted or swore at officials were police
targets was irrational. Further, he had reversed the standard of proof in
assessing risk on return and applied the wrong standard of proof in
assessing credibility.

3.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 25
April 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had made a
mistake of fact because the expert evidence and CPIN said that the Formosa
protests were political and the judge found that they were not.  Permission
was granted on all grounds.


The Judge's Findings

4.   The judge made the following findings:

         "19. There is no evidence directly linking the Appellant to
             participation in the demonstration, save for an email at page
             33 of the Appellant's bundle purporting to come from a man
             called Long Ngoc Le. It is unclear whether this email was
             written from within the United Kingdom or elsewhere. In this
             email the author claims that the Appellant and he were both at
             the demonstration and relies on a photograph to confirm that
             fact. However, no such photograph is apparent in the
             Appellant's bundle. The provenance of the email is also
             unclear. Therefore, the email referred to on its own does not
             prove that the Appellant participated in the demonstration.


         ...


         21.  Whilst I do not find it inherently implausible that the
             Appellant could have escaped from the scene and would have
             chosen to come home at his first point of call it has not been
             explained how late in the evening, given the situation, he
             managed to make a 100 kilometre journey to his home.


22.  In paragraph 38 the Secretary of State claims that the police were
only interested in stone throwing demonstrators as well as those insulting
officials and swearing at them, and in paragraph 48 that only some high
profile activists of the demonstrations were ill-treated. The Appellant was
neither of those. The expert report does not specifically address these
issues but suggests that the Appellant will be treated as an opponent of
the regime which is not tolerated and therefore the subject of adverse
interest. I am unable to accept that as a proposition because the expert's
own report suggests that there were mass protests against a particular
institution which was admitted by them to have been responsible for causing
pollution. Any protest against that would have been specific to that issue
and would have a non-political dimension to it.  Whilst I can well
understand the authorities' interest in anyone involved in breaking the
laws such as causing public disorder, that every single person who
participated should be treated as an opponent of the regime simply makes no
sense.


             ...


         25.  Having looked at the totality of the evidence and in the light
             of the observations made above I have come to the conclusion
             that the Appellant has not satisfied me firstly that he was
             the subject of any adverse interest and secondly, which
             follows from my first finding, that he would on return be the
             subject of any adverse interest.


         26.  If I am wrong about that I find it unlikely that with the
             passage of some three years the authorities would still retain
             an interest in the Appellant in order to get to the bottom of
             who was involved in the demonstration. By the Appellant's own
             evidence one of the organisers that prompted him to attend was
             his local priest. The Appellant claimed that the priest was
             also the subject of a summons but failed to turn up. That the
             priest was in a position to have moved parish suggests that in
             the three years that have passed in between the authorities
             have not come after him.  It must therefore follow firstly
             that the authorities will have by now established who the
             organisers were behind the protests and secondly that with the
             passage of time there would be no point in pursuing a child of
             the Appellant's age whose involvement was no more than simply
             attending along with many thousands of people that
             participated in the protests.


         ...


         28.  In view of my findings firstly that I am not satisfied to the
             requisite standard that the Appellant has proven that he
             attended the demonstration and was the subject of adverse
             interest and secondly the unlikelihood of him being seen as an
             opponent of the regime simply because he participated in what
             was a protest with a non-political context, I find that even
             if the Appellant is apprehended and questioned nothing adverse
             would be revealed about his past so as to put him at the risk
             of ill-treatment amounting to persecution."


Submissions

5.   Ground 1: Ms Clarke submitted that the mistake of fact had infected
the judge's finding at [28] of the decision that the Appellant was not of
adverse interest and was unlikely to be at risk on return. It was clear
from [51] of the CPIN that the Vietnamese government did not tolerate
political expression contrary to the government. Individuals who criticised
human rights came to the adverse attention of the authorities. There was
reference to the Formosa disaster and it was clear from the CPIN that this
was considered to be a political protest. There were plain clothes police
officers attacking demonstrators and this was an example of how the
government acted against its critics. The treatment by the state, including
an assault on protesters, amounted to persecution and the demonstration was
considered to be political in nature. The judge did not take this into
account.

    6.   Ground 2: It was accepted in the CPIN that anyone at risk would
    not be able to escape serious harm by relocating. Accordingly, the
    judge's finding that the Appellant would not be at risk was irrational.

    7.   Grounds 3 and 4: The judge stated at [26]: "I find it unlikely
    that with the passage of some three years the authorities would still
    retain an interest in the Appellant in order to get to the bottom of
    who was involved in the demonstration." This was the wrong standard and
    the judge further speculated as to the likely actions of the
    government.  There was evidence in the expert report that the Appellant
    would come to the attention of the authorities if he sought to
    relocate. A summons had been issued against him, which would bring him
    to the attention of the authorities on return. There was also evidence
    that the authorities went to the Appellant's school and that the priest
    who organised the demonstration was living with the Appellant's
    grandma. These were all factors that would bring the Appellant to the
    attention of the authorities. This was a demonstration by Catholic
    followers. The judge was wrong to find that the Appellant had added the
    matters referred to at [23] to bolster his claim. There was an
    increased threat to Catholics who were part of a government uprising
    and the judge had failed to consider this aspect of the claim.

8.   Mr Tarlow submitted that there was no material error of law and the
judge's findings were open to him on the material before him. There was an
email at page 33 but no photograph was attached. The judge was entitled to
rely on this at [19] and the discrepancies he referred to at [23]. The
judge specifically rejected the explanation that the police were not
permitted to enter the houses in Catholic areas. The judge's finding at
[26] that it was unlikely, with the passage of time, the authorities would
have any interest in the Appellant, given his age, was open to the judge on
the evidence before him. Even if the judge got it wrong about the Formosa
protests being non-political, the Appellant had not shown to the lower
standard that he in fact attended the demonstration. Accordingly, the
nature of the protests was not relevant to the judge's finding at [28] and
the Appellant would not be at risk on return.

9.   In response, Ms Clarke submitted that the Respondent rejected the
Appellant's claim to have attended the demonstration but in doing so had
ignored the expert evidence that the Appellant had given the correct date
for the demonstration. Further, the judge acted unfairly in relying on the
lack of explanation for how the Appellant made a 100 kilometre journey to
his home after the demonstration in the evening, given that the matter was
not canvassed at the hearing by the judge or the Respondent.


Conclusions and reasons

10.  There was no challenge in the grounds of appeal to the judge's finding
that the Appellant had failed to show to the requisite standard that he
attended the demonstration and was the subject of adverse interest.

11.  The mistake of fact was not material because the nature of the
demonstration was irrelevant to the judge's finding that the Appellant had
failed to prove he attended the demonstration.

12.  I am not persuaded by Ms Clark's submission that the judge had acted
unfairly in failing to ask for an explanation for the Appellant's journey
home from the demonstration. The Appellant was represented and the burden
was on him to prove the facts he relied upon.

13.  The judge took into account the expert report and gave adequate
reasons for why he rejected the Appellant's evidence to have been visited
at school by the authorities or to have received a summons, relying on the
inconsistent evidence the Appellant gave about the contact he had with the
parish priest and his grandmother. Accordingly, the judge's finding that
the Appellant was of no adverse interest to the authorities prior to
leaving Vietnam was one which was open to the judge on the evidence before
him and any mistake of fact was immaterial.

14.  Whilst the judge may well have speculated in some respects at [26] his
conclusion that, given the passage of some three years, the Appellant would
be of no interest to the authorities, because his participation was not
such that he brought himself to the attention of the authorities, was a
rational one. The judge applied the correct standard of proof, which he set
out at [14] and [15]. The reference at [26] that it was 'unlikely' did not
show that he had applied a higher burden, given his conclusion at [28]
where he summarised his findings.

15.  Accordingly, we find that there is no error of law in the judge's
decision and we dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                  J Frances


Signed                                  Date: 26 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


                  J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 26 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

