
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/00807/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 August 2020                   |On 12 August 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     IS

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



For the appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan

For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood




This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by  the  parties.
The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face  to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The primary documents that  I  was  referred
to are in a consolidated bundle of 58 pages, the contents of  which  I  have
noted and taken full account of. The order made is described at the  end  of
these reasons. The appellant was also present during the remote hearing.

1. The appellant, who is a national of the Democratic Republic of the  Congo
   (DRC) born on 15.4.97, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal
   against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  23.1.20,
   dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 14.1.19, to refuse his claim  made  on  16.8.15
   for international protection on the basis of imputed political opinion.

2. On 1.4.20 the Upper Tribunal issued directions proposing that  the  error
   of law issue  be  determined  without  an  oral  hearing,  providing  for
   submissions on that issue.  In  the  light  of  submissions  subsequently
   received from the appellant's representatives seeking an oral hearing, on
   6.7.20 the Upper Tribunal directed that the appeal should be listed for a
   remote hearing by Skype for Business  and  the  matter  was  subsequently
   listed for 6.8.20.

3. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the various written and oral submissions before me, and  the
   grounds of application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

4. The appellant claimed that in 2006  soldiers  came  to  his  family  home
   looking for his father. His sister was raped and later killed along  with
   his mother and father. He went to live with  an  uncle  until  2015  when
   soldiers came to the house looking for him, when he  was  out.  There  is
   some debate as to whether his father fled from the soldiers or whether he
   abandoned the property for other reasons. In any event, he allegedly left
   the appellant's belongings with a  neighbour,  together  with  the  phone
   number of someone who subsequently gave the  appellant  $8,500  and  made
   introductions to an agent, with whose assistance the appellant managed to
   leave the DRC. The appellant had given an  alternative  account  that  he
   went to Europe with friends and then decided to come and live in the  UK,
   paying E1,000 for a Belgian ID card in the name of [AM] to gain entry  to
   the UK. He has alternatively stated that he came to  the  UK  because  he
   feared he would be killed, or that it was because coming to  the  UK  was
   his aim and goal.

5. The appeal was dismissed in the First-tier  Tribunal  because  the  judge
   found the appellant's core factual  account  not  credible  and  did  not
   accept that the authorities had ever had any adverse interest in him, nor
   would they have any such interest on his return.  Amongst  the  findings,
   between [29] and [33] of the decision, the judge considered but  rejected
   the appellant's claim to have used a false passport to fly from  the  DRC
   to Turkey.

6. The grounds of application for permission to appeal first  asserted  that
   the  First-tier  Tribunal  misapprehended   the   appellant's   evidence,
   resulting in an unfair adverse credibility finding. This related  to  the
   judge's finding that it was not credible that after living with the uncle
   for 9 years from 2015,  the  uncle  would  flee  and  yet  not  warn  the
   appellant, who had a mobile phone, that soldiers had come to the house in
   looking for him. The grounds argue that there was nothing in the evidence
   to support the conclusion that it was the appellant's case that the uncle
   had any prior notice of the soldiers' visit to the property.

7. The second ground relates  to  the  judge's  rejection  at  [33]  of  the
   decision of the appellant's claim that he flew from  the  DRC  to  Turkey
   using a false passport, which was in turn relevant to the risk on  return
   for having committed a criminal offence in the use of the false passport.
   It is submitted that  this  finding  was  not  adequately  reasoned  and,
   further, that the judge proceeded unfairly in questioning why  the  agent
   had the appellant fly from the DRC to Turkey as  opposed  to  a  European
   country, and how his uncle could have afforded to finance the journey  so
   that the appellant was handed a wad comprising $8,500.

8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Swaney  on
   24.2.20, finding no merit in the first ground but considering the  second
   ground arguable,  stating:  "The  refusal  letter  did  not  dispute  the
   appellant's evidence that he used a false passport to travel from the DRC
   to Turkey. It was therefore not identified  as  a  matter  the  appellant
   ought to comment on. It was a matter that was  relevant  to  the  judge's
   consideration of risk on return pursuant to  the  guidance  given  in  BM
   (false passport) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00467 (IAC). The  handwritten  record
   of proceedings is not legible and it is unclear whether the appellant was
   asked any questions related to the passport he used to  travel  from  the
   DRC to Turkey or why the agent facilitated travel to Turkey as opposed to
   any other country."

9. It is evident that the grant of permission was made under something of  a
   misapprehension. It was incorrect to  suggest  that  the  refusal  letter
   (RFR) had not disputed  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  used  a  false
   passport to fly from the DRC to Turkey. Neither is it correct to  suggest
   that this was something that should have been put to  the  appellant  for
   comment at the appeal hearing. Judge  Swaney  also  stated  that  as  the
   Record of Proceedings was illegible, it was unclear whether the appellant
   was questioned about this in evidence. In fact, as summarised below, this
   evidence was given for the first time by the appellant in his examination
   in chief by Mr O'Ryan.

10. The refusal letter (RFR) notes the claim  to  have  paid  for  a  stolen
   Belgian ID card with which he was able to fly from Paris to  London,  but
   did not contain any reference to a claim that the appellant  had  used  a
   false passport, in the exact same name, to travel from the DRC to Turkey.
   It is not mentioned in either the Screening Interview (SI) or the  Asylum
   Interview Record (AIR). There were no  questions  or  answers  addressing
   this issue. The appellant mentioned in reply to Q43-44  about  coming  to
   the UK but there was no reference to a false passport. At Q151 onwards he
   explained about a neighbour telling him his uncle had left a  number  for
   him to call. The person he spoke to put him in touch  with  a  woman.  On
   meeting this woman she  gave  him  an  envelope  containing  $8,500.  She
   introduced him to someone else who introduced him to an  agent,  whom  he
   paid with some of the money from the envelope, retaining some from  which
   he paid another person in France to provide him with a Belgian  ID  card.
   There was no reference to a false passport.

11. Neither was there any reference to having left the  DRC  using  a  false
   passport in either of the appellant's witness statements  of  26.2.19  or
   16.7.19. As stated above, this claim was  first  made  by  the  appellant
   during his oral evidence in  chief  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal
   hearing, a transcript of which has now been obtained. It appears from the
   transcript that Mr O'Ryan must have had instructions on the matter before
   the commencement of the hearing as he asked  permission  to  ask  further
   questions of the appellant in  light  of  the  new  CPIN,  and  proceeded
   immediately to ask the appellant how he left the DRC and whether  he  had
   used a travel document. It was in that way that the evidence came  about,
   not as the judge granting permission to appeal understood.

12. He was further     questioned  about  leaving  the  DRC  using  a  false
   passport in cross-examination. In relation to how he left  the  DRC,  the
   appellant claimed in evidence that he used  a  false  Congolese  passport
   given to him by the agent in the name of [AM], explaining  that  [A]  was
   his middle name and [M] was his grandmother's name. He accepted  that  he
   did not have right to use that passport, or any passport in that name, or
   have his own passport. In cross examination  he  said  the  passport  was
   given to him by an agent on the day he left but that person had  taken  a
   photograph of him some two  weeks  earlier  and  the  passport  bore  his
   photograph.

13. He was challenged in evidence about the coincidence of the name  on  the
   passport with the name of the stolen Belgian ID card he had used to enter
   the UK, which was also in the name of [AM]. He said he had been told that
   that ID card was 'valid,' but that it bore his own  photograph.  He  said
   that the person who gave it to him took his photograph and then gave  him
   the card. This was not the same agent who provided him with the  passport
   in the DRC but another person who was just someone who had approached him
   in Paris asking if he could help anyone cross the border to  the  UK.  He
   claimed that it took a week for the card to be prepared and that  he  had
   asked for the name [AM] to be put on it.

14. There was some discussion  at  the  hearing  about  the  source  of  the
   information that the Belgian ID card had been stolen, as recorded at [71]
   of the refusal decision, as was being suggested that the card was  stolen
   from someone called [AM]. The information was produced to  Mr  O'Ryan  at
   the hearing by the presenting officer, apparently from Annex III at  page
   A1-A3. Having seen that source material, Mr Ryan had no cross-examination
   for  the  appellant  on  that  point,  concluding  the  appellant's  oral
   evidence. Mr O'Ryan submitted at that appeal hearing that on the  limited
   information provided it could not be established that the Belgian ID card
   had been stolen from [AM] but could equally have been  from  a  batch  of
   stolen blank Belgian ID cards and that the appellant had asked  for  that
   name to be put on it, and that his photograph must have been added.

15. Having carefully considered Mr  O'Ryan's  detailed  submissions  me  and
   looked again at the decision, I am satisfied that there is  no  error  of
   law in respect of the first ground of appeal. The judge was  entitled  to
   infer from the appellant's answers in interview between  Q106,  Q107  and
   Q110, that the appellant's uncle knew the authorities were coming, having
   left before they arrived, but had not bothered to warn the appellant  who
   was fortuitously absent whilst helping a friend  move  house.  He  claims
   that he did not have a key, despite living there 9 years and that when he
   returned he found the house closed up. The appellant's answer at Q107  is
   rather garbled but it was pointed out that at  part  of  the  answer  the
   appellant appeared to suggest that the uncle had left the property to the
   neighbour. The only explanation the neighbour gave him was "my uncle said
   he has to leave because he has nothing to do with  the  problem  that  my
   family is having with the government," and went on to tell him  that  his
   uncle had left the phone number of a friend to call. In oral evidence  he
   said that the neighbour told him, 'they're not here anymore." At Q141  to
   142, and at Q150 he said that he didn't know if anyone was at  the  house
   but was told that the uncle was no longer there, "he had left." He didn't
   know if his uncle ever returned to his  house  after  the  visit  by  the
   soldiers. Evidently, the appellant  and  his  uncle  never  spoke  again,
   although he was given $8,500 to finance his departure from the DRC.

16. Mr O'Ryan submitted to me that it did not necessarily  follow  that  the
   uncle had advance notice of the arrival of  the  soldiers  and  may  have
   fortuitously left without knowing that soldiers were coming. However,  in
   assessing the credibility of this aspect of the  claim,  the  judge  took
   account of the fact that before leaving, the uncle was not only  able  to
   leave the appellant's belongings with a neighbour but also left a message
   with the neighbour with a phone number for the appellant to call, through
   which the appellant was provided with a large sum of money and introduced
   to an agent to assist him to leave the DRC. If this account is  true,  it
   must follow that after 9 years and without any advance notice or word  of
   discussion with the appellant the uncle left his home  suddenly  and  yet
   was able to have sufficient  foresight  to  provide  the  means  for  the
   appellant to almost immediately flee the DRC. The  message  left  through
   the neighbour, to the effect that the uncle didn't want  anything  to  do
   with the problem the appellant had with the authorities,  also  supported
   the conclusion that the uncle was aware of the visit of soldiers or  some
   other current adverse interest and activity. On  that  factual  scenario,
   taking into account the adverse credibility  findings  as  to  the  other
   aspects of the factual claim, the judge was entitled to draw what was the
   only sensible conclusion that could  be  drawn,  that  the  uncle  sudden
   departure was not a coincidence and that on that account he  had  advance
   knowledge of the soldiers' visit or managed  to  escape  undetected  when
   they arrived and yet never bothered to warn his nephew,  even  though  he
   was generous and kind enough to leave him $8,500.  I  am  satisfied  that
   the judge was entitled  to  draw  the  inference  made  at  [25]  of  the
   decision,  and  did  not  err  in  concluding  that  this  claim  was   a
   fabrication.

17. In relation to the second ground it is curious that, as the judge  noted
   at [10] of the decision, the appellant's case at the appeal  hearing  was
   that he left the DRC by flying to Turkey using a false  ID  card  in  the
   name of [AM]. However, the appellant's case in interview was that it  was
   in France that he obtained a stolen Belgian ID card in the name of [AM].

18. It was the appellant's claim that he would be at  risk  on  return  for,
   inter alia, having  left  using  a  false  passport  and  the  burden  of
   discharging that fell on the appellant to the lower  standard  of  proof.
   Independently of this aspect of the claim, the  judge  rejected  entirely
   the claim to have been of any adverse interest  to  the  authorities.  As
   drafted, at [29] of the decision, by stating "Over and above that..."  it
   is clear that the core of the claim had been rejected, whether or not  he
   also left on a false passport.

19. The grounds aver that the judge's finding that  the  appellant  did  not
   use a false document to leave  the  DRC  was  made  without  any  or  any
   adequate reasoning. However, the submission is short-sighted and fails to
   take account of the other credibility findings, many of  which  have  not
   been challenged in the grounds. Properly read, the statement at  [33]  of
   the decision, "I do not accept he facilitated the use of a false document
   to leave the DRC" is a summary and not to be characterised as  a  finding
   devoid of supporting reasoning. That reasoning is set  out  between  [29]
   and [32] of the decision and, importantly, must be read in the  light  of
   the conclusion at [28] of the decision, rejecting  as  not  credible  the
   events of 2015 claimed by the appellant. That conclusion  regarding  2015
   itself is supported by reasoning set out in the preceding  paragraphs  of
   the decision. The judge stated at the  conclusion  of  [28],  "I  do  not
   accept as credible that 9 years later the soldiers would be  looking  for
   him." It must follow that if the appellant's account of events justifying
   his flight from DRC in fear of his life is not made  out,  there  was  no
   valid reason for the appellant to leave the DRC, or to do so by flying to
   Turkey using a false passport costing a substantial amount of money.

20. As the judge observed at [32] of the decision, BM (false passport)  held
   that the mere fact that an asylum claimant utilised a false  passport  or
   kindred document in departing the DRC will not without  more  engage  the
   risk category  specified  at  [119(iv)]  of  BM  and  others  (Returnees:
   Criminal and Non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 293 (IAC). However,  the  matter
   is fact and context sensitive so that the Tribunal must  consider,  inter
   alia, the likely state of knowledge of the DRC authorities. Such a person
   using a false passport will not be at risk on  return  unless  likely  to
   come to the attention of the DRC authorities. As stated above, at [33] of
   the decision, the judge found that the appellant had  not  used  a  false
   document to leave the DRC and, therefore, did not  fall  into  this  risk
   category. I accept the submission of Mr Jarvis, in his  response  to  the
   grounds of appeal, that given the burden was on the appellant and  having
   failed to establish the core reason to need to leave the DRC by  using  a
   false passport, the judge had no alternative but to find  the  burden  of
   showing a reasonable likelihood of punishment by imprisonment for the use
   of a false passport not discharged. In any event, I am satisfied that the
   finding was adequately reasoned and  justified  in  the  context  of  the
   overall adverse credibility findings. As stated above, it is not the case
   that this issue was never put to the appellant,  as  the  judge  granting
   permission misapprehended.

21. Mr O'Ryan relied on his response to the respondent's submissions on  the
   error of law and the endorsement of the Supreme Court in MA  (Somalia)  v
   SSHD [2010] UKSC 49, that a Tribunal must be very careful not to  dismiss
   an appeal just because an appellant has told lies. "Even  if  very  large
   parts of his story have been disbelieved it is still  possible  that  the
   appellant has shown that he would be at risk on return." I bear  this  in
   mind, but as stated above, I am satisfied that the finding rejecting  the
   claim to have flown from the DRC using a false passport was supported  by
   cogent reasoning and the judge was also entitled to take into account the
   other  adverse  credibility  findings,  many  of  which  have  not   been
   challenged. In any event, I cannot see from the evidence presented to the
   Tribunal that the appellant had managed to advance his  case  beyond  the
   "mere fact that an asylum claimant utilised a false passport  or  kindred
   document in departing the DRC will  not  without  more  engage  the  risk
   category..." Whilst the guidance depends on the fact sensitive context of
   the individual case, it must follow from the adverse earlier  credibility
   findings that the appellant was  not  of  adverse  interest  to  the  DRC
   authorities. In reality, the appellant's claim on this head, advanced  at
   the last moment in his oral evidence at  the  appeal  hearing,  would  be
   insufficient to engage the risk category, so that any error of the First-
   tier Tribunal in this regard cannot be material to  the  outcome  of  the
   appeal.

22. Complaint is also made that the  judge  made  unfair  criticism  of  the
   appellant allegedly flying only to Turkey, to have to make his way across
   other European countries, and of the rejection  of  the  claim  that  his
   uncle was in a position to leave him so much money to finance the flights
   and journey to the UK. The complaint is that these two matters  were  not
   put to the appellant for comment at the hearing.  It  is  submitted  that
   there may be a number of  explanations  why  the  agent  facilitated  his
   flight to Turkey, speculation of which some examples are set out at  [10]
   of the grounds. I am not, in any event satisfied that it was incumbent on
   the judge to put these matters to the appellant. However, even  if  there
   was such a duty, these are subsidiary findings and not  material  to  the
   conclusion reached that the appellant's factual account of events in 2015
   was not credible; they could have made  no  tangible  difference  to  the
   outcome of the appeal.

23. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.

Decision

      The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error of law.

      The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal must stand and the  appeal  is
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       6 August 2020



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

      "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.  This  direction
      applies to, amongst others, both the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of  court
      proceedings."

Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       6 August 2020


