
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00426/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 September 2019                          |On 23 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A A
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr. I Palmer, Counsel, of Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr. P. Singh, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the respondent's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ian Howard ('the Judge') issued on 3 April 2019 by which
    the appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  to  grant  him
    international protection was allowed.

 2. For the purposes of this decision the parties will be  referred  to  by
    their status before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  all
    grounds.


Anonymity

 4. The Judge issued an anonymity direction and there was no application by
    the parties to set aside this decision.  Therefore,  unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of these proceedings or
    any formal publication thereof shall directly  or  indirectly  identify
    the appellant or close members of his family.  This  direction  applies
    to, amongst others, the appellant and the respondent.  Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings. I re-affirm the direction so as to avoid the likelihood of
    serious harm  arising  to  the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  the
    protection claim being made public.


Background

 5. The appellant is a national of Iraq and he is  presently  aged  30.  He
    states that he cannot return  to  Iraq  on  account  of  his  political
    opinion and by means of his asylum claim he  detailed  that  Daesh  had
    taken control of his hometown of Mosul in June 2014. Daesh attended his
    home in January 2015 demanding details of the occupant  of  the  ground
    floor of the house which he rented to  a  man  he  believed  to  be  an
    engineer. He was informed that this man was in fact  an  army  officer.
    Three days later he received a telephone call  from  the  army  officer
    threatening to kill him for revealing his details.

 6. In February 2015 he visited a paternal uncle and  whilst  talking  with
    his  uncles  and  cousins  he  expressed  anti-Daesh   sentiments.   It
    transpired that his family  members  were  pro-Daesh  and  an  argument
    ensued in which he was attacked and knocked unconscious. When  he  came
    around there were five Daesh members  surrounding  him,  but  an  uncle
    persuaded them not to kill him and they left. The appellant returned to
    his home, picked up his passport and some money  and  then  hid  at  an
    aunt's house before fleeing Iraq. He details that one  of  his  cousins
    was subsequently killed by Daesh on 6 June 2016.

 7. He claimed asylum in this country and the application  was  refused  by
    the respondent. He appealed this decision and his appeal was  dismissed
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Raikes by way  of  a  Decision  and
    Reasons  issued  to  the  parties  on  30  March  2017.  The  appellant
    subsequently made further representations and though the  Secretary  of
    State  refused  to  grant  him   status   she   recognised   that   the
    representations constituted a fresh claim for the purposes of paragraph
    353 of the Immigration Rules and so the appellant a right of appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Hatton Cross on 14 February
    2019. The respondent relied upon evidence seeking to establish that the
    situation in Iraq had changed  and  that  the  appellant  could  safely
    return to Mosul.  It was the respondent's case that the  Judge  was  no
    longer required to rely  upon  the  country  guidance  decision  of  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  00544.  The  appellant  sought  to
    assert that the Judge was required to rely upon  the  country  guidance
    decision. The Judge accepted that the appellant  could  not  return  to
    Mosul and further determined that there was a real likelihood that  the
    appellant would be required to live in  Baghdad  without  any  support,
    without possession of a CSID, and with the real  risk  of  having  been
    wrongly identified  as  having  an  association  with  Daesh.  In  such
    circumstances he allowed the  appeal  on  both  asylum  and  article  3
    grounds.


Grounds of Appeal

 9.  The  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  are  very  short,  in  essence
    challenging the  Judge's  approach  to  considering  the  new  evidence
    relating to the risks or otherwise of the appellant returning to Mosul.




Decision on Error of Law

10. I was greatly aided by Mr Palmer at the hearing before me.  I  reminded
    Mr Palmer as to the guidance of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  R  (on  the
    application of) SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2012] EWCA Civ 940; [2013] 1 WLR 41 in which the Court  of  Appeal  in
    providing guidance observed that in order to  ensure  that  there  were
    reliable and accurate determinations as well as noting the desirability
    of consistency, decision makers were required to take country  guidance
    determinations into account and follow them unless very strong  grounds
    supported by cogent evidence were adduced justifying not doing so.  The
    Court of Appeal confirmed at [47]:

         'It  is  for  these  reasons,  as  well  as  the  desirability   of
         consistency, that decision makers and tribunal judges are  required
         to take Country Guidance determinations into account, and to follow
         them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,  are
         adduced justifying their not doing so.'

11. Unfortunately, as Mr  Palmer  accepted  with  his  usual  candour,  the
    Judge's consideration of the respondent's evidence, and  therefore  the
    heart of the respondent's  case,  wholly  failed  to  engage  with  the
    guidance of the Court of Appeal. The Judge's considerations are set out
    at [20] of his decision:

         'I must therefore envisage the appellant returning to  Baghdad  and
         remaining in the 'Baghdad Belts' or travelling north  to  his  home
         area of Mosul. The latter must be discounted as for the time  being
         Mosul remains a contested area notwithstanding  very  recent  event
         (sic). Indeed, in the decision letter the respondent considers  the
         current situation in  Iraq  at  paragraphs  26  onwards  and  while
         identifying Mosul as the appellant's home  area  at  paragraph  31,
         does not address the issue of return to that location. Judge Raikes
         found that as a contested area the appellant could not return there
         and on the information before me that remains the position.'


12. It is clear that the  Judge  has  not  adequately  considered  the  new
    evidence presented on behalf of the respondent in light of the Court of
    Appeal guidance, and whilst it may have been open to him to  find  that
    it was not cogent or  sufficient,  this  is  not  the  only  reasonable
    decision that could be made on the evidence presented  and  so  by  not
    examining it in the manner approved by the Court of Appeal it can  only
    be said that his approach materially erred in law.  Mr  Palmer,  though
    not resiling from the favourable decision reached  by  the  Judge,  and
    observing that care had been taken  to  argue  the  inadequacy  of  the
    evidence before the Judge, fairly accepted that there  was  no  express
    consideration of the guidance, nor even could it be argued  that  there
    was an implicit consideration.

13. In such circumstances  the  parties  accepted  that  the  rest  of  the
    decision would struggle to survive if I were to  find  that  there  had
    been a material error of law in the reasoning at [20.] For the  reasons
    detailed above I find that there was such material error and  that  the
    failure to lawfully consider  the  new  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent and to give adequate reasons  for  its  rejection  was  such
    error as to require this decision to be set aside.


Remittal to the First-tier Tribunal

14. Both representatives informed me that if I were to find that there  was
    a material error of law clear findings would have to  be  made  on  the
    evidence presented on behalf of both the appellant and  the  respondent
    and so  requested  that  the  matter  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

15. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice  Statement  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the  disposal  of
    appeals in this Tribunal and I observe at paragraph 7.2:-

         "The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-


         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or


         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal".


16. I find in the circumstances of this appeal that it  is  appropriate  to
    remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision  on
    all matters. There has been no adequate and fair consideration  of  the
    asylum claim to date. In this case I  have  determined  that  the  case
    should be remitted because a new fact-finding exercise is required.


Notice of Decision

17. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    Judge's decision promulgated  on  3  April  2019  pursuant  to  Section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

18. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Hatton  Cross
    to be heard before any Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than
    Judge Ian Howard.

19. No findings of fact are to stand.

20. The anonymity direction continues.



Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 20 September 2019


