
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00552/2020_P


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |On 22 September 2020                 |
|On 18 September 2020                 |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between
                                   Ms B C
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
I make this order because this is a protection claim.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

    This is a decision on the papers without a hearing. In her submissions,
    the appellant did not address whether it as appropriate for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed without a hearing. The respondent did not lodge any
    submissions  in  response  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  directions.  The
    documents described at para 4  below  were  submitted.  A  face-to-face
    hearing or a remote hearing was not held for the reasons given at paras
    6-19  below.  The  order  made  is  set  out  at  paras  44-45   below.
    (Administrative  Instruction  No.  2  from  the  Senior  President   of
    Tribunals).


Representation (by written submissions):
For the appellant:     Immigration Advisory Service (IAS).
For the respondent:    (No representation).


                                  DECISION

 1. The appellant, a national of Angola born on 30 September 1978,  appeals
    against a decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Bannerman
    (hereafter the "Judge") who, in a decision promulgated on 16 April 2020
    following a hearing on 5 March 2020 dismissed  her  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds against a decision  of
    the respondent of 3 January 2020 to refuse her protection claim  of  21
    August 2019.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  refused  permission  to  appeal  in  a
    decision signed on 24 May 2020. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson in a decision signed on 11 July 2020, sent
    to the parties on 31 July 2020.

 3. In her decision granting permission,  Judge  Jackson  stated  that,  in
    light of the need to take precautions against the spread  of  Covid-19,
    she had reached the provisional view, having reviewed the file in  this
    case, that it would be appropriate to determine questions (1)  and  (2)
    set out on the second page of  her  decision,  reproduced  at  my  para
    5(i)(a) and (b) below, without a hearing. Judge  Jackson  proceeded  to
    give the following directions:

         (i)  Direction (1) provided for the appellant to  make  submissions
         in support of the assertion of an error of law and on the  question
         whether the decision of the FtT should be set aside if error of law
         is found, no later than 14 days after the notice of her decision to
         grant permission was sent to the parties;  for  the  respondent  to
         file and serve submissions in response, no later than 21 days after
         her decision to grant permission was sent to the parties;  and,  if
         such submissions in response were made, for the appellant to file a
         reply no later than 28 days after her decision to grant  permission
         was sent to the parties.

         (ii) Judge Jackson then proceeded to give a further direction which
         provided that any party who considered that despite  the  foregoing
         directions a hearing was necessary to consider  questions  (1)  and
         (2) may submit reasons for that view no later than  21  days  after
         her decision to grant permission was sent to the parties.

 4. In response to Judge  Jackson's  directions,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    received a document entitled "Appellant's Further Submissions" dated 14
    August 2020 by the IAS, submitted to the Upper Tribunal under cover  of
    an email of the same date timed at 15:55 hours. The respondent has  not
    filed any Rule 24 Reply and/or any submissions  in  response  to  Judge
    Jackson's directions.



The issues

 5. I have to decide the following issues (hereafter the "Issues"),

         (i)  whether it is appropriate to decide  the  following  questions
         without a hearing:

             (a)  whether the decision of the Judge involved the making  of
             an error on a point of law; and

             (b)  if yes, whether the Judge's decision should be set aside.



         (ii) If yes, whether the decision on the appellant's appeal against
         the respondent's decision should be re-made in the  Upper  Tribunal
         or whether the appeal should be remitted to the FtT.

Whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

 6. In its  submissions  dated  14  August  2020,  IAS  did  not  make  any
    submissions as to whether or  not  it  is  appropriate  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to decide the Issues without a hearing.

 7. I do not rely upon the mere fact that the appellant and the  respondent
    have not made any submissions on the question whether it is appropriate
    for the Upper Tribunal to make a  decision  on  the  Issues  without  a
    hearing as factors that justify proceeding without a  hearing.  I  have
    considered the circumstances for myself.

 8. The appeal in the instant case is straightforward.

 9. I am aware of, and take into account, the force of the points  made  in
    the dicta of the late Laws LJ at para 38 of Sengupta  v  Holmes  [2002]
    EWCA Civ 1104 to the effect, inter alia, that "oral argument is perhaps
    the most powerful force there is, in our legal process,  to  promote  a
    change of mind by a judge"; Keene LJ at para 47 of  Sengupta  v  Holmes
    concerning the impact that oral submissions may have on  the  decision-
    making process; paras 35 and 48 respectively of the judgments  of  Lord
    Bingham and of Lord Slynn in Smith v Parole Board [2005]  UKHL  1;  the
    dicta at para 17(3) of Wasif v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 82  concerning  the
    power of oral argument; the  dicta  in  the  decision  in  R  v  Sussex
    Justices, ex parte McCarthy [1924] 1 KB 256 to the effect that  justice
    must be done and be seen to be done; and the  dicta  at  para  8  of  R
    (Siddiqui) v Lord Chancellor and others [2019] EWCA  Civ  1040  to  the
    effect that it is an "undeniable fact that the oral  hearing  procedure
    lies at the heart of English civil procedure", to mention just a few of
    the cases in which we have received guidance from judges in the  higher
    courts concerning the importance of an oral hearing.

10. I am aware of and have applied the guidance of  the  Supreme  Court  at
    para 2 of its judgment in Osborn and others v Parole Board [2013]  UKSC
    61.

11. Given that my decision is limited to the Issues, there is  no  question
    of my making findings of fact or hearing oral evidence  or  considering
    any evidence at this stage.

12. In addition, I take into account the seriousness of the issues  in  the
    instant appeal for the appellant.  This  is  a  protection  claim.  The
    appeal therefore is a serious matter.

13. I have considered  all  the  circumstances  very  carefully  and  taken
    everything into account, including the overriding objective.

14. Taking a preliminary view at the initial stage of deciding  whether  it
    is appropriate and just to decide  the  Issues  without  a  hearing,  I
    considered the Judge's decision, the grounds and the submissions before
    me. It seemed to be obvious, taking a preliminary view, that the  Judge
    had materially erred in law in his assessment of credibility.

15. There is nothing complicated at all in the assessment of the Issues  in
    the instant case, given that the grounds are simple and straightforward
    and the Judge's decision  straightforward.  I  kept  the  matter  under
    review throughout my deliberations. However, at the  conclusion  of  my
    deliberations, I was affirmed in the view I had taken on a  preliminary
    basis.

16. Whilst I acknowledge that the Tribunal is now listing  some  cases  for
    face-to-face hearings and using technology to hold hearings remotely in
    other cases where it is appropriate to do so, the fact is  that  it  is
    not possible to accommodate all cases in  one  of  these  ways  without
    undue delay to all cases.

17. Of course, it is impermissible, in my view, to proceed to decide a case
    without a hearing if that course of  action  would  be  unfair  in  the
    particular case. If it would be unfair to proceed to decide  an  appeal
    without a hearing, it would be unfair to do so even if there would be a
    lengthy delay in order to hold a hearing face-to-face  or  remotely  or
    even if there is a consequent delay on other  cases  being  heard.  The
    need to be fair cannot be sacrificed.

18.  There  are  cases  that  can  fairly  be  decided  without  a  hearing
    notwithstanding that the outcome of the decision may not be  in  favour
    of the party  who  is  the  appellant.  In  the  present  unprecedented
    circumstances brought about by the coronavirus pandemic, it is my  duty
    to identify those cases that can fairly be decided without a hearing.

19. Having considered the matter with anxious scrutiny, taken into  account
    the overriding  objective  and  the  guidance  in  the  relevant  cases
    including in particular Osborn and others v Parole Board,  I  concluded
    that it is appropriate, fair and just for me to exercise my  discretion
    and proceed to decide the Issues without a  hearing,  for  the  reasons
    given in this decision.

Questions (a) and (b) - whether the Judge  erred  in  law  and  whether  his
decision should be set aside

20. The Judge rejected the credibility of the appellant's  account  of  the
    events she said had  occurred  in  Angola  relating  to  her  husband's
    activities. He found that she had fabricated her entire account. He did
    not accept that her daughters were genuinely at risk of a form  of  FGM
    in Angola.

21. The Judge therefore dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds
    and humanitarian protection grounds. For the  same  reasons,  he  found
    that there were no potential breaches of Articles 2 and 3 of  the  ECHR
    (para 71).

22. In relation to Article 8 of the ECHR, the Judge noted (at para 72) that
    the appellant's representative had conceded that "there was no  Article
    8 case essentially being claimed here" but he went on to say that,  for
    the avoidance of doubt, he agreed with the  appellant's  representative
    and also with the decision made by the respondent  on  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim. He therefore also dismissed her appeal under Article 8
    of the ECHR.

23. The appellant's grounds do not challenge the decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on human rights grounds with respect of Article 8.

24. The grounds may be summarised as follows:

         (i)  Ground 1: The Judge erred in law in failing to make a  finding
         as to whether the appellant was a vulnerable adult. His  assessment
         of credibility was therefore impaired by this omission.

         (ii) Ground 2: The Judge failed to adequate reasons for findings on
         material matters.

         (iii)    Ground 3: The Judge materially misdirected himself  and/or
         failed to take account of  material  matters  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's claimed injury and problem with her kidneys.

Assessment

25. I am satisfied that all the grounds are established and that the  Judge
    did materially err in law in his assessment of the credibility  of  the
    appellant's evidence in relation to her protection claim. I  shall  now
    give my reasons:

Ground 1

26. The evidence before the Judge was that the appellant had problems  with
    her hearing. The appellant  had  mentioned  this  fact  at  her  asylum
    interview. It was also raised in her pre-hearing reply notice dated  17
    February 2020 which raised her hearing as an issue.

27. The Judge did not make any finding on  whether  she  was  a  vulnerable
    witness and, if so, whether he had treated her  as  such,  nor  did  he
    indicate whether he considered that this had impacted upon her  ability
    to give oral evidence and his assessment of  credibility  and,  if  so,
    how.

28. To the contrary, he said, at para 66, that the appellant  was  hesitant
    in giving her evidence and, at para 34 (in setting out a summary of the
    appellant's oral evidence), he said:

         "34. The Appellant adopted her witness statement and stated that in
             Angola she has a father and mother and eventually decided  she
             had 2 brothers but had to muse over that for some considerable
             time."

29. The Judge made no mention of the appellant's hearing problems at  paras
    34 and 66 when taking into account the appellant's hesitation in giving
    oral evidence.

30. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge had failed to apply  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.

Grounds 2 and 3

31. Paras 64-66 of the Judge's decision,  which  featured  heavily  in  his
    adverse credibility assessment, read:

         "64. I have to say that I did not find this witness  credible.  Her
             explanation, for example, with regard to her alleged  injuries
             seems to be made  up  on  the  spot  and  did  not  carry  any
             significant weight. For example, she said that only a hospital
             could decide whether or not her injuries were severe but  that
             she hadn't been to a hospital. In the papers there is a  claim
             of a scar at an interview although there are  no  pictures  or
             information or evidence about if she had a  scar  and  how  it
             might have been caused and it is only mentioned about  hearing
             loss otherwise with that not being put  down  to  the  alleged
             assault upon her. At one stage, also,  she  refers  to  having
             pain in the  kidneys  but  having  been  in  the  country  for
             significantly more than 4 months she  still  doesn't  seem  to
             have sought any medical help for it and certainly there was no
             evidence given to that effect.

         65.  I consider that the criticisms of her position on  the  claims
             of her husband's involvement in some form of investigation and
             even more so with regard to the claims that people  threatened
             him and then came to the house, simply did not stack  up  even
             against the lower standard and her claim did not stand  up  to
             any scrutiny even against that standard.

         66.  I accept that if her husband had been playing some role in the
             investigation against this disgraced senior officer  then  his
             name wouldn't have appeared in the newspaper report  but  just
             because his name doesn't appear there on the one hand  doesn't
             mean that he wasn't involved but on  the  other  hand  doesn't
             mean that he  was  involved.  Against  the  lower  standard  I
             consider the claims that she makes to be ones borne out  of  a
             desperate attempt to find a reason to be able to remain in the
             United Kingdom  and  not  ones  borne  out  by  the  facts  or
             circumstances even against the lower standard. She has made  a
             claim that 4 men entered her house all  by  the  rear  of  the
             property and claims them to police based on  some  items  they
             had with them and the title given to one of  them.  I  do  not
             accept what  she  is  saying  here,  even  against  the  lower
             standard, it seems to me to be contrived and she was  hesitant
             in giving her evidence and I give  weight  to  the  criticisms
             made of her by the  Respondent  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
             letter. She was, able to leave the country on her own passport
             and to stay elsewhere in the country for a few days before she
             claims she left. I did not accept her claims in that regard."

                                                               (My emphasis)

32. The Judge erred at paras 64-66 for the following reasons:

         (i)  At para 64, the Judge took into account that the appellant had
         not been to a hospital about her injuries but, in doing so,  failed
         to take into account  the  appellant's  explanation  in  answer  to
         question 68 of  her  interview  and  at  para  18  of  her  witness
         statement that she had not been to a hospital as she could not risk
         exposing herself whilst receiving treatment.

         (ii) In relation to the  appellant's  scar,  the  Judge  took  into
         account, inter alia, at para 64 that there was  no  information  or
         evidence about how the scar might have been caused. In this regard,
         I am satisfied that he overlooked the appellant's evidence  at  her
         interview that she was struck on her back  during  the  assault  on
         her.

         (iii)    In relation to the pain that the appellant said she had in
         her kidneys, the Judge took  into  account  at  para  64  that  the
         appellant did not "seem to have sought any  medical  help  for  it"
         notwithstanding that  she  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
         "significantly more than 4 months". However, as contended  at  para
         25 of the grounds, there was a letter dated 2 January 2020 from the
         NHS which showed that the appellant was due to attend  the  Urology
         department at the Royal Bolton Hospital on 23 March  2020.  He  was
         therefore incorrect to say that "certainly there  was  no  evidence
         given to that effect".

         (iv)  For  the  reasons  given  at  (i)-(iii)  above,  the  Judge's
         reasoning from and including the second sentence of para 64  cannot
         stand. The first sentence of para  64  therefore  could  not  stand
         either, as the reasoning in the first sentence  was  insufficiently
         reasoned to be capable of standing on its own.

         (v)  At para 65, the Judge said, inter alia, that he gave weight to
         the respondent's criticism of  the  appellant's  evidence  but,  in
         doing so, failed to  consider  the  appellant's  responses  to  the
         refusal letter at paras 22-31 of her  witness  statement  dated  20
         February 2020 (AB1-4). I am therefore satisfied that he  overlooked
         relevant evidence in this regard.

33. Whilst I have noted that the Judge went on to give  other  reasons  for
    his adverse credibility assessment at paras 67-69, I am satisfied  that
    his adverse assessment at paras  64-66  was  material  to  his  overall
    adverse assessment of credibility.

34. It is therefore unnecessary for  me  to  deal  with  the  remainder  of
    grounds 2 and 3, i.e. paras 15-18 of the grounds in relation to  ground
    2.

35. For all of the above reasons, I set aside the decision of the Judge  to
    dismiss the appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds and in relation to Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

36. The appellant's  representative  before  the  Judge  conceded,  on  her
    behalf, that "there was no Article 8  case  essentially  being  claimed
    here" (para 72 of the Judge's decision). The Judge said that he  agreed
    with him and with the respondent's decision on the appellant's  Article
    8 claim. He proceeded to dismiss the appellant's Article 8 appeal.

37. The grounds did not challenge the Judge's decision on  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim.

38. Accordingly, the re-making of the decision on the appellant's appeal is
    limited to the asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  (in
    relation to the human rights ground) the related claim under Articles 2
    and  3,  although  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  Article  2  can  be
    established.

39.  The  re-making  of  the  decision  will  include  a  re-assessment  of
    credibility afresh. None of the Judge's findings at paras  63-71  shall
    stand. His record of her oral evidence, at paras 34-42 shall  stand  as
    the record of her evidence to the FtT save that the first  sentence  of
    para 34 shall be read as set out below so as to delete his  observation
    of the manner in which the appellant had given her oral evidence:

         "The Appellant adopted her witness statement  and  stated  that  in
         Angola she has a father and mother and she had 2 brothers."

40. I turn now to consider whether the appeal should be remitted to the FtT
    or whether the Upper  Tribunal  should  re-make  the  decision  on  the
    appellant's appeal.

41. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

42. It is plain from my reasoning above that the  appellant's  case  simply
    has not been considered by the  Judge.  There  is  no  mention  of  her
    witness statement and no engagement with her response  to  the  refusal
    letter. There is no mention of the letters from the NHS notwithstanding
    that the Judge took into account that  the  appellant  had  not  sought
    medical help for her problem with her kidneys. He  did  not  take  into
    account her evidence at her interviews in making his adverse assessment
    on various matters.

43. In these  circumstances,  and  taking  into  account  that  this  is  a
    protection claim that includes a claim for protection for two  separate
    reasons (namely, the activities of the appellant's husband  in  certain
    investigations and also her fear that her daughters will  be  subjected
    to a form of FGM), I am satisfied that this case falls within para  7.2
    (b) of the Practice Statements. I therefore remit this  appeal  to  the
    FtT.

Notice of Decision

44. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  errors
    on points of law such that the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds, on humanitarian protection  grounds  and  (in
    relation to the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds)  with  respect  to
    Articles 2 and 3 only is set aside. The decision to dismiss the  appeal
    on human rights grounds with respect to Article 8 stands.

45. This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing of
    the appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and the related claims under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, by a
    judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bannerman.


Signed   Date: 18 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email


