
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00432/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th February 2019                          |On 27th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     RLY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  O'Neill
    made following a hearing at Manchester on 9th February 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria  born  on  10th  May  1990.   She
    entered the UK as the spouse of a British citizen on 24th February 2017
    and was divorced on 20th November 2017.

 3. The respondent accepted that during her marriage she was the victim  of
    domestic violence from her husband.

 4. She claimed asylum on 4th July 2017 and was refused  on  20th  December
    2017.  It was this refusal which was the subject of the  appeal  before
    Judge O'Neill.

 5. The judge dismissed the appellant's asylum claim and permission was not
    granted to challenge that aspect of his decision.

 6. Permission to appeal was however granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kekic
    on 13th August 2018 in respect of the judge's failure  to  address  the
    human rights  claim  which  was  relied  upon  in  submissions  by  the
    appellant's representative.  It is clear from the  judge's  notes  that
    this argument was made to him at the hearing and Mr Greer, who appeared
    in the First-tier Tribunal, confirmed that this was the case.

 7. Mrs Pettersen did  not  seek  to  argue  that  the  decision  could  be
    maintained nor that it should be reversed  and  allowed  on  Article  8
    grounds.

Findings and Conclusions

 8. It  is  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of Section E-DVILR: eligibility for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a victim of domestic violence.

 9. The appellant's first grant of limited leave  was  as  a  spouse  of  a
    British citizen.   Under  GEN.1.9  the  requirement  to  make  a  valid
    application will not apply when an Article 8 claim is raised as a  part
    of an asylum claim or as part of a further submission in  person  after
    an asylum claim has been refused.

10. Mrs Pettersen in fact confirmed from her records that the appellant had
    written to the Secretary of State asking  for  a  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain as a consequence of domestic  violence.   She  did  not
    seek  to  argue  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  substantive
    Immigration Rule and  therefore  accepted  that  the  appellant  should
    succeed on Article 8 grounds.

Decision

11. The Immigration Judge's decision is set aside.  He erred in law in that
    he failed to take into account a  relevant  matter.  It  is  remade  as
    follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                  Date 23 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
