
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00363/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 October 2019                |On 29 October 2019               |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                     KSU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lewis, instructed by York Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national who was born on 13 October 1984.
     He appeals against a decision  which  was  issued  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  on  16  July  2019,  dismissing  his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's refusal of protection under the Refugee Convention.

 2. The appellant entered the UK in 2010 and claimed asylum in  2012.   His
    claim was refused and an appeal dismissed.  Following  his  arrest  for
    working unlawfully in 2014, however, further submissions were made  and
    those submissions were accepted by the respondent to amount to a  fresh
    claim for asylum.  Whilst that claim was  refused,  the  appellant  was
    entitled to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, which he did.

 3. Before the FtT,  the  appellant  advanced  two  principal  submissions.
    Firstly, that he would be subject to enhanced interest on the  part  of
    the Sri Lankan authorities because of his involvement with a proscribed
    organisation - the Transitional Government of Tamil Eelam ("TGTE") - in
    the United Kingdom.  Secondly, that his mental health was so poor  that
    to remove him would be in breach of Articles 3 and 8 ECHR,  whether  on
    account of the risk of suicide or the suffering which would be  brought
    about by his removal to Sri Lanka.

 4. The judge in the FtT  received  a  significant  amount  of  documentary
    evidence, including expert medical evidence from Dr Lingam, Dr Longman,
    Dr Dhumad and Dr Persuad.  She also heard  evidence  from  an  official
    within the TGTE - Sockalingam Yogalingam - who said that the  appellant
    was his 'right hand man' in that organisation.  The judge  of  the  FtT
    scrutinised the evidence thoroughly and concluded  that  the  appellant
    was of no interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka and that his  mental
    health was not such that his removal would be contrary to the ECHR.

 5. Notwithstanding the apparent care which went into the judge's  analysis
    of the extensive evidence in this case, it is accepted by Mr Kotas, who
    appears for the respondent before me, that her decision is vitiated  by
    legal error and that  it  cannot  stand.   It  is  agreed  between  the
    parties, in those circumstances, that the  proper  course  is  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to be heard de  novo  by  a  different  judge  at
    Hatton Cross.  Given the agreement between the parties, I can summarise
    fairly shortly the reasons which quite properly led Mr  Kotas  to  make
    the concessions he did.

 6. The first accepted error on the part of the judge is the subject of the
    first ground of appeal, by which it is submitted that the appellant did
    not receive a  fair  hearing.   Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant was represented by Mr Paramjorthy of  counsel.   Due  to  the
    nature of the complaint which is raised,  Mr  Paramjorthy  has  made  a
    witness statement in support of this appeal.   In  that  statement,  Mr
    Paramjorthy describes how the hearing  before  the  FtT  straddled  the
    short adjournment.  He called Mr Yogalingam to give evidence before the
    judge rose for luncheon, and  the  oral  evidence  was  completed  just
    before  the  lunch  break.   What  happened   immediately   after   the
    adjournment is recorded at [9] of Mr Paramjorthy's witness statement:

         "The FTTJ then rose for the lunch recess and returned and prior  to
         submissions commencing she stated that she had  spoken  with  other
         Judges about Mr Yogalingam  over  the  lunch  break  and  that  his
         evidence as to how many times he  had  attended  the  Tribunal  was
         inconsistent with his evidence in court."

 7. Mr Paramjorthy explains in his statement that he expressed  concern  to
    the judge about the view she  had  seemingly  formed  as  a  result  of
    conversations to which he had not been privy.  He asked her  to  record
    the exchange in her decision.  She did not do so.  There is however  no
    reason to doubt what is said by counsel in his statement and  supported
    by a contemporaneous email which he sent to his  instructing  solicitor
    after the hearing before the FtT.  Mr Kotas did not attempt to do so.

 8. What is said in the grounds of appeal about this exchange is  that  the
    judge's assessment of the evidence was procedurally improper  and  that
    there was an  appearance  of  bias,  although  there  is  obviously  no
    suggestion of actual bias.  Mr Kotas was content to accept the first of
    these complaints.  In his submission, he asked rhetorically how counsel
    could have hoped to address the view  which  the  judge  had  seemingly
    formed as a result of the  conversation  with  other  judges  over  the
    luncheon adjournment?  To my mind, that  summarised  the  problem  very
    accurately.  If this conversation was to have a bearing on the  judge's
    assessment  of  the  evidence,  the  appellant  had  to  have  a   fair
    opportunity to address it and it is not clear how he could  have  hoped
    to do so, given the private nature  of  the  conversation  between  the
    judge and other un-named judges at Hatton Cross.

 9. In the circumstances, I need not say a great deal about the second  way
    in which the complaint is  put.  The  test  for  whether  there  is  an
    appearance of bias is now well-established and  was  reviewed  at  some
    length by Stanley Burnton LJ (with whom Jacob and Lloyd LJJ agreed)  at
    [42]-[53] of Virdi v The Law Society & SDT [2010] EWCA Civ 100;  [2010]
    1 WLR 2840.  The overarching test remains that which was formulated  by
    Lord Philips in Re Medicaments and Related  Classes  of  Goods  (No  2)
    [2001] 1 WLR 700:

         "The court must first ascertain all the circumstances which have  a
         bearing on the suggestion that the judge was biased. It  must  then
         ask whether  those  circumstances  would  lead  a  fair-minded  and
         informed observer to conclude that there was a real possibility, or
         a real danger, the two  being  the  same,  that  the  tribunal  was
         biased."

10. Applying that test to the circumstances in this case, I  am  driven  to
    the conclusion that there was an appearance of bias as a result of what
    the judge said to Mr Paramjorthy after the lunch adjournment.  This did
    not arise because of her conversation  with  other  judges  during  the
    short adjournment but because of the view she had seemingly formed as a
    result of  that  conversation.   She  had  seemingly  decided  that  Mr
    Yogalingam had not told her the truth because of what she had been told
    outside court.  A fair-minded and informed observer would conclude,  to
    my mind, that the judge had taken against the witness for reasons which
    it was beyond the applicant's power  to  address.   This  was  not,  as
    considered in Sivapatham [2017] UKUT 293 (IAC),  the  expression  of  a
    provisional view on the part of the judge; it was the  judge  conveying
    to counsel a problem with which he could not hope to  deal.   The  fact
    that there is no reference to this exchange  in  the  judge's  decision
    serves to compound, and not to reduce, the  concern  which  necessarily
    results.

11. Mr Kotas accepted that there was a second error in the decision of  the
    FtT.  At [21] of her decision, the judge set out in full  the  headnote
    from the Upper Tribunal's decision in KV (Sri Lanka)  [2014]  UKUT  230
    (IAC).  The judge heard the appeal in June 2019.   KV  was  decided  on
    appeal to the Court of Appeal on 7 March 2017 and on further appeal  to
    the Supreme Court on 6 March 2019.  The decision of the  Supreme  Court
    was very different from the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  that
    Lord Wilson (with whom the other Justices agreed) emphasised at [34]  a
    number of considerations which had to be weighed when assessing whether
    an individual's scars were  the  result  of  self-infliction  by  proxy
    ("SIBP").  Unfortunately, because she made no reference to the  Supreme
    Court's decision, the judge did not consider  those  matters  when  she
    came to the conclusion, at [39] of her  decision,  that  she  found  Dr
    Longman's reason for rejecting SIBP unpersuasive.  Had she referred  to
    the guidance given by Lord Wilson, she  might  have  been  entitled  to
    reach  that  conclusion  but,  having  directed  herself   instead   in
    accordance  with  the  Upper  Tribunal's   overturned   decision,   her
    conclusion is unsustainable.

12. The final error identified in the grounds and agreed by Mr Kotas is  to
    be found at [80] of the judge's decision, in which she stated that  the
    appellant had first been given Mirtazapine in 2015.  She  rejected  the
    evidence given by Dr Persuad, which  included  a  suggestion  that  the
    appellant had been receiving the maximum dose of  this  drug  since  he
    arrived in the UK in 2010, because this  was  'not  borne  out  by  his
    medical records'.  In fact, as Mr Kotas accepted, there is reference in
    the appellant's medical records (at p208 of the bundle)  to  his  being
    prescribed Mirtazapine in at least 2012.  It seems, therefore, that one
    of the principal reasons given by  the  judge  for  doubting  that  the
    appellant was as mentally unwell  as  claimed  was  not  based  on  the
    evidence before her.

13. As a result of these accepted errors, the result is also agreed between
    the parties.  Mr Kotas and Mr Lewis agreed that the only proper  course
    was for the decision of the FtT to be set aside and for the  matter  to
    be remitted to a different judge in that Tribunal  for  redetermination
    de novo.  I agree and will so order.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was erroneous  in  law  and  is  set
aside.  The appeal is remitted to be heard de novo by a different  judge  in
the FtT.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                               25 October 2019

