
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00148/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 March 2020                      |On 24 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      F
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:     Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is a very short decision  because  there  was  complete  agreement
between the parties as to what the Upper Tribunal should do.

2.   In brief, the claimant is a national of Sudan. On 24 December 2018  the
Secretary of  State  refused  to  grant  him  international  protection.  He
appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (the  tribunal).  The  tribunal  found
(albeit after some hesitation) that not only is he a national of  Sudan  but
that he is a non-Arab Darfuri. It decided, in consequence, that he would  be
at risk of persecution or serious harm if  returned  to  his  home  area  in
Sudan. But it also decided that he would be able to  take  advantage  of  an
internal flight alternative to Khartoum. In so deciding, it  took  the  view
that it was no longer required to follow country guidance given in AA  (non-
Arab Darfuris-relocation) Sudan CG [2019] UKAIT and MM (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG
UKUT 00010 (IAC) due to changes which had  taken  place  in  Khartoum  since
those cases had been decided. Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
was granted. That being so, the matter came before me for it to  be  decided
whether the decision of the tribunal contained an error of law  and,  if  it
did, what should flow from that. Representation was as stated  above  and  I
am grateful to each representative.

3.   After the tribunal had decided the appeal, the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
its decision in AAR and AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris-return)  Sudan  [2019]  UKUT
00282  (IAC).  The  Upper  Tribunal  decided  that  there  was  insufficient
evidence currently available to show that the country guidance  as  set  out
in the two cases cited above required revision.

4.   In the circumstances Mrs  Aboni  accepted  that  the  decision  of  the
tribunal could not stand. She urged me to set aside the tribunal's  decision
and to remake the decision by allowing the claimant's appeal. Mr Howard  was
understandably entirely content with that. I have decided  to  do  as  I  am
invited to do. That is because there is agreement between  the  parties  and
because if the tribunal had followed the above  country  guidance  it  would
have had to allow the appeal.

5.   There are three more things  I  would  like  to  say.  Firstly,  in  my
judgement the concession made by Mrs Aboni was  proper,  fair  and  entirely
appropriate. Secondly,  the  decision  of  the  tribunal  was  thorough  and
careful even though I have had to set it aside.  Thirdly,  although  nothing
was said about this before me, I have  decided  to  continue  the  grant  of
anonymity given to the claimant by the tribunal.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside. The Upper  Tribunal  remakes  the  decision  in  these
terms: The claimant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of
24 December 2018 refusing to  grant  international  protection,  is  allowed
both on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds (article 3 of the  ECHR).




Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008. Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall  name  or  otherwise
identify the claimant or any member of her family.  This  grant  applies  to
all parties to the proceedings. Failure to comply may lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed:  Dated: 23 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
