
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00391/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2019                   |On 19 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'KP'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms K Jones, Counsel, instructed by Gurney Harden
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. These are the approved record of the decision and written  reasons  which
   were given orally at the end of the hearing on 5 December 2019.

Introduction

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Abebrese (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 17 September  2019,
    by which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human rights claims on 13 December  2018.
    This decision had in turn refused the appellant's application for leave
    to  remain  based  on  his  political  loyalties  to  the  'LTTE',   as
    constituting a claim of asylum  or  humanitarian  protection;  and  the
    appellant's claim that such  refusal  would  breach  his  rights  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').

 3. In essence, the appellant 's previous claim of asylum had been rejected
    by the respondent  and  also  by  a  previous  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    November 2016. The respondent did  not  accept  further  correspondence
    from a Sri Lankan attorney  as  accurate,  as  the  correspondence  had
    merely referred to allegations made by the appellant's  mother,  rather
    than within his personal knowledge. Even taking the lawyer's assertions
    at their highest that there was  an  outstanding  arrest  warrant,  the
    respondent's view was that this did not mean that he had  been  charged
    with any offence or that he would be detained on  questioning.  He  had
    previously referred to being arrested  with  other  young  males  of  a
    similar age to him, following an explosion in the village and it begged
    the question of why he would still be of interest. His  claim  to  have
    been involved with the LTTE, taken at its highest, was as  a  low-level
    member and whilst the Sri Lankan  lawyer  had  referred  to  an  arrest
    warrant being outstanding in the absence of any 'sur place'  activities
    if detained he would be released shortly without charge.

The FtT's decision

 4. The FtT dealt with a renewed application for an adjournment, which  had
    previously been made at the end of January 2019, and to  which  I  will
    make further comment later in this decision.  This was renewed  on  the
    day before the FtT's hearing  and  at  the  hearing  itself.   The  FtT
    referred to the earlier applications which were apparently made on  the
    basis of the need to adduce new evidence and had been  refused  as  the
    appellant had entered the UK  on  23  March  2015  and  had  had  ample
    opportunity to obtain any evidence since 2015. The FtT did  not  accept
    the qualifications  of  the  Sri  Lankan  attorney,  noting  that  only
    photocopies of his qualifications had been provided; and  the  lawyer's
    assertion about the existence of an arrest warrant  was  undermined  by
    the absence of such an arrest warrant.  Overall, the FtT did not accept
    that the appellant would be at risk of persecution by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities, including by reference to the well-known case  of  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially  that  the
    FtT had arguably applied the incorrect  test  in  deciding  whether  to
    adjourn the hearing and had also failed to engage with the evidence  of
    the Sri Lankan lawyer. The grounds  also  asserted  that  the  FtT  had
    failed to consider the risk of detention on return as  amounting  to  a
    breach of the appellant's rights under  article  3,  even  if  he  were
    released; and the FtT had failed to consider whether he fell within one
    of the risk categories identified in GJ.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant-Hutchison  granted  permission  on  28
    October 2019, regarding it is arguable that the FtT had failed to apply
    the correct test on the issue of adjournment; and  in  considering  the
    evidence of the Sri Lankan attorney. The grant of  permission  was  not
    limited in its terms.

The hearing before me

 7. In terms of the  hearing  before  me,  Ms  Jones  reiterated  that  the
    primary, although not sole focus of the error of law, had been  in  the
    FtT's Judge's refusal to adjourn the hearing.  Whilst Ms Jones was  not
    aware of the circumstances of the earlier January application, what was
    clear was that the FtT had failed to consider not only the reasons  for
    any delay in  obtaining  the  arrest  warrant  but  in  particular  the
    importance of that arrest warrant to the decision in question which was
    potentially determinative of the appeal.  If  the  arrest  warrant  had
    been issued, as claimed, then the appellant would  surely  fall  within
    one of the risk categories in GJ.

 8. Mr Walker on behalf of the respondent expressly conceded that there had
    been a material error of law by the FtT in not adjourning the  hearing,
    noting the well-known authority of SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1284 and also the well-known  authority  of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  Even if, as may well be  the  case,
    there had been a substantial delay by the  appellant's  representatives
    in seeking to obtain the arrest warrant, nevertheless  because  of  the
    importance of the arrest warrant to the proceedings and the appellant's
    claim, the appellant had been denied a fair hearing.

 9. In light of the respondent's concession, I conclude that  the  FtT  did
    err in law in not adjourning the hearing. I regarded it as  appropriate
    to set aside the Tribunal determination  without  any  preservation  of
    findings, as the existence of the arrest warrant was  critical  to  the
    FtT's conclusions about the appellant's credibility and the risk to him
    on his return.

10.  By  way  of  assistance  to  the  parties,  I  set  out  the   precise
    circumstances of the previous adjournment application, as Ms Jones  was
    not aware of these in  full.   The  adjournment  application  had  been
    previously made as part of a 'reply notice' on 29 January  2019.   This
    had included a reply notice itself, which referred to the appellant not
    being ready to proceed with the  then-listed  hearing  on  14  February
    2019. While the reply notice did not explain why,  the  covering  email
    from the appellant's solicitors did appear to attach  separate  written
    submissions, which may well not have been  before  the  judge  who  was
    considering the pre-hearing review process in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    In light of the written submissions not being  before  the  judge,  the
    adjournment application was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  because
    of the absence of any reasons and this  application  was  then  renewed
    shortly afterwards in the grounds which were made on 5  February  2019.
    These reattached the written submissions, the gist of  which  was  that
    the decision which had been served on the appellant between  3  January
    2019 and the notice of hearing, served  on  17  January  2019,  allowed
    insufficient time to prepare for the hearing and this was important  in
    two respects.  First there was a need to obtain further  evidence  from
    the Sri Lankan attorney; and second, an independent psychiatric report.
     In light of the correspondence of 5 February 2019, the  Tribunal  then
    adjourned the hearing in a decision on 13 February  2019.   By  6  July
    2019, the appellant's solicitors applied  for  an  adjournment  of  the
    relisted hearing on 16 July 2019, which  referred  to  the  appellant's
    solicitor being in dialogue  with  the  Sri  Lankan  attorney,  and  an
    inability to obtain the arrest warrant, in part because of  an  absence
    of a response from the Sri Lankan courts and  also  because  of  strike
    action in the local area. There is no explanation by Ms Jones  for  the
    delay between the grant of the adjournment on 13 February 2019 and  the
    renewed adjournment application on 6 July 2019, as to the  steps  which
    were taken to obtain the arrest warrant. Ms Jones  confirmed  that  for
    reasons of cost, while the decision on the appeal to this Tribunal  was
    awaited, work on obtaining the arrest warrant had ceased and had  still
    not been obtained.   As the arrest warrant is said  to  be  of  central
    importance in the case, that will  be  a  matter  for  the  appellant's
    representatives to address without further delay.

11. On the basis of the respondent's concession, I conclude  that  the  FtT
    did err in law in failing to adjourn the  hearing,  in  order  for  the
    appellant to be able to obtain the arrest warrant, said to  be  central
    to his case.  I set aside the FtT's decision without  any  findings  of
    fact, but noting that there is a previous First-tier Tribunal  decision
    unaffected by this error-of-law decision.

12. As an assessment of the appellant's credibility  has  been  undermined,
    and will need to  be  reassessed  in  the  context  of  all  of  wider,
    substantial evidence, the representatives urged me, and  I  agreed,  to
    remit the matter back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  remaking  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete  rehearing
with no preserved findings of fact.

The remitted  appeal  shall  not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Abebrese.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  16 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
