
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00399/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 14 December 2017                 |On 14 December 2017                    |
|                                    |                                       |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                              REBIN SABIR JALAL
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J Howard, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's his appeal against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herwald promulgated 16.2.17, dismissing on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    29.12.16, to refuse his protection claim as an Iraqi Kurd.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 13.2.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pullig  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    8.6.17. However, when the application was  renewed  to  the  UK,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission on 31.7.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 14.12.17 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons summarised below I found  such  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require  it  to
    be set aside and remade, remitting it to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    accordance with the directions below.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Finch noted the recent decision
    of the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and  considered
    it arguable that the judge's findings as to return to  Iraq  failed  to
    address the ability of the appellant to obtain a CSID.

 7. Whilst the Court of Appeal decision, amending the country  guidance  in
    relation to the CSID, was promulgated 11.7.17 and thus  post-dated  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    address the issue of a CSID at all.  There  is  a  distinction  between
    documentation enabling return to Iraq and the  CSID  needed  to  access
    basic resources.

 8. Further, Judge Herwald appears to have misunderstood AA (Article 15(c))
    Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 by suggesting at [11(a)] and at [18]  that  the
    country guidance provided that Kirkuk was no longer a  contested  area.
    That is not what the case held. Kirkuk was a contested  area  in  2015.
    Paragraph 1 of the country guidance in fact provides:

         "1.  There is at present a state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
         certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
         militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group  known  as  ISIL.
         The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called  "contested
         areas", comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk,  (aka
         Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general
         matter, there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
         civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
         there, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to serious harm  within  the  scope  of  Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive."

 9. That part of the Country Guidance remains unchanged following the Court
    of Appeal decision. I note in passing that that some  recent  decisions
    of the Secretary of State have suggested that with the  demise  of  IS,
    which is no longer in control of Kirkuk, it is no  longer  a  contested
    area.  However,  more  recent  country  information  suggests  that  an
    internal armed conflict  continues,  with  the  Iraqi  Army  in  battle
    against Kurdish Peshmerger forces, so that it remains a contested area.



10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is devoid of adequate reasoning
    as to whether the appellant, who is not from the IKR, will be  able  to
    obtain a CSID and how, if he is not to return to Kirkuk  or  settle  in
    Baghdad, he will  manage  to  access  the  IKR  from  Baghdad.  In  the
    circumstances, the decision cannot stand.

Remittal

11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates the findings of fact and the  conclusions  from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues in the appeal.

12. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Consequential Directions

14.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester;

15. The ELH is 3 hours;

16. A Kurdish Sorani interpreter will be required;

17. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Herwald and Judge Pullig;

18. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

19. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

