
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00274/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 October 2016                            |On 24 October 2016             |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                 CECILIA [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar of Counsel, instructed by Queen's Park
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Gambian national born on 7 June 1979.  In  2010  she
    arrived with leave to enter as  a  domestic  worker.   This  leave  was
    extended to expire on 22 August 2014.  She had visited the Gambia  over
    Christmas and New Year 2012/13.  On 11 November 2014 a late application
    for further leave as a domestic worker was refused and on 12  May  2015
    she claimed asylum on the grounds that on  return  to  the  Gambia  she
    would be at risk of female genital mutilation (FGM) or forced  marriage
    or both and on account of her sexual orientation.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 2. On 10 June 2015 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds assert she is of the Jola tribe  and  that  she
    will be forced into a marriage and subjected to FGM or  both  and  that
    she is a  lesbian.   The  appeal  was  initially  subject  to  the  now
    discredited Fast-Track Procedure but was eventually  adjourned  out  of
    the Fast-Track on account of a  series  of  failings  to  find  a  Jola
    interpreter.

 3. By a decision promulgated on 29  June  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal B Morris found the Appellant was not of the Jola tribe and had
    not established her claim to be at risk on  return  to  the  Gambia  by
    reason of her membership of the Jola Tribe or by reason of  her  sexual
    orientation.

 4. On 25 July 2016 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Andrew  refused  the
    Appellant permission to appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 5. The Appellant renewed her application on the same grounds to the  Upper
    Tribunal and on 5 September 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  granted
    permission to appeal on  the  basis  it  was  arguable  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed  to  reconcile  an  apparent  acceptance  that  the
    Appellant gave detailed evidence in the Jola language with the  finding
    that she is not Jola.

 6. In the course of my consideration of the papers in the Tribunal file in
    preparation for the hearing I noticed several matters to  which  I  now
    turn.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal decision recorded  that  there  had  been  much
    discussion about  the  identity  of  the  Appellant's  first  language,
    whether it was Jola or Wolof.  At paragraph  34  of  her  decision  the
    Judge noted "the Appellant  speaks  Wolof  as  her  main  language  the
    prevalence of which is believed to  be  0%  in  the  Jola  Foni  ethnic
    group."  In the next paragraph she went on to  note  that  despite  the
    Appellant having stated in the original  grounds  of  appeal  that  she
    would be seeking an expert report  on  her  ethnicity,  none  had  been
    obtained and no explanation for such failure  had  been  given  to  the
    Tribunal.

 8. At paragraph 42 the Judge had referred to the decision in K and  Others
    (FGM) Gambia CG [2013] UKUT 62 (IAC).   She  refers  to  the  table  at
    paragraph 124 of K and Others and concludes that:-

         "It states that the prevalence of  FGM  within  Jola  phoni  ethnic
         group, the  ethnicity  claimed  by  the  Appellant,  is  not  known
         although it is known that FGM is practised.  The prevalence of  FGM
         in Wolof who migrated from Senegal is 0% and the Wolof who migrated
         from Sine Saloum is not known but it is known that it is practised.
          ..."

    She then finds that the Appellant is from Latrikunda which is an  urban
    area of Serrekunda the largest town in Gambia.  I  noted  at  paragraph
    125 of K and Others that the Upper Tribunal found that although it  was
    setting out factors of general application each case will turn  on  its
    own facts.

 9. I drew the attention of the parties to  the  line  in  the  table  from
    paragraph 124 of K and Others that the Upper Tribunal  found  that  FGM
    was practised with  a  range  of  90%  to  100%  in  the  ethnic  group
    comprising the Jola and Karonikas.  I also pointed out  that  the  same
    table as reproduced in the head note failed to contain  the  line  from
    the table in paragraph 124 which found that the practice of FGM amongst
    the Wolof (overall) may be as high as 20%.

10. I  also  referred  the  parties  to  paragraph  3.16.2  of  the  Gambia
    Operational Guidance Note  v  7.0  of  January  2014  prepared  by  the
    Respondent recording that the national prevalence of FGM in  Gambia  is
    78.3% and the highest prevalence rises to 99%.  This was sourced from a
    UNHCR paper "Too Much Pain - a statistical overview February 2013."

11. I mentioned that I had made  some  research  which  indicated  that  in
    Serrekunda although there is a tiny minority of ethnic Wolof, some  70%
    speak or understand Wolof.

12. The Appellant attended the hearing  with  her  employer  Ms  [C].   She
    appears to have very limited English and I endeavoured  to  explain  in
    the simplest of terms the purpose and procedure to be  adopted  at  the
    hearing.  Thereafter I adjourned the hearing into chambers when I  drew
    the attention of the parties to  the  matters  already  mentioned.   Mr
    Jafar also referred me to the record of the screening interview of  the
    Appellant at pages F1-F4  of  the  Respondent's  bundle  in  which  the
    Appellant stated that the main language she spoke was  Wolof  that  she
    also spoke Jola and had stated her tribe to be Jola and  that  she  had
    been raised in Latrikunda.

13. He also referred me to page K3 in the same bundle being an extract from
    the access Gambia.com website which states that the Wolof comprise  16%
    of the population of Gambia and are the third largest ethnic group.  It
    adds that they are primarily engaged in  the  occupations  of  business
    people, traders or farmers and that most people in the urban  areas  of
    Greater Banjul have adopted the Wolof language as  the  lingua  franca.
    Page L1 of the Respondent's bundle indicates that  Serrekunda  is  some
    thirteen kilometres to the south-west of Banjul.

14. On resuming the hearing, Mr Staunton quite properly conceded  that  the
    failure  of  the  Judge  to  address  these  specific  aspects  of  the
    background evidence in  the  Tribunal  file  would  have  infected  the
    entirety of her findings such that the decision  contained  a  material
    error of law.

Conclusion

15. I note from the Judge's evidently  full  and  very  legible  Record  of
    Proceedings that these particular parts of the background evidence were
    not referred to in submissions, the thrust  of  which  focused  on  the
    Appellant's sexual orientation and the press release issued by  Amnesty
    International on 2 June 2016.  Its 2016 report "Dangerous  to  Dissent"
    focussed on political and media freedom.

16. In the circumstances I conclude that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside in its entirety and the appeal heard afresh.
     Having regard to the extensive fact-finding which will be required and
    the Senior President's Practice Statement paragraph 7.2, I consider  it
    appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for hearing afresh.

Anonymity

17. There was no application for an anonymity order and  having  considered
    the appeal I find none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
    is set aside in its entirety.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.

DIRECTIONS

Not later than ten working days before the next hearing,  the  Appellant  is
to file and serve:-

(1)  An expert report on her tribal ethnicity.

(2)  A doctor's letter confirming whether the Appellant  has  not  undergone
    any form of FGM.

(3)  The appeal to be listed before any Judge other than Judge  B  A  Morris
    and allotted four points.

(4)  A Jola interpreter is required.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  11.
x. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

