
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00656/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2016                           |On 5 January 2017             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    S A M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Syed-Ali
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mayall, promulgated on 14 September 2016,  in  which  he
    refused the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

 2. I make an anonymity direction continuing that made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The application for permission to appeal, which was made in  time,
         contends in particular that the judge misapprehended the date of an
         affidavit from the appellant's  ex-wife  about  his  divorce.   The
         divorce took place in 2010 but the judge took as  a  point  against
         the appellant's credibility that the affidavit was dated 2015.  The
         application states that this is the date of the translation.

         It is arguable  that  the  judge  misconstrued  the  date  of  this
         document when relying on this at para 60 as part of  the  reasoning
         for making an adverse credibility finding.  The  other  grounds  of
         the application, although on the face of them carrying less weight,
         may also be considered arguable."

 4. The Appellant did not attend the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from
    both representatives following which I reserved my decision.

Submissions

 5. Mr. Syed-Ali relied on the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that it was
    a narrow point.  In paragraph 60 there had been misconstruction of  the
    evidence.  He accepted that it was open to the judge  to  consider  the
    weight to be apportioned to the evidence as set out  in  paragraphs  61
    and 62, however the finding relating to the document was  determinative
    of the reasoning in  the  mind  of  the  judge.   The  judge's  finding
    relating to the document had a knock-on effect to the way that  he  had
    considered the discrepancies.  For example, he  noted  the  failure  of
    some witnesses to attend, but failed to give any credit  to  those  who
    did attend.  The fact that two witnesses had attended the hearing  must
    be given some weight.

 6. Further, the discrepancies relating to the narrative of a few hours  at
    the club were not determinative.  In the mosaic of the  facts,  all  of
    the evidence could fit together.  However,  the  findings  relating  to
    this evidence had become determinative of the outcome  because  of  the
    wrong treatment of the document in paragraph 60.  The original document
    was dated 2010, not  2015.   The  weight  given  to  the  evidence  was
    determined by  the  misconstruction  of  the  facts  relating  to  this
    document, which had not been explored properly at the hearing.

 7. Mr. Armstrong relied on the Rule 24 response.  He submitted that  there
    were several reasons why the judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal
    and the reasoning in paragraph 60 was just one of those  reasons.   The
    judge had found that there were problems with the evidence early in the
    decision and this had fed into the judge's findings.  Paragraph 60  was
    not material.  He submitted that there was  no  particular  finding  in
    paragraph 60, but it was just a recording of what had happened  at  the
    hearing.  It highlighted the fact that the  Appellant  could  not  have
    received the document in 2010 if it had been dated 2015.

 8. It had been accepted that the weight to be given to  the  evidence  was
    open to the judge.  The Appellant had  waited  for  five  years  before
    claiming asylum.  It was open to the judge to find  the  witnesses  not
    credible.  These findings  were  not  material.   The  judge's  overall
    findings were based on the totality of the evidence.  He  had  listened
    to the evidence, considered it in the round  and  had  found  that  the
    Appellant was not credible due to discrepancies in the evidence.  There
    had been only one issue before the judge which was whether or  not  the
    Appellant was gay.  The decision  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.

 9. In response Mr. Syed-Ali accepted that weight was a  matter  which  was
    open to the judge but he had given inappropriately heavy weight to  his
    findings which followed on from the  erroneous  finding  regarding  the
    documentary evidence.  It had not been submitted that the document  was
    a forgery, but the fact that the judge considered  that  the  Appellant
    could not have received it in 2010 as claimed, if  it  had  been  dated
    2015, must have weighed heavily on the judge's mind when he came to his
    other credibility findings.

Error of Law Decision

10. The judge turns to his assessment  of  the  evidence  and  findings  in
    paragraph 59 of the decision.  In paragraph 59 he states "I regret that
    I did not find the appellant or the witnesses to be credible or  honest
    witnesses".  He gives no reasons, but turns immediately to the document
    which is at the centre of this appeal.  In paragraph 60 he states:

         "The appellant has put forward  a  document  purporting  to  be  an
         affidavit relating to divorce by a wife to (sic) her  husband.   It
         is in English and it bears the date of 2015.  The appellant claimed
         that he had received this document shortly  after  his  arrival  in
         2010.  His evidence about this then became  confused.   He  claimed
         that he had the original of the document but had not produced it."

11. Although the judge refers to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    produced the original of the  document,  it  is  not  clear  from  this
    paragraph whether he is treating the "affidavit" mentioned in the first
    sentence to be an original or a translation.   I  have  considered  the
    evidence regarding this document as set out in paragraphs 30 and 31  of
    the decision.  It appears from the recording of the evidence set out in
    these paragraphs that there was some confusion about the  date  of  the
    document and when the Appellant had received it.  There was  also  some
    confusion about which language  it  was  in.   However,  there  are  no
    findings in these paragraphs, which just record the evidence.

12. I find that there are no clear findings either in  paragraph  60.   The
    judge refers to an apparent discrepancy in the fact that  the  document
    is dated 2015 although the Appellant claims that he received  in  2010,
    but he makes no findings on the evidence which  he  says  then  "became
    confused".  He makes no reference back to paragraphs  30  and  31.   He
    makes no findings regarding the original document and  the  failure  of
    the Appellant to produce it, just recording that the Appellant  claimed
    to have it, but had  not  produced  it.   The  judge  states  that  the
    document "purport[s] to be an affidavit", but it is not clear if he  is
    referring to a translation or an original document.  According  to  the
    evidence, the original was not before the judge, but it  is  not  clear
    from paragraph 60 whether the judge considers that he is looking at  an
    original affidavit or a  translation.   He  makes  no  findings  as  to
    whether the Appellant claimed to have received the translation in 2010,
    or the original.  I find that it is not clear from this paragraph  that
    the judge is clear as to which document he is considering.

13. While it appears that the evidence was  not  entirely  clear  and  that
    there was some confusion regarding the date of the  document,  and  the
    date of the translation, the judge has made no findings regarding  this
    evidence.  He has merely restated the fact that  there  was  confusion.
    Although the judge makes no clear findings  on  this  document,  it  is
    clear that it is a matter which he considers of some importance, as  it
    is the first issue to which he turns in addressing the  credibility  of
    the Appellant and the witnesses.

14. I find that the judge's failure to make a finding as to whether or  not
    this document was the document which it purported to be, and was  dated
    when it purported to be dated, is an error of law given the  importance
    that he attaches to it.  I now turn to whether or  not  this  error  is
    material.

15. It was accepted by Mr. Syed-Ali that the weight to be given to  various
    matters of evidence is a matter for the judge.   However,  it  was  his
    submission that, having made an error of fact regarding  the  document,
    this infected the credibility findings.

16. In paragraph 61 the judge states that no  evidence  has  been  provided
    from the  Appellant's  previous  partners,  and  that  the  people  who
    originally wrote letters of support did not attend  to  give  evidence.
    He states that he finds it unlikely that they would all be unavailable.
     In paragraph 62 he states:

         "The Appellant did field two witnesses.  There  was  (sic),  as  it
         seems to me, considerable discrepancies between their evidence."

17. He then focuses on one occasion when they went out clubbing.  He refers
    to a "huge discrepancy" as to what had happened.  It appears that  this
    "huge discrepancy" concerns who left which club when  and  who  was  in
    attendance at the club on this one occasion.  He states in paragraph 63
    that there were discrepancies as to when this meeting took  place.   In
    paragraph 64 he states:

         "I gained the distinct impression whilst  they  were  giving  their
         evidence that they had learned from  a  script  but  they  did  not
         necessarily know all the details."

    No reasons are given for this finding.

18. I find that, while it was of course open to the  judge  to  find  there
    were discrepancies in the evidence, he  has  given  a  disproportionate
    amount of weight to the evidence of one event.  This  follows  on  from
    his erroneous treatment of the divorce document.

19. In paragraph 65 the  judge  turns  to  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
    previous marriage and the Appellant's evidence  of  his  marriage.   In
    paragraph 66 he states that he found it implausible  that  if  he  were
    living openly as a gay man his nephew with whom he lived would not have
    become aware of this.  This is all of  the  evidence  which  the  judge
    considers when finding that the Appellant lacks credibility, and  these
    findings are made against the backdrop of the  misconstruction  of  the
    divorce document.

20. I find that, while there are other reasons given for why the judge does
    not  find  the  Appellant   credible,   these   all   flow   from   the
    misconstruction of the document.  Given the importance of the  document
    which shows when the Appellant was divorced from his wife, I find  that
    his failure to make findings on this document, and also his failure  to
    make clear whether or not he was aware  that  he  was  considering  the
    translation or the original, affects the weight which he then gives  to
    other matters in the evidence before him.  I therefore  find  that  the
    error of law is material.

21. As submitted by the representatives at the hearing, were I to find that
    the decision contained an error of law, given the extent of  the  fact-
    finding necessary, this appeal should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I have taken account of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10
    February 2010, paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the  error  has
    been to deprive a party  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair
    hearing or other opportunity for the party's case  to  be  put  to  and
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent  of
    the fact-finding necessary to enable this  appeal  to  be  remade,  and
    having  regard  to  the  overriding  objective,  I  find  that  it   is
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision

22. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    the decision aside.

23. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 4 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


