
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00012/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 December 2016                           |On 30 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               tinashe sochela
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tapfymaneyi, P T Law and Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is my decision following the resumed hearing  at  Bradford  on  12
    December 2016.  In the decision promulgated on 24 October 2016, I found
    that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that  this  decision
    fell to be set aside.  My reasons for reaching that conclusion were  as
    follows:

         1.   I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  the
         respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, Tinashe Sochela, was born
         on 2 November 1990 and claims to be  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe.   He
         appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Hindson)  against  the
         decision of the respondent to deport him to Zimbabwe.  The decision
         was taken on 18 December 2015.

         2.   The appellant was sentenced to three  years'  imprisonment  in
         February 2013 for seven offences of supplying class  A  drugs.   He
         was  released  from  prison  in  August  2014.   He   applied   for
         international protection on the ground that he would be subject  to
         persecution on return to Zimbabwe because of his imputed  political
         opinion.  The respondent refused that application.  The  respondent
         does not accept that the appellant and his partner and children are
         in a genuine partner/parent relationship.  Judge  Hindson  rejected
         the appellant's protection claim in  respect  of  his  claimed  MDC
         profile.  That decision has not been the subject of  an  appeal  by
         the appellant.  Judge Hindson went on to consider paragraphs 399(a)
         and 399(b) of HC  395.   At  [38]  Judge  Hindson  found  that  the
         appellant's relationship with his partner, Miss McPhee  was  formed
         when  the  appellant's  immigration  status  had  been  precarious.
         However, the judge found that the appellant and Miss McPhee are  in
         a genuine relationship.  That finding has not  been  challenged  by
         the Secretary of State.  Likewise,  the  dismissal  of  the  appeal
         under paragraph 399(b) has not been challenged  by  the  appellant.
         The focus of the appeal in the  Upper  Tribunal  (as  it  had  been
         before the First-tier Tribunal) is  the  application  of  paragraph
         399(a):

             399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)
             applies if -

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
             the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         3.   The judge set out his analysis at [41-42].  He found  that  it
         would be extremely difficult for the appellant to "provide for even
         the basic necessities of lives for the children in Zimbabwe".   The
         children would be separated from the benefits which they  enjoy  in
         the European Union.  The  judge  considered  the  appellant  to  be
         "reformed and unlikely to reoffend".   He  accepted  Miss  McPhee's
         description of the family as "normal".  The appellant  looks  after
         the children whilst Miss McPhee works.  The judge noted  that  "the
         effect of the  deportation  order  would,  in  fact,  be  that  the
         children and their father would almost  certainly  never  see  each
         other again".  The judge found  that  the  children  cannot  go  to
         Zimbabwe because of the cost involved.  In light of these  factors,
         the judge was satisfied that it would "be unduly  harsh  to  expect
         the children to remain in the UK while the  appellant  returned  to
         Zimbabwe".

         4.   The problem with the judge's analysis is that it  ignores  the
         ratio of MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450:

         For all these reasons in my judgment MAB was wrongly decided by the
         Tribunal. The expression "unduly harsh" in section 117C(5) and Rule
         399(a) and (b) requires regard to be had to all  the  circumstances
         including the criminal's immigration and criminal history [26]

         5.   The Secretary of State now accepts that it  would  be  "unduly
         harsh" for the children to live in  Zimbabwe.   The  difficulty  is
         that the judge has failed to factor into  his  analysis  the  wider
         public interest concerned with the appellant's  criminal  offending
         and  the  seriousness  of  the  drugs  offence  for  which  he  was
         imprisoned.  The focus in Judge Hindson's analysis  is  exclusively
         upon the effect on the children.  I find that the judge  has  erred
         in law such that his decision falls to be set aside.  The  decision
         may be remade in the Upper Tribunal where both parties  may  adduce
         new evidence to bring the circumstances of the family up  to  date.
         The parties are also referred to the recent further guidance of the
         Court of Appeal in AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012.

         Notice of Decision

         6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 21 July 2016 is set aside.  The findings that (i) the  appellant
         and Miss McPhee are in a subsisting relationship and (ii) it  would
         be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to  live  in  Zimbabwe,  are
         preserved.  Both parties may adduce evidence (which must  be  filed
         and served on the other party no later than ten clear days prior to
         the resumed hearing) concerning the family's current circumstances.
          The Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane)  will  remake
         the decision in the light of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in
         MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450 and AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         1012.

         7.   No anonymity direction is made.

 2. The appellant has not appealed against the findings of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as regards his protection claim.  Although the appellant  told
    me in oral evidence that he was afraid  of  returning  to  Zimbabwe  on
    account of his political views, the appeal on asylum and  human  rights
    (Articles 2/3) grounds is no longer a live matter.  As regards  Article
    8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules, the  standard  of  proof  is  the
    balance of probabilities.

 3. I heard evidence from the appellant.  He told me that he  had  acquired
    qualifications in English and information technology.  He said he would
    have nowhere to live or work in Zimbabwe.  He said that his partner (Ms
    McPhee) works as a reception assistant.  The couple have  two  children
    born in 2013 and 2015  respectively.   Ms  McPhee  has  a  child  by  a
    previous relationship who lives with the family.

 4. I heard evidence from Ms McPhee.  She candidly told me that, if it  was
    necessary, she would travel to live in Zimbabwe with the children.  Her
    child by a previous relationship had no  contact  with  the  biological
    father but his name does appear on the child's birth  certificate  and,
    in consequence, he has parental responsibility.  It will  be  necessary
    to obtain his written permission to the permanent removal of the  child
    to Zimbabwe on order of the court.  The child in question is now aged 6
    years.  Ms McPhee confirmed that the children did not suffer  from  any
    medical conditions.

 5. I heard evidence from Ms Helen Saunderson, who works for  the  National
    Probation Service.  She told me that she had seen the  appellant  about
    twenty times over a period of eighteen months when  she  had  been  his
    Probation Officer.  She believes he is not a risk to the  public.   His
    criminal offending having now ceased.  She could not see that it was in
    the public interest to remove the appellant.

 6. The credibility of the witnesses before  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  not
    challenged by Mrs Pettersen.  I accept that the appellant has not  been
    prosecuted for any  subsequent  offences  following  his  serious  drug
    offending for which he was in prison.  The issue in the appeal  remains
    by that identified by the First-tier Tribunal which is addressed  under
    paragraph 399(a) of HC  395  (as  amended).  If  the  appellant  cannot
    satisfy the Immigration Rules,  that  he  must  show  that  exceptional
    circumstances  justify  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain   outside   the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 ECHR.

 7. I was impressed by the evidence given by  Ms  McPhee,  and  as  I  have
    recorded, did not hesitate in telling me that she would take the family
    to Zimbabwe if that was the only way in which the family  could  remain
    together.  However, I must carry out an objective assessment of whether
    (a) the family  and  in  particular  the  children  may  reasonably  be
    expected to live in Zimbabwe, and (b) whether the effect  of  deporting
    the appellant to Zimbabwe would be unduly harsh upon the  children  who
    would remain living in the United Kingdom.  If I were to find  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the  children  to  live  in  Zimbabwe,  there
    would, of course, be nothing to prevent the family relocating  to  that
    country if that is what they choose to do.  I have no doubt also as  to
    the strength of the relationship between Ms McPhee  and  the  appellant
    who is the father of two of her children.

 8. The position of  the  children  of  the  appellant  and  Ms  McPhee  is
    complicated by  the  presence  of  Ms  McPhee's  child  by  a  previous
    relationship.  Although he does not have contact with the child,  there
    is no reason to suppose that the biological father of that child  would
    be willing to see him removed  permanently  to  Zimbabwe.   This  is  a
    factor which the Tribunal must take into account in  assessing  whether
    or not it would be unduly harsh to  expect  the  children  to  live  in
    Zimbabwe.  If the children were  to  move  to  Zimbabwe  without  their
    stepbrother, it was clear that this would have an adverse  affect  upon
    them and the family as a whole.  That the appellant does not place  any
    risk of persecution in Zimbabwe the conditions there are not good and I
    accept that the appellant has no family or friends who may be  able  to
    offer the family assistance upon their arrival in that country.  Having
    regard to all the circumstances, I do find  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect the children to live in Zimbabwe.

 9. The remaining question, whether or not it is unduly harsh  to  separate
    the appellant from the children is essentially the  same  question  the
    Tribunal must address in  respect  of  an  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  If I find that such a separation would not be  unduly  harsh,
    then this leaves a very narrow margin within which Article 8  may  have
    the potential to operate.

10. As I noted in my error of law decision, all the  circumstances  of  the
    case including the criminal offending and immigration  history  of  the
    appellant must be considered notwithstanding the fact that the focus of
    paragraph 399(a) appears to be upon the children.  Recent guidance  has
    been provided by the Court of Appeal in AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    1012.  At [13] - [17] the Court of Appeal held:

          1. This court has on a number of occasions had cause to emphasise
             that the mere fact that there will be a detrimental effect  on
             the best interests of the children where  the  parent  (almost
             always the father) is  deported  in  circumstances  where  the
             children cannot follow him does not by  itself  constitute  an
             exceptional circumstance. In LC (China) v Secretary of State
             for the Home  Department [2015]  ImmAR  2 the  appellant,  a
             citizen of China,  had  been  convicted  of  two  offences  of
             robbery  and  sentenced  to  five  years'  imprisonment.   The
             Secretary  of  State  made  a  deportation  order  which   was
             challenged on article 8 grounds. The appellant had  two  young
             children who were British  citizens  and  a  partner  who  had
             indefinite leave to remain in the UK. The  FTT  held  that  it
             would be disproportionate to  deport  him  after  taking  into
             account the nature of his offending, the likelihood of his re-
             offending, the circumstances facing the family  if  they  were
             all to live in China, and the best interests of the  children.
             The UT held that the FTT had been  in  error  and  upheld  the
             order. The Court of Appeal (Moore-Bick, Ryder  LJJ  and  David
             Richards J) dismissed the appeal.  Moore-Bick  LJ  noted  that
             this was not a case of  removing  someone  who  had  illegally
             entered the country - had it been, the decision  of  the  FTT,
             which placed particular emphasis on the best interests of  the
             children, might well have been sustainable. But here the  more
             important public interest was engaged of deporting  a  foreign
             criminal. He observed that:

         ".... neither the fact that the appellant's children enjoy  British
             nationality nor the fact that they may be separated from their
             father for a  long  time  will  be  sufficient  to  constitute
             exceptional circumstances of a kind which outweigh the  public
             interest in his deportation"

          1.  In Secretary  of  State  for  the  Hone  Department  v   CT
             (Vietnam) [[pic]2016][pic] [pic]EWCA[pic] [pic]Civ[pic] 488 a
             foreign criminal with two firearms offences and a  variety  of
             other offending was sentenced  to  seven  and  a  half  years'
             imprisonment, having earlier served a  lengthy  sentence.  The
             FTT nonetheless found that his deportation would infringe  his
             article 8 rights. The fact that it was in the  best  interests
             of the children for their father to remain in the  UK  weighed
             particularly heavily with the tribunal. Rafferty LJ, giving  a
             judgment with which Tomlinson LJ agreed, held that it was  not
             a factor capable  of  constituting  exceptional  circumstances
             (paras.36 and 38):

         "The effect on the children was, on the  evidence,  to  leave  them
             unhappy at the prospect  of  their  father  being  on  another
             continent.  I  readily  accept  that  description.  Experience
             teaches that most children would so react. I cannot accept the
             conclusion that, added to  a  low  risk  of  reoffending,  the
             effect on them tips the balance. These children  will  not  be
             bereft of both loving parents. Nor was  there  evidence  of  a
             striking condition in either (I  ignore  the  stepchildren  by
             virtue of their age)  which  his  presence  in  the  UK  would
             dispositively resolve. He is said to have "a  particular  tie"
             with the Respondent. The son was  said  to  have  spoken  less
             confidently when his father was in prison and to have returned
             to confidence upon his release. That is not exceptional. ...

         Appellate guidance is clearer now than when the FTT promulgated its
             decision. As paragraph 24 of LC (China) succinctly explains,
             where the person to be deported has been sentenced to 4 years'
             imprisonment or  more,  the  weight  attached  to  the  public
             interest in deportation remains very great despite the factors
             to which paragraph 399 refers. Neither the British nationality
             of the Respondent's children nor their likely separation  from
             their father for a  long  time  is  exceptional  circumstances
             which  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his   deportation.
             Something more is required to weigh in the balance and nothing
             of substance offered. The approach of both the FTT and the  UT
             failed to give effect to the clearly  expressed  Parliamentary
             intention."

          1. LC (China) and CT (Vietnam) were cases where the sentence was
             over four years and the public  interest  was  correspondingly
             even stronger than in either of these appeals. However, in  my
             view their observations apply equally where shorter  sentences
             are imposed and the foreign criminal does not fall within  the
             specific exceptions in rules 399 and 399A.  Moreover,  similar
             observations to those made in LC and CT have been made in such
             cases.  In SS  (Nigeria) the  appellant  was  convicted  of
             supplying  class  A  drugs  and  sentenced  to  three   years'
             imprisonment. He was illegally in the UK. He had a young child
             in the UK who could, however, be cared for by  his  mother  so
             rule 399(a) did not apply. One of the issues before the  court
             was whether there had been an adequate  consideration  of  the
             child's best interests. The Court of Appeal held that  it  was
             immaterial on the facts; it was quite unrealistic  to  believe
             that further consideration  of  the  child's  interests  could
             possibly lead to the conclusion that deportation  would  be  a
             disproportionate interference with the appellant's  article  8
             rights.

          1. More recently, this  court  considered  a  number  of  appeals
             together in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
             Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662. In some of the cases sentences
             of between 12 months and four years had been imposed.  Jackson
             LJ, delivering the judgment of the court (Jackson,  Sharp  and
             Sales LJJ) made this observation with respect to the interests
             of the children in the context of "exceptional  circumstances"
             (paras.33-34):

                  "..... it inexorably follows  from  the  statutory  scheme
                  that the cases in  which  circumstances  are  sufficiently
                  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high  public  interest   in
                  deportation will be rare.  The  commonplace  incidents  of
                  family life, such as ageing parents in poor health or  the
                  natural love between parents and  children,  will  not  be
                  sufficient.

                  The best  interests  of  children  certainly  carry  great
                  weight,  as  identified  by  Lord  Kerr  in HH  v  Deputy
                  Prosecutor of the Italian Republic [2012] UKSC 25; [2013]
                  1 AC 338 at [145]. Nevertheless, it is a  consequence  of
                  criminal conduct that  offenders  may  be  separated  from
                  their children  for  many  years,  contrary  to  the  best
                  interests of those children. The desirability of  children
                  being with both parents is a commonplace of  family  life.
                  That is not usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance
                  to outweigh the high public interest in deporting  foreign
                  criminals..."

             The  court  then  cited  with  approval  the  observations  of
             Rafferty LJ in para. 38 of the CT (Vietnam) case, reproduced
             in para.14 above.

          1. These cases show that it will be rare for the  best  interests
             of the children to outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in
             deporting foreign criminals. Something  more  than  a  lengthy
             separation  from  a  parent  is  required,  even  though  such
             separation is detrimental to the child's best interests.  That
             is commonplace and not a compelling circumstance.  Neither  is
             it looking at the concept of exceptional circumstances through
             the lens of the Immigration  Rules.  It  would  undermine  the
             specific exceptions in the  Rules  if  the  interests  of  the
             children in maintaining a  close  and  immediate  relationship
             with the deported parent were as a matter of course  to  trump
             the  strong  public  interest  in  deportation.  Rule   399(a)
             identifies the particular circumstances where it  is  accepted
             that the interests of  the  child  will  outweigh  the  public
             interest in deportation. The conditions are onerous  and  will
             only rarely arise. They include the requirement that it  would
             not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK  and  that  no
             other family member is able to look after the child in the UK.
             In  many,  if  not  most,  cases  where  this   exception   is
             potentially engaged there will be the normal  relationship  of
             love  and  affection  between  parent  and  child  and  it  is
             virtually always in the best interests of the child  for  that
             relationship to  continue.  If  that  were  enough  to  render
             deportation a disproportionate interference with family  life,
             it would drain the rule  of  any  practical  significance.  It
             would   mean   that    deportation    would    constitute    a
             disproportionate  interference  with  private  life   in   the
             ordinary run of cases where children  are  adversely  affected
             and the carefully framed conditions in rule  399(a)  would  be
             largely otiose.  In  order  to  establish  a  very  compelling
             justification  overriding  the   high   public   interest   in
             deportation, there must be some additional feature or features
             affecting the nature or quality of the relationship which take
             the case out of the ordinary.

11. The clear message from the Court of  Appeal  in  AJ  and  the  relevant
    jurisprudence quoted in the passages above by the  Court  is  that  the
    separation of a parent from his or her children may be required by  the
    public interest even in  circumstances  where  such  a  separation  may
    appear to be contrary to the  best  interest  of  children  who  remain
    behind in the United Kingdom.  There needs to be something  which  goes
    beyond the bonds tying together the  family  which  must  outweigh  the
    public interest if an appeal is  to  succeed.   Before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Hindson at [42] recorded Ms McPhee having  in  evidence
    described the family as "normal".  With respect, that is the difficulty
    faced by the appellant and his family.  I have no hesitation at all  in
    agreeing with Ms McPhee and Judge Hindson that it is a "normal"  family
    in which the members of the family are held together by strong bonds of
    love and affection.  However, as the Court of  Appeal  observed  in  NA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662, "that is  not  usually  a  sufficiently
    compelling  circumstance  to  outweigh  the  high  public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals ...".  The appellant may be described as  a
    "medium" offender; he did not commit a minor offence by any  evaluation
    but nor did he cross for four years imprisonment threshold which  would
    have led to his being considered under  the  Rules  as  a  particularly
    serious offender.  The fact remains,  however,  that  he  commented  an
    offence involving class A drugs for which the public  interest  clearly
    requires him to be removed from the United Kingdom.  I have to say that
    I can identify no compelling circumstance in the facts before me  which
    might the outweigh public interest concerned  with  his  removal.   The
    guidance now available from the Court of Appeal could not  be  clearer;
    if there is no compelling circumstance then  deportation  will  be  the
    inevitable consequence  of  serious  criminal  offending.   I  am  led,
    therefore to conclude, having regard to all the facts,  that  it  would
    not be unduly harsh for the appellant and his children  living  in  the
    United Kingdom to be separated by reason of  his  deportation.   Having
    dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules,  I  am  unable  to
    identify any another circumstance not covered  or  anticipated  by  the
    Rules which might justify a grant of leave to remain  under  Article  8
    ECHR.



Notice of Decision

Having set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  I  have  remade  the
decision.  The appellant's appeal against the  decision  to  deport  him  to
Zimbabwe is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

