
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00304/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Bradford                   |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On: 16th September 2019              |On: 27 September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MYA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Syria born in 1987.

    2. This protection appeal is allowed by  consent  of  the  Secretary  of
       State so the reasons can be briefly stated.

    3. The Appellant was refused protection on the 4th January 2019  because
       the Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant  was  in  fact  a
       national of Syria. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.
       The  Respondent  placed  reliance  on  a  report   prepared   by   an
       organisation called 'Verified AB' which purported  to  be  an  expert
       linguistic analysis of the Appellant's spoken  Arabic.  Although  the
       report was decidedly equivocal ("the language  analysis  can  neither
       confirm nor refute the hypothesis") the Respondent submitted  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal that it undermined  the  Appellant's  case.   The
       Appellant therefore applied for an adjournment in order to obtain his
       own linguistic report. That adjournment was refused  and  the  appeal
       was dismissed.

    4. On the 17th July 2019 the matter came before The President Mr Justice
       Lane who found that the issue of the Appellant's spoken language  was
       manifestly relevant to the only issue in the appeal, viz whether  the
       Appellant was in fact Syrian.   He found that the First-tier Tribunal
       should have adjourned the hearing before it in order that  a  further
       report could be obtained, and set  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal aside for procedural unfairness.

    5. By the time that the appeal had reached  the  court  of  Lane  J  the
       Appellant had obtained a new report, by a  Professor  Matras  of  the
       University of Manchester. Given the agreement between the  parties  I
       need not set out the detail of that report in writing, save  to  note
       that Professor Matras offers a cogent critique  of  the  Verified  AB
       report, and concludes that in his view the Appellant's spoken  Arabic
       is "fully consistent" with him being a native of Daraa, Syria.   Lane
       J made directions that the  Respondent  consider  that  new  evidence
       before the case could proceed before the Upper Tribunal.

    6. Before me today Mr Diwnycz has explained that the Respondent has done
       so, and accepts the evidence  to  be  authoritative.  The  Respondent
       therefore intends to grant the Appellant refugee status.  Mr  Diwnycz
       is however under instructions that such status cannot be issued until
       the Appellant withdraws his appeal. For her part Ms  Patel  indicates
       that she has no intention of withdrawing the appeal until she has  in
       writing that her lay  client  has  been  granted  refugee  status.  I
       resolve that impasse by simply allowing the  appeal  on  the  grounds
       that  the  Appellant  has  discharged  the  burden   of   proof   and
       demonstrated that he is indeed a national of Syria.

    7. The direction regarding anonymity made by Mr Justice Lane on the  5th
       August 2019 remains in force.

  Decisions

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law  and
       it is set aside.

    9. The appeal is allowed on protection and human rights grounds.

   10. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         16th September 2019
