
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00776/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                          |On 12 November 2018           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                    [A I]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W M Rees, Counsel instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain promulgated on 18 April 2018.  The appellant is  a  Bangladeshi
    national born on 7 December 1992.  He appealed from  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision in January of this year to refuse his application  for
    asylum or discretionary leave, alternatively leave to remain on  family
    or private life grounds.

2.   The principal issue for the judge to determine was one of fact,  namely
    whether the appellant had made out his claim  to  be  homosexual.   The
    judge dealt with  that  matter  and  at  paragraph  18,  rejecting  the
    claimant's contention. The judge was not satisfied that  the  appellant
    had discharged the burden of proof which lay on him in this regard.

3.   Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer on 18 September 2018.  The following reasons were stated:



         "It is arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  adverse
         credibility finding regarding the appellant's claim to  be  gay  at
         [13]  prior  to  and  separately  from  supporting  evidence   from
         witnesses  as  summarised  at  [14]  to  [15].   The  reference  to
         considering all the evidence in the round at [17] arguably  focuses
         upon the documentary evidence alone - see [16] and [17]".

4.   Mr Rees, who represents the appellant today, settled the grounds  which
    led to Judge  Plimmer  granting  permission.  He  has  augmented  those
    written grounds with oral submissions this morning.  His principal  and
    fundamental submission,  to  adopt  his  words,  is  that  the  judge's
    commentary at paragraph 13 effectively meant that "the  die  was  cast"
    and that led inevitably to the dismissal of the appeal.

5.   Accordingly it is necessary to  scrutinise  with  care  the  particular
    paragraphs of the decision on which I have heard  detailed  submissions
    from the representatives this  morning.   It  set  them  out  in  full,
    beginning at paragraph 13.

         "13. I have considered the appellant's claim and  make  an  adverse
             credibility finding for the following reasons:

             (a)  The appellant claims that when his father discovered  his
                  sexuality he beat him and disowned him.  However  this  is
                  inconsistent with the evidence that his  father  supported
                  him in applying  for  a  student  visa  and  continued  to
                  provide financial support whilst studying in the UK.

             (b)  The appellant states that  he  is  unable  to  return  to
                  Bangladesh as his father was informed of  his  active  gay
                  relationships  in  the  UK  and  has  therefore  lodged  a
                  criminal case against  him  in  Bangladesh  in  or  around
                  October 2014.  I do not find this credible given that,  on
                  the  appellant's  case,  his  father  was  aware  of   his
                  sexuality before he left Bangladesh.  There appears to  be
                  no credible reason for why the  appellant's  father  would
                  want to publicise his son's sexuality when he  is  not  in
                  Bangladesh furthermore there appears  to  be  no  credible
                  reason  as  to  why  his  father  would   start   criminal
                  proceedings against his son some 5  years  after  he  left
                  Bangladesh.

             (c)  The appellant entered the UK on  20.11.2010.   He  stated
                  that he was involved in several gay  relationships  whilst
                  in Bangladesh.  This was discovered  by  his  parents  who
                  beat him.  This was the reason he states why  he  came  to
                  the UK to claim asylum.  However, he entered the UK  on  a
                  student  visa  and  despite   several   applications   for
                  extensions of his visa he failed to  make  his  claim  for
                  asylum.  He was given a notice of removal on 9.2.2015  but
                  did not claim for asylum until 15.11.2016.  He states that
                  he was living freely as a gay man whilst in the UK and  so
                  no satisfactory explanation has been given for the  delay.
                  In the circumstances I make an adverse credibility finding
                  pursuant to section 8(2) of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
                  (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 (the 2004) Act  by
                  reason of the appellant failing to make  an  asylum  claim
                  until 15.11.2016.

         14.  I also heard evidence from Mr [SC], he confirmed  and  adopted
             his  letter  at  page  22  of  the  appellant's  bundle.    In
             particular he identified himself as gay and knew the appellant
             as gay also.  I do not find the evidence provided by Mr [C] as
             reliable.  This is because he confirmed that he had also  been
             a witness in relation to another asylum claim at this tribunal
             in the previous week.  He did not purport to be attending as a
             representative of any particular  organisation  so  I  am  not
             satisfied  that  his   evidence   was   either   reliable   or
             independent.  In any event, on his own evidence he  only  came
             to know the appellant from 13.5.2017,  this  being  after  his
             claim for asylum.

         15.  I also heard the evidence from Mr [Z], he  identified  himself
             as a long time friend of the appellant.  He confirmed that  he
             knew that the appellant's sexuality as being gay  and  further
             was aware of the appellant's same sex  relationship  with  [B]
             whilst in the UK.  I do not accept the  evidence  of  Mr  [Z],
             this  is  because  he  purports  to  confirm  the  appellant's
             relationship with [B], which was said to have existed prior to
             his claim for asylum, however there is a complete  absence  of
             any evidence of [B]'s existence or that he  was  gay.   Whilst
             corroboration  of  aspects  of  a  claim  for  asylum  is  not
             necessary, given that these facts are said to have occurred in
             the UK, it is not unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to
             provide some supporting evidence.  Given the vague  nature  of
             the details of the relationship I am not  prepared  to  accept
             that the appellant has been in a relationship with [B] and  Mr
             [Z]'s evidence is not satisfactorily supported.

         16.  The appellant has also submitted  several  documents  to  show
             attending gay events.  In considering these documents  I  rely
             upon the guidance of Tanveer Ahmed [2002]  UKIAT  00439  which
             states that it is for an individual claimant to  show  that  a
             document on which he seeks to rely can be relied on and that I
             should consider whether a document is one  on  which  reliance
             should properly be placed before looking at all  the  evidence
             in the round.

         17.  Having considered all the evidence in the round  I  find  that
             these are not documents that I  can  place  any  weight  upon.
             This is because all post date his claim for asylum  and  given
             that he claims to have been openly gay since coming to the UK,
             there is a distinct lack of evidence to demonstrate this until
             after he claimed asylum.

         18.  I find that the appellant has not established to the  standard
             of proof required that he would have a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution for  a  Convention  reason  were  he  returned  to
             Bangladesh".

6.   Mr Rees made detailed submissions in relation to the three elements  of
    paragraph 13 which he says amount to a pre-judgment of the  fundamental
    factual issue whereby, to coin  his  phrase,  the  die  was  cast.   In
    relation to subparagraph (a) he suggests that it was not  open  to  the
    judge to make that finding, indicating that the father sending the  son
    to the United Kingdom was to "straighten  him  out".   In  relation  to
    paragraph (b) he says there is an explanation for the appellant  acting
    as he did which the judge should have considered; and  in  relation  to
    paragraph (c) again it is suggested that there is a perfectly  credible
    explanation for the delay, namely that the appellant only  agitated  to
    seek asylum once the relationship with his family had broken down.

7.   These criticisms of the judge  are  not  well-founded.   Analysing  and
    assessing evidence is a matter for the tribunal of fact  and  ascribing
    weight to different parts of the evidence is part and  parcel  of  that
    process. That First-tier Tribunal Judge has the benefit of hearing live
    evidence and having it tested in cross-examination, a privilege  denied
    in the reviewing function of the Upper Tribunal. I do not consider that
    giving indications at this stage in the decision  that  the  judge  had
    concerns  with  the  appellant's  credibility  in   relation   to   the
    appellant's evidence  is  in  any  way  a  pre-judgment  of  what  came
    afterwards.  Reading  the  decision  in  a  detached   holistic   makes
    abundantly clear that the judge considered at all the evidence  in  the
    round.

8.   Mr Rees' criticism of paragraph 14 is  rooted  in  the  fact  that  the
    judge seemed to give diminished weight to  Mr  [C]'s  evidence  on  the
    basis that he had given similar evidence in another case  at  the  same
    Tribunal centre the previous week.  Whilst I agree,  and  Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe properly concedes, that this particular matter is not expressed
    well, nor is it something upon  which  the  judge  should  have  placed
    particular reliance, the final sentence of paragraph 14 reads: "In  any
    event, on his own evidence he only came  to  know  the  appellant  from
    13.5.2017, this being after his claim for asylum".  So, although  there
    can be criticism of the judge for the remarks he made in relation to Mr
    [C], the probative value of such relevant evidence as he  was  able  to
    give is unaffected.

9.   Next comes the judge's assessment of the evidence of Mr  [Z].  Here  Mr
    Rees' particular criticism is directed towards the fact that there  was
    apparently a photograph of the gentleman named as [B] in the bundle  of
    documentation before judge.  The existence or otherwise, the photograph
    is not and cannot be determinative. What paragraph 15  makes  clear  is
    that the judge is properly assessing the weight  that  he  could  place
    upon Mr [Z]'s evidence and  its  relevance.  Significantly,  the  judge
    records "the vague nature of the details of the relationship" which  Mr
    [Z] was able to provide. The judge came to a careful evaluation of  the
    quality and probative value of Mr [Z]'s evidence and concluded,  as  he
    was entitled  to  do,  that  it  did  not  satisfactorily  support  the
    appellant's claim to have been in a homosexual relationship with [B].

10.  No proper criticism can be made of the judge for giving  little  weight
    to documentation purporting to show the appellant's attendance  at  gay
    events when, as is common ground, those matters all post-date the claim
    for asylum being made.

11.  During the course of oral argument Mr Rees made criticism of the  judge
    for not making  reference  to  a  legal  opinion,  duly  authenticated,
    provided by a Noushad Parvez practising as CLP (Counsels Law  Partners)
    from an address in Bangladesh.  Mr Rees submitted  that  this  evidence
    should have been referred to and weighed in the balance.

12.  In particular, Mr Rees took me to paragraph 1.5 of this  legal  opinion
    which reads: "In UK, Mr. [I] regularly goes to the gay  club  with  his
    partner". The difficulty for Mr Rees is that that  quotation  is  taken
    from a passage of the letter beginning Summary of Facts which speaks at
    1.1 as being "information provided  by  you".  All  this  expert  legal
    opinion does is to recite the instructions received in relation to  the
    appellant.  It cannot amount to relevant and admissible evidence as  to
    the appellant's sexual orientation. The judge can be criticised for not
    expressly citing that legal opinion. Reference is made to the  criminal
    law and the  legal  position  in  Bangladesh,  a  matter  which  as  it
    transpired was not contentious. There was no need to make reference  to
    the legal opinion which, in any event, contained nothing  of  relevance
    to the factual issue of whether the appellant is homosexual.

11.  Mr Rees raised one final point, although he properly accepted this  was
    not included in the Grounds of Appeal. It concerned the  relevance  and
    applicability of HJ (Iran), and the distinction between the appellant's
    de facto sexual orientation and how it may be perceived. This is not  a
    ground of appeal, nor has  any  application  been  made  to  amend  the
    grounds, therefore  it  does  not  fall  for  consideration.   For  the
    avoidance of doubt, had permission been sought  to  advance  it  as  an
    additional stand-alone ground, it would not have found  favour  because
    it has no relevance to  this  decision  which  was  one  of  fact,  the
    principles if HJ  (Iran)  having  no  impact  upon  the  assessment  of
    evidence as to the appellant's sexual orientation.

12.  Viewing the decision in the round and taking into account all Mr  Rees'
    submissions, I can see no basis upon which it would be  appropriate  to
    set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  has
    clearly given full regard to all the evidence and come to a  conclusion
    which was open to him on that evidence.  I can find  no  error  of  law
    either as propounded in the grounds or as argued  in  oral  submissions
    this morning. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of decision

      1) Appeal dismissed and decision of First-tier Tribunal affirmed;

      2) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                               Date     6 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

