
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00466/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Without a Hearing under Rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 16 October 2020                   |On 26 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                  IRAM [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     AG Solicitors (Written Submissions)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer (Written Submissions)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 6 October  1986.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 January 2014 and claimed  asylum
    on that day.  Her asylum claim was refused by the Secretary of State on
    4 August 2017 and her subsequent appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was
    dismissed on 19 June 2018.  She became appeal rights  exhausted  on  17
    January 2019.

 2. On 7 June 2019, further submissions were made on the appellant's behalf
    which were refused on  27  July  2019  with  no  right  of  appeal.   A
    subsequent judicial review was unsuccessful and permission was  refused
    on 26 September 2019.

 3. Further submissions were again made on the  appellant's  behalf  on  10
    August 2019.  The basis of those submissions  was  that  the  appellant
    suffered advanced chronic kidney disease resulting in a transplant when
    she was 8 years of age.   That  transplant  started  to  fail  and  the
    appellant became dependent upon haemodialysis treatment in April  2014.
    Her claim was that, due to her health, on return to Pakistan she  would
    suffer serious ill-treatment contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR and, indeed,
    because of her condition she would be  unable  to  travel  to  Pakistan
    without a breach of Art 3 of the ECHR.

 4. On 12 December 2019, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim under Art 3 of the ECHR.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and,  in  a  decision
    sent on 11 March 2020, Judge  C  J  Dainty  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  On 27 May 2020  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge  Gumsley)  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal, in particular on the basis that the judge had arguably

         "failed to engage  with  or  address  the  issues  surrounding  the
         evidential burden imposed  upon  the  respondent,  particularly  in
         relation to the appellant's transit to Pakistan".

 7. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, on 30 July 2020 the Upper Tribunal
    issued directions  provisionally  indicating  that  the  error  of  law
    hearing could be held remotely by Skype for Business.  The parties were
    invited to make submissions both on the substance  of  the  appeal  and
    also as to whether they had any objection to a  remote  hearing  taking
    place.  The parties were also invited to discuss the case and ascertain
    whether it was agreed that there had been an error of law by the First-
    tier Tribunal and as to the proper disposal of the appeal.

 8. In response, on 2 September 2020 the Secretary of State  accepted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved an  error  of  law  on  the
    basis upon which permission was granted and "invites  the  Tribunal  to
    set aside the decision of the FTT.  It may be appropriate for this case
    to be remitted to the FTT".

 9. The appellant's legal representative responded on 4 September 2020 in a
    "Skeleton Argument" enclosing up-to-date  medical  evidence  concerning
    the appellant.  The representatives made no reference  to  whether  the
    appeal (at the error of law stage) should  be  determined  remotely  or
    otherwise.  The skeleton argument essentially  seeks  to  argue,  based
    upon the new medical evidence and the decision of the Supreme Court  in
    AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2020] UKSC 17 decided subsequent  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision, that the appellant should succeed under Art 3
    of the ECHR.

10. In the light of the submissions, and having regard to the  respondent's
    concession that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  cannot  stand  and
    should be set aside, I have concluded that it is in  the  interests  of
    justice to determine the error of law issue  without  a  hearing  under
    rule 34 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
    2008/2698 as amended).

11. I accept on the basis of the respondent's concession, and in the  light
    of the appellant's grounds of appeal and the  terms  of  the  grant  of
    permission, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in dismissing the
    appellant's appeal under Art 3 of the ECHR.  That decision cannot stand
    and I set it aside.

12. The appellant now wishes to rely upon  new  evidence  and  the  Supreme
    Court's decision in AM (Zimbabwe) in  seeking  to  establish  that  the
    appellant's health condition would result in a breach of Art 3  of  the
    ECHR if she is returned  (or  in  the  process  of  returning  her)  to
    Pakistan.

13. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of the appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other than  Judge  Gumsley.   At  that
    hearing, the appellant will be  able  to  rely  on  up-to-date  medical
    evidence and the (now) prevailing approach to Art  3  in  health  cases
    after the Supreme Court's decision in AM (Zimbabwe).

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.   That  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

15. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Gumsley.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             20 October 2020

