
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00109/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th August 2019                   |On 20th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    b t r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Wilson-Brown of CAB Bradford and Airedale
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Bashir
    made following a hearing in Bradford on 25th February 2019.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of South Sudan born on 3rd August 1987.   He
    made a claim for refugee status in the UK which  was  refused  on  18th
    December 2018 and the judge dismissed his subsequent appeal.

 3. Mr Howells for the respondent accepted that the judge had erred in  law
    and that the decision would have to be remade by another judge  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant had sought to remain here on the grounds that he would be
    at risk on return on account of his imputed political opinion.   Whilst
    Mr Howells did not consider that he had erred in his  consideration  of
    that aspect of the appeal he did accept that the judge  had  failed  to
    consider the appellant's  claim  to  be  at  risk  on  grounds  of  his
    ethnicity and had failed to deal with  his  claim  to  be  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.

 5. It was agreed between all parties that the proper course was  for  this
    matter to be remitted de  novo  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no
    findings of fact preserved so that the decision could be made afresh.

 6. The judge erred in law because he did not consider relevant matters  in
    reaching his decision and his decision is set aside.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]


Signed                              Date 13 August 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
