
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/00932/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 January 2018                         | On 29 January 2018             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                BQ (PAKISTAN)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Ms H Masood, Counsel instructed by Synthesis
Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr D Milis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Khan sitting at Harmondsworth on 8  February
    2017) dismissing her appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to recognise her as a refugee as a lone  woman  who  is
    estranged from her Pakistani national husband because of  a  false  and
    malicious allegation that he did not father her eldest child; and whose
    alleged risk on return is compounded by the fact that  her  husband  is
    not the father of her two younger children, who she says were  fathered
    out of wedlock by another man who has abandoned  her.  The  appellant's
    three children join in  her  appeal  as  her  dependents:  NU  born  in
    Pakistan on 30.11.07; SA born in UK on 2 August 2012; and  LA  born  in
    the UK on 14 January 2015.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 19 October 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt  gave  her  reasons  for
    granting the application for permission to appeal:

         It is arguable (just) that the FTTJ took an incorrect  approach  to
         the entries in the visit visa applications which do  not  at  first
         blush show that the appellant's husband  made  an  application  for
         entry clearance or came to the UK.  It is also  arguable  that  the
         FTTJ took an incorrect approach to the fatwa which  was  not  "new"
         evidence and that, in combination with the  previous  ground,  this
         could be material.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, whose  date  of  birth  is  11
    February 1982.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 August 2011 on a
    family visit visa which was valid from 6  July  2011  until  6  January
    2012.  She was accompanied by her then only child, who had been granted
    entry clearance in line with her.

The Initial Asylum Claim and Appeal

 4. The appellant made a claim for asylum on  10  November  2012,  and  her
    appeal against the refusal decision was heard by  Judge  Jhirad  on  18
    February 2013.

 5. In her subsequent decision, Judge  Jhirad  summarised  the  appellant's
    claim at paragraphs [7.1] to [7.3]. She had married "AA" in Pakistan on
    3 October 2001.  She lived with her husband and his parents in  Lahore.
    She had become friendly with non-Muslim neighbours.   Her  husband  and
    his family alleged that the child born in 2007 was not in fact that  of
    her husband, but had been fathered  by  a  non-Muslim  neighbour.   Her
    husband  apparently  refused  to  undergo  a  DNA  test  to   establish
    paternity.  In January 2008 her husband's brothers  attempted  to  kill
    her child.  Her husband disappeared from home, and in January 2008  she
    reported his disappearance to the police.  In April 2008 she complained
    to the police about her brothers-in-law.  On 8 July 2008 she left  home
    with her child to stay with a friend, N.

 6. On 12 July  2008,  her  brothers-in-law  lodged  an  FIR  against  her,
    alleging that she had given birth to an illegitimate child and accusing
    her of theft.  In September 2008 she moved  to  the  house  of  another
    friend, "Mrs S", in Rawalpindi.  Mrs S's husband made improper advances
    towards her, so she moved to the house of "Mrs F" in February 2009.  In
    July 2009 she moved to a women's shelter, which she later learned was a
    brothel.  Later that month, she moved to a religious centre, where  she
    stayed until February 2010.  During her stay there, a friend  told  her
    that the police and "moulvis" were looking for her.

 7. An agent lodged on her behalf  an  entry  clearance  application  as  a
    visitor in March 2010. The application was granted in July 2011  (after
    she had appealed against the initial refusal). When she came to the  UK
    in early August 2011, she made the acquaintance of "MA", and  moved  in
    with him in September 2011.  He abandoned her in January 2012, when she
    told him that she was pregnant by him.

 8. Judge Jhirad dismissed the appeal, as she found  that  the  appellant's
    account lacked credibility "in all material respects".  She  held  that
    the appellant had failed to prove the core facts relied upon, including
    her claim that her second child  had  been  fathered  out  of  wedlock.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  refused  on  26  April
    2013.

The First Fresh Claim and Appeal

 9. The appellant made further representations in  support  of  her  asylum
    claim on 30 July 2013, and a  fresh  decision  refusing  to  grant  her
    refugee status was made on  13  May  2014.   Her  appeal  against  this
    decision came before Judge Sweet, whose decision dismissing the  appeal
    is to be found in the second supplementary bundle of  documents  relied
    on before Judge Khan.

10. At paragraph [40], Judge Sweet rehearsed the new evidence  relied  upon
    in the second appeal as justifying a departure from the  conclusion  of
    the Judge in the first appeal.  He noted that the  previous  Judge  had
    doubts about the veracity of  a  FIR  of  8  July  2008.   The  further
    evidence provided in support of the fresh asylum claim included an  FIR
    dated 17 May 2013, a letter from a friend of the appellant, N,  stating
    that the police were still searching for  her,  and  a  statement  from
    Bishop Azaria dated 28 May 2013, which had been prepared at the request
    of N.

11. Judge Sweet found at paragraph [41] as follows:

         Following the principles in Devaseelan I must consider whether this
         further evidence assists the appellant in her claim  or  not.   The
         fundamental issues as to her credibility remain, and I consider  it
         implausible that the appellant's brother-in-law would be pursuing a
         vendetta against the appellant some five years after  the  previous
         incidents in 2008 and more than eighteen months after she  came  to
         the UK in August 2011.  There is no corroborative evidence that the
         photographs of [BL's] house are of his house and  it  seems  to  me
         that the appellant has made  these  further  submissions  (in  July
         2013) immediately after her final rights of appeal were  exhausted.
         As the previous judge had decided,  it  was  implausible  that  the
         appellant, if she was really in fear of her life or the life of her
         daughter, would have stayed in Pakistan from 2008 and  delayed  her
         escape to the UK till August 2011.   Whether  or  not  the  further
         documents produced are genuine, I do  not  think  they  assist  the
         appellant in her claim, particular as her main account has  already
         been rejected.

12. Judge Sweet went on to dismiss the appellant's appeal, and his decision
    was upheld by the Upper Tribunal, following a hearing at Field House on
    12 December 2015.

The Second Fresh Claim

13. In a letter dated 24 November 2015,  the  appellant's  solicitors  said
    that their client now  had  "new  information  and  evidence  of  vital
    importance" to substantiate her asylum claim.  The new information  was
    that, on 3 May 2015 the appellant's brothers-in-law ("R" and  "Z")  had
    again fired on "BL" (the Christian neighbour who was falsely accused of
    fathering NU).  As a  consequence  of  the  attack,  BL  had  sustained
    serious injuries to  his  legs.   He  was  immediately  taken  to  Rana
    Hospital in Lahore.  The assailants had also  threatened  to  kill  the
    appellant.  They left BL unconscious, believing him to  be  dead.   The
    evidence to support the above was a FIR made by BL's brother on  3  May
    2015, and documents from Rana Hospital that showed the treatment  which
    BL had received at the hospital.  Reliance was also placed on a  letter
    from a Pastor, which had been issued at N's request.

The Reasons for Refusal of the Second Fresh Claim

14. On 6 January 2016, the respondent gave her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's fresh claim for asylum based upon the  new  evidence.   The
    letter cited a Country of Information Report on  Pakistan,  dated  June
    2012, for the proposition that  in  nearly  all  cases,  the  documents
    presented by asylum seekers for proof of persecution such  as  warrants
    for  arrests,  court  judgments,  and  lawyers'  correspondence,  "were
    falsified  or  of  incorrect  content".   In  Pakistan,  it  was   not,
    "difficult to have a (simulated) criminal proceeding initiated  against
    oneself,  in  order  to  get  authentic  documents"  such  as  a  First
    Information Report or a decision to set the accused free until the date
    of trial. Accordingly, it was considered that the FIR  and  the  letter
    from the Church were entirely self-serving and should not  be  accepted
    as independent corroboration of the appellant's claim.

15. It was noted that she had a  third  child  in  the  UK.   The  father's
    details had not been mentioned by her, and were absent from  the  birth
    certificate.  It was not known if her husband had visited  her  in  the
    UK, or who the father actually was.  Taken with  the  previous  adverse
    credibility findings, it was not accepted that this child had been born
    out of wedlock.

16. In summary, based upon the evidence she had given, it was not  accepted
    that she was accused by her husband and his family of adultery prior to
    her departure from Pakistan, as her account  had  been  found  to  lack
    credibility and it was not believed that her second daughter  was  born
    out of wedlock.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

17. The appellant's appeal against this refusal decision came before  Judge
    Khan by way of remittal from the Upper Tribunal, the previous  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  having
    been set aside as containing a material error  of  law.   Both  parties
    were legally represented before Judge Khan.

18. In  paragraph  [2]  of  his  subsequent  decision,  he  summarised  the
    appellant's claim.  After she gave birth to a daughter on  30  November
    2007, she was accused by her husband and his family that the child  was
    not his, and that she  was  having  a  relationship  with  a  Christian
    neighbour by the name of BL,  who  she  had  befriended.   (I  note  en
    passant that this is a different version of events from that  given  to
    Judge Jhirad, in which the  appellant  claimed  that  her  husband  was
    supportive of her on the issue of paternity.)  The appellant said  that
    she was unable to return to her own family, because they  believed  the
    allegations made by her parents-in-law.  She claimed that she had  been
    beaten by her brother and told not to come to  the  family  home  again
    otherwise she and her daughter would be killed.  She also claimed  that
    her parents-in-law had decided to  kill  her  and  her  daughter.   She
    reported these matters to the police, but they took no action.

19. She  claimed  that  her  brother-in-law  assaulted  her  daughter,  and
    threatened to kill her.  She said they  had  left  her  home  area  and
    stayed with a friend, taking all her jewellery with her on 8 July 2008.
     On 12 July 2008, a FIR was lodged against her, stating that she had  a
    legitimate daughter born from a relationship with a Christian, and  she
    was also accused of theft of jewellery.

20. One month after her arrival in the UK, she  had  begun  a  relationship
    with MA, and she had had two children by him.

21. In May 2013, BL's house was set on fire and he was  attacked,  and  the
    incident was reported to  the  police.   In  May  2015,  BL  was  again
    attacked and the matter was also reported to the police.

22. The appellant claimed that she could not return to Pakistan because two
    of her three daughters were illegitimate.  Also, her life would  be  in
    danger from her own family and from her husband's family.

23. As is recorded at paragraph [11] of the decision,  during  his  closing
    submissions, the Presenting Officer made reference to a printout from a
    Home  Office  database,  pertaining  to  the  appellant's  visit   visa
    application.  The printout had not previously  been  disclosed  to  the
    appellant or to the Tribunal.  The Presenting Officer submitted that it
    showed that her  husband,  AA,  and  their  child  were  named  on  the
    application for a visit visa.   The  appellant  was  recalled  to  give
    further evidence on this issue.  She said that her  husband  had  never
    applied to come to the UK.  She did not know "SJ", who  was  stated  in
    the application form to be her sponsor -and her aunt  -  and  she  said
    that she had never been  to  [                      ],  which  was  the
    sponsor's stated address.

24. The Judge's findings were set  out  in  paragraphs  [14]  onwards.   At
    paragraph [20], he concluded that  he  did  not  find  that  the  fresh
    evidence added anything to the appellants' case at all.  He found  that
    it was a somewhat desperate attempt by her to try and remain in the  UK
    by introducing evidence which  he  could  not  regard  as  reliable  to
    support her case that she was at a real risk on return to Pakistan  and
    that she was wanted by the Pakistani authorities.

25. At paragraph [21], he embarked on a discussion of the visa  application
    form, showing that the appellant had made an application for  a  family
    visit visa, "and [that] the appellant's husband [AA] and  her  daughter
    ... were included on the application".

26. He did not accept the appellant's evidence that she did  not  know  who
    the sponsor was.  This was because the sponsor's  address  was  in  the
    same road where the appellant said that she had lived with MA.

27. At paragraph [23], the Judge held that it was simply  unbelievable  for
    the  appellant,  given  her  cultural  background,  to  enter  into   a
    relationship with another man within one month of arrival in the UK  on
    a family visit visa to see her family.  There was no evidence  that  MA
    was the father of her second and third children, and he found that  she
    had manufactured a story that she could not go back to Pakistan because
    she had a two illegitimate children and would be without support.

28. At paragraph [25], he said: "SM involved the question of whether  there
    is a likelihood of ostracism on the basis of  a  lone  mother  with  an
    illegitimate child."  However, he did not accept that the appellant had
    had two illegitimate children from a mysterious MA who had  disappeared
    off the face of the earth.  Accordingly, he found that there  would  be
    no risk to her and her children upon return to Pakistan.

29. The Judge went on to make a positive finding that it  was  very  likely
    that her husband also came to the UK on a family  visit  visa,  "either
    separately or with the Appellant".  He acknowledged that there  was  no
    evidence before him in relation to his specific arrival in the UK,  but
    he entirely agreed with what had been said by the judge  in  the  first
    determination:

         It beggars belief that a Muslim woman with traditional values  who
         has fled apparent ill-treatment at the hands of her husband and his
         relatives would risk her safety and move in to cohabit with a  male
         stranger in the strange country within a brief period  of  arriving
         in the UK and become pregnant by him.

The Error of Law Hearing

30. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out,  Mr  Milis  produced  further  evidence  relating  to   the   visa
    application which was not before Judge Khan. This comprised the missing
    pages from the printouts from the Home Office database (Judge Khan  had
    only  been  given  the  odd-numbered  pages),  and,  of  much   greater
    materiality, the notice  of  refusal  of  the  appellant's  visit  visa
    application dated 31 March 2010.  It  was  apparent  from  the  refusal
    notice that the understanding of the Entry Clearance Officer  was  that
    the appellant proposed  to  travel  to  the  UK  without  her  husband.
    However, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was a genuine visitor.

31. Mr Milis submitted that the Judge had not made a clear mistake of  fact
    in his decision, as his findings were broad enough to cover the  actual
    scenario disclosed by the refusal notice.  So  there  was  no  material
    error, and the same applied  to  the  Judge's  observations  about  the
    fatwa.

32. Ms Hasood developed the arguments advanced in the  grounds  of  appeal,
    and she also  addressed  me  on  the  implications  of  the  additional
    disclosure made by Mr Milis. She submitted that the errors made by  the
    Judge were material, and  that  there  needed  to  be  a  complete  re-
    assessment of the appellant's credibility.

Discussion

The Fatwa

33. It is convenient to deal with the issue of the fatwa first.  The  Judge
    made a mistake of fact in treating the "fatwa" claim as  a  new  claim.
    Although it does not feature in the summary of the  evidence  given  by
    Judge Jhirad, it is mentioned in Judge Sweet's rehearsal of the  claim.
    The appellant said that when she  went  to  a  house  of  a  friend  in
    February 2009, "she was told that Moulvi had given  a  verdict  (fatwa)
    against her because of her alleged relationship with a  non-Muslim  and
    giving birth to an illegitimate child with a Christian".

34. Ms Masood submits that Judge Khan's error is material,  as  he  treated
    its late introduction as being part of a "somewhat desperate attempt by
    her to try and remain in the UK by introducing evidence which I  cannot
    regard as reliable": see paragraph [20].

35. However, I do not consider that the error is material, for a number  of
    reasons.   Firstly,  the  fatwa  claim  never   had   any   independent
    credibility, as it was not supported by documentary  evidence  and  the
    only source for the claim was the appellant. Moreover, she only claimed
    to have been told of the fatwa by someone  else.  Secondly,  the  fatwa
    claim was caught by the earlier adverse credibility  findings  made  by
    both Judge Jhirad and Judge Sweet. So it was not a  piece  of  evidence
    which Judge Khan could regard as advancing the appellant's case.  Thus,
    the Judge was right to treat this piece of evidence as "evidence  which
    I cannot regard as reliable", albeit that he gave the wrong reason  for
    so doing.  Thirdly, the comment which the Judge made in paragraph  [20]
    of his decision clearly  applies  to,  and  holds  good  for,  the  new
    evidence which the Judge discussed at paragraph [18] of  his  decision,
    and in respect of which he made specific and  sustainable  findings  to
    the effect that they were not  transformative  of  the  landscape,  and
    hence they were not reliable to support her case that there was a  real
    risk of her returning to Pakistan, or her case that she was  wanted  by
    the Pakistani authorities.

The Visit Visa Application - The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

36. In her witness statement of 3 February 2017 which she  adopted  as  her
    evidence in chief before Judge Khan, the appellant said that the  agent
    had procured her passport and other required documents  using  her  in-
    laws address because her National  ID  card  was  registered  to  their
    address. The agent paid PKR 15,000 to the postman to give him  all  the
    post that was being sent to the in-laws address in  her  name  and  her
    daughter's name. The  arrangement  continued  for  the  appeal  against
    refusal: the postman gave all the documents to the agent that came from
    the Tribunal and UKBA.

37. The documentary evidence relating to the contents  of  the  visit  visa
    application which was placed before the Judge showed on the front  page
    the name of her husband alongside the name of her daughter, followed by
    the words: "Waiting for VAF".  This was under the heading of Additional
    Information.

38. Ms Masood pleaded in the grounds of appeal that the findings which  the
    Judge  made  on  the  basis  of  this  evidence  were  perverse  and/or
    irrational, as they were  wholly  unsupported  by  the  evidence.   The
    findings which were said to be perverse were (a) that  the  appellant's
    husband was "included" in the application; and (b) the finding that  it
    was very likely that her husband came to the UK on a family visit  visa
    "either separately or with the appellant."

39. On the evidence that was shown to the Judge, it  would  not  have  been
    perverse or irrational for him to draw the inference that  the  husband
    was included in the application in the sense of  him  applying  at  the
    same time for a visit visa alongside the appellant and  their  daughter
    (Contingency A) - as distinct from the husband being  included  in  the
    application in the alternate capacity of  an  important  family  member
    whom the appellant and her daughter ostensibly proposed to leave behind
    in Pakistan, and hence in respect of whom  they  would  have  a  strong
    incentive to return to Pakistan before the expiry  of  their  visas  to
    reconstitute their nuclear family unit (Contingency B). I consider that
    the words  on  the  front  page  are  reasonably  susceptible  of  both
    constructions. I also consider that, taken in isolation,  it  would  be
    reasonable to construe them in the first sense  in  preference  to  the
    alternate sense.

40. However, insofar as it is material, I am not persuaded that  the  Judge
    unequivocally committed himself to Contingency A. I consider  that  the
    Judge deliberately reflected the ambiguity inherent in the words on the
    front  page  by  his  phraseology,  which  is   apt   to   cover   both
    contingencies. In addition, whereas he flatly rejected the  appellant's
    oral evidence that she did not know the UK sponsor, he did  not  reject
    the appellant's oral evidence that her husband  did  not  apply  for  a
    visit visa at the same time as she did.  He accepted that she might  be
    telling the truth on this point, as he held that the husband  may  have
    come to the UK separately.

41. As the Judge acknowledged, he had no specific evidence of the husband's
    arrival in the UK. Accordingly if his only reason for finding that  the
    family unit had been reconstituted in the UK was what was said  on  the
    front page of the database printout, his positive finding of fact would
    have been unsustainable. But this  finding  also  rested  on:  (i)  the
    appellant not telling the truth about her  knowledge  of  the  sponsor;
    (ii) the sponsor and MA living in the same street; (iii) the surname of
    MA was virtually identical to the surname of AA (pointing to  the  fact
    that they were in reality one  and  the  same  person),  and  (iv)  his
    agreement with Judge Jhirad that her account of becoming impregnated by
    MA was wholly incredible, and that it was very likely that she had been
    impregnated by her husband, who must have been in the  UK  nine  months
    before the appellant gave birth to their second child.

The Visit Visa Application  -  The  additional  evidence  before  the  Upper
Tribunal

42. I ask myself whether there is a real possibility that the outcome would
    have been different if the Judge had been shown the visit visa  refusal
    decision.  I am not persuaded that there is a real possibility that the
    outcome would have been different.  I accept that there would have been
    no evidential basis for  the  Judge  drawing  the  inference  that  the
    husband had applied at the same time for a family visit visa.  However,
    the additional evidence would not have negated Contingency B -  indeed,
    it would have fortified it - and it would not have negated the  husband
    coming to the UK separately. In the light of the other reasons he  gave
    for inferring family reunion in the UK, I consider that the Judge would
    still have made a positive finding to this effect. He  certainly  would
    not have found that the  effect  of  the  additional  evidence  was  to
    engender  a  real  risk  that  the  second  and  third  children   were
    illegitimate.

43. Ms Masood submitted that the additional  evidence  is  helpful  to  the
    appellant's case as it is  consistent  with,  and  supportive  of,  the
    account of the making of the application which she gave in her  witness
    statement.

44. But on  the  account  given  by  the  appellant,  the  application  was
    fraudulent,  as  she  was  not  a  genuine  visitor  and  she   falsely
    represented that she was residing at her  in-laws  address,  which  was
    also, on her account, the  last  known  address  of  her  husband.  The
    additional evidence does not assist the appellant on the issue  of  her
    general credibility, as it only serves to highlight the extent  of  the
    fraud that must have been perpetrated, on the appellant's  account,  in
    order for her to succeed in her  visit  visa  appeal.  In  theory,  the
    application might only have been  refused  on  financial  grounds.  The
    production of the refusal notice shows  that  it  was  refused  on  the
    grounds that the appellant was not a genuine visitor. So  in  order  to
    succeed  in  her  appeal,  the  appellant  must  have  provided   false
    assurances about her family ties to Pakistan. It  is  possible,  as  Ms
    Mahmood submitted, that she only relied  by  way  of  appeal  on  wider
    family ties, and not on her marital tie to her husband. But  this  does
    not change the fact that, on her account, the appellant was still being
    highly  dishonest  about  enjoying  settled  family  circumstances   in
    Pakistan, and having a familial incentive to return to Pakistan.

45. An additional consideration on materiality is that the Judge's positive
    finding of fact on family reunion in the UK was unnecessary. The  Judge
    had already given adequate reasons for dismissing the appellant's  core
    claim before he went on to consider the implications of the visit  visa
    documents and the appellant's oral evidence about them. The appellant's
    core claim included the claim that she would be returning  to  Pakistan
    with two illegitimate children. This claim had been  rejected  by  both
    Judge Jhirad (after the birth of the second child) and by  Judge  Sweet
    (after the birth of the third child). Judge Khan's positive finding  of
    fact on family reunion in the UK was advanced by him as  an  additional
    reason for dismissing the appeal over and  above  the  reasons  he  had
    already  given  for  dismissing  it.  Since  the  earlier  reasons  are
    sufficient, it does not matter if his finding  on  family  reunion  was
    tendentious and/or partially based on a mistaken interpretation of  the
    documentary evidence relating to the visit visa application.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date  20 January 2018


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


