
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/00702/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30th June 2017                      |    On 5th July 2017                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     b K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Raw, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, in respect of a  Decision  and  Reasons  of  Judge  Baldwin
    promulgated on 19th April 2017 following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on
    5th April 2017.  The Appellant, now 18, is a  citizen  of  Albania  who
    arrived in the UK when he was 16 and  claimed  asylum  immediately.  He
    made a claim to have been trafficked.  Initially the  first  assessment
    by the NRM was such that he was accepted for further  assessment.   The
    standard of proof of course is very low for that first  assessment.  On
    the second, more detailed assessment, his claim to have been trafficked
    was rejected.  There followed a refusal by the Secretary  of  State  of
    his Protection claim.  His protection claim was based on a  blood  feud
    that the Appellant claimed his father was involved in.

 2. The Judge dismissed  the  appeal  finding  the  claims  to  be  without
    credibility.  The grounds attack several aspects of that judgment.  The
    main ground is that the first adverse credibility point is  unjustified
    and wrong and tainted the Judge's view of this Appellant  and  infected
    all the other adverse findings.  The finding referred to is in relation
    to an apparent inconsistency which the Judge found  to  be  an  untruth
    about whether or not the Appellant was having counselling.   There  was
    some confusion in the evidence because the Appellant did claim  in  his
    statement to be suffering from depression and to having  been  referred
    for counselling.  In the asylum interview  he  refers  to  having  some
    counselling from his social worker in relation  to  living  in  the  UK
    rather than anything to do with the mental  health  issue.   The  Judge
    seems to have confused the two  and  thought  that  the  Appellant  was
    claiming that he was receiving counselling from a social worker when  a
    letter form the social worker said he was not and that no mental health
    issues were mentioned.  The Judge found that meant that  the  Appellant
    was being untruthful about his treatment.  That is wrong and  it  is  a
    confusion of the evidence.  He was right to say there was  no  evidence
    of a mental health issue which the Appellant had claimed,  but  he  was
    wrong to say  he  had  been  untruthful  about  receiving  counselling.
    Whether that error is sufficient to upset the Decision and  Reasons  in
    its entirety remains to be decided.

 3. The second ground is that the Appellant was unjustly criticised for not
    producing back-up e-mails attached  to  various  e-mails  that  he  did
    produce.  That is a disagreement with the Judge's conclusions.   It  is
    not the case that he could not  possibly  have  provided  any  of  this
    evidence because his evidence was he was in contact with his uncle  and
    his uncle could have been asked to assist.  He was represented and  not
    producing the entirety of the  e-mails  was  something  the  Judge  was
    entitled to hold against him.

 4. The Judge is next criticised for accepting the evidence of the  Embassy
    in Tirana that the Appellant travelled from Albania in the  company  of
    his father.  It is argued that that whilst there is  information  given
    by the Embassy about the Appellant having travelled  and  his  passport
    and his photograph, the only information about his father was his name.
     I cannot see an error of law there because it is quite apparent,  even
    on the evidence adduced on behalf of the Appellant in the  form  of  an
    expert report from Dr Korovilas, that the airport has reliable scanning
    of biometric passports.  The expert said that  the  evidence  that  the
    passport of his  father's  was  used  at  the  airport  was  reasonably
    reliable.  The expert does not really  help  the  Appellant  in  saying
    simply "slightly too much weight had been given to information provided
    to the British Embassy".  The Judge was entitled to  attach  weight  to
    that evidence from the Embassy.

 5. The Judge also found against the Appellant on the basis  of  his  claim
    that his father was unwell at the time he travelled, when that evidence
    quite clearly, and for the reasons  the  Judge  gave,  was  unreliable,
    saying as it did at the  same  time  that  he  should  have  ambulatory
    treatment and bed rest.

 6.  The  other  criticisms  are  that  the  Judge   erred   in   requiring
    corroborative evidence, arguing that  the  Judge  is  not  entitled  to
    expect  corroborative  evidence  and  it  was   unreasonable   in   the
    circumstances of this Appellant to  expect  it.   However,  as  I  have
    previously said it was the Appellant's case that he is in contact  with
    his uncle who could have assisted - as he did with the emails.

 7.  There are other adverse findings that the  Judge  makes,  quite  apart
    from those mentioned above.  He simply did not find it credible that if
    the Appellant is in touch with an uncle he is not in touch  with  other
    family members.  The Judge noted that it  is  highly  likely  that  his
    father is still in Albania and that evidence simply  does  not  support
    the Appellant's claim to be in fear of reprisals from another family in
    connection with a blood feud.   It  is  also  of  note  that  there  is
    evidence from Albania that no such blood feud existed and the Judge was
    entitled to attach weight to that.

Notice of Decision

 8. Overall therefore I find that this Decision and Reasons, whilst it does
    contain an error caused by confusion about the evidence in relation  to
    counselling, also contains numerous reasons open to the  Judge  on  the
    evidence as to why this claim was totally  without  credibility  and  I
    find therefore that there is no material error of law and the appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date 4th July 2017

C J Martin
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


