
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00986/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2016                     |On 26 October 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                      SP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago, born on  8  February
    1980.  Her daughter, Ms AP, a  minor,  is  dependent  on  her  mother's
    claim.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 9 August  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lloyd dismissed the Appellant's appeal, against the refusal of
    the Respondent of her application for  asylum,  on  all  grounds.   The
    Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal with permission.

 3. The issue before me was a narrow one.  The Appellant contends that  the
    judge's decision at the hearing to refuse Counsel's application for  an
    adjournment was procedurally unfair.

 4.  The  Appellant's  representatives  indicated  (and  indeed  this   was
    confirmed by the judge at paragraph [6]  of  his  decision)  that  both
    Counsel for the Appellant and the Respondent conducted the hearing with
    reference to a Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 20 January  2016  which
    contained a concession on the part of  the  Respondent  accepting  that
    threats had been made against the  Appellant.   However,  during  final
    submissions (Mr Dhanji indicated before me it was during the course  of
    his own submissions) it emerged that the judge had prepared the  appeal
    on the basis of a different version of the Reasons for Refusal  Letter.
    This version was also dated 20 January 2016 but  in  this  version  the
    Respondent did not accept that threats had been made to the  Appellant.
    For ease of reference I adopt the same descriptions as adopted by Judge
    Lloyd where he described the version which did not accept  the  threats
    as "version 1" and the version which did accept the threats as "version
    2".

 5. As already noted, both parties had prepared and made their  submissions
    on the basis of version 2; when this discrepancy emerged the Respondent
    sought  instructions  and  then  indicated  that  the  Respondent   was
    withdrawing  version  2  and  therefore  withdrawing   the   concession
    accepting the threats.  Counsel for the  Appellant  then  requested  an
    adjournment as the Appellant would  not  have  had  an  opportunity  to
    obtain evidence in respect of the issue.

 6. Judge Lloyd refused that adjournment on the basis that  version  1  had
    been attached to the original appeal made by the appellant and  to  the
    Appellant's bundle and it was clear therefore that  the  Appellant  had
    been in receipt of the correct version, as the judge described it,  all
    along.  It was Judge Lloyd's view that Mr Dhanji's  instructions  could
    and should have reflected this.  In addition, the judge indicated  that
    he had asked the Appellant about the threats during the hearing and was
    satisfied there was enough evidence to  enable  him  to  reach  a  fair
    conclusion on the matter.  Thirdly in the course  of  the  hearing  the
    Appellant had already  said  that  there  was  nobody  else  who  could
    corroborate the events.  Fourthly the judge was of the  view  that  the
    only other likely source of corroboration would be phone  records  from
    2008 and the judge found it unlikely that these would now be  available
    and in any event he was of the view  that  they  were  unlikely  to  be
    conclusive.  The judge also indicated that  he  offered  Mr  Dhanji  an
    opportunity to  reopen  oral  evidence  on  the  point  but  Mr  Dhanji
    declined.

 7. Although Mr Kotas initially sought to resist the appeal,  he  indicated
    during the  course  of  his  submissions  that  he  had  been  under  a
    misapprehension in relation to the judge's approach.  He then  conceded
    that there was a material error of law and  that  the  proceedings  had
    been unfair.

 8. I am satisfied that this has to be the  case.   The  president  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe (Adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
    sets out that the test and the sole test is whether the  decision  (not
    to adjourn) was unfair.  I also rely, as set out  in  Nwaigwe,  on  the
    Court of Appeal's opinion in SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.

 9. Whilst it was not unfair of the judge (and indeed  Mr  Dhanji  did  not
    make this argument) to allow the Respondent to withdraw the concession,
    I am not satisfied that the Appellant was given a fair  opportunity  to
    address what in effect was a material change to her case.

10. Although I have noted the  judge's  consideration  including  that  the
    Appellant had prior access to both versions of the refusal  letter  and
    that she was asked in oral evidence about the threats,  up  until  that
    point I accept  that  it  was  entirely  reasonable  that  all  of  her
    preparation, and that of her representatives, would have  been  on  the
    basis that those threats were accepted.   The  judge  went  on  in  his
    findings at [20] and [21] to find the Appellant not  credible;  he  did
    not accept that the  threats  were  made  and  largely  on  this  basis
    dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.

11. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd
    contained a material error of law such that it must be set  aside.   No
    findings are preserved. The Appellant has not  had  an  opportunity  to
    have a fair hearing of her case and therefore the appeal is remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  any  judge,  other  than  Judge
    Lloyd.  For the avoidance of doubt it was confirmed before me that  the
    respondent continues to rely on version 1 of the refusal  letter  which
    did not accept that threats had been made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date:  25 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore no fee award is made.

Signed                                  Date:  25 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
