
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00905/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2018                            |On 15 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     OR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, of Counsel, instructed by Fawad Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Robertson who in a determination promulgated on
    1 August 2018 dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of
    the respondent made on 4 January 2018 to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who  was  born  on  15  April
    1998.  He entered Britain in May 2016 and claimed asylum.  He initially
    stated that his date of birth was  15  April  2002  but  that  was  not
    accepted and after a  Merton  compliant  age  assessment  his  age  was
    confirmed by a social worker to be over eighteen  years,  his  assessed
    age being between 18 and 19.

3.   The appellant's claim was that  his  father  had  been  killed  by  the
    Taliban and that the Taliban had made attempts to recruit him.  He  had
    argued that if returned to Afghanistan he would be  at  risk  of  being
    targeted by the Taliban for forced recruitment and that there would  be
    no state protection for him.

4.   The appellant stated that he had been born and raised in Kote Sangi,  a
    district outside Kabul, and that the Taliban would come to his home and
    demand that he go with them. He would hide when they came.   They  came
    four or five times and spoke to his mother.  They made threats and  his
    mother would make excuses. They  did  not  come  into  the  house.  The
    appellant said that he spent most of his time playing cricket  and  had
    never worked and that the Taliban, although  they  would  come  to  the
    village, had made no attempt to pick him up as he was  playing  cricket
    in the open and other people were around.

5.   His mother had sold their home and made arrangements for him  to  leave
    Afghanistan. He said he had left in 2015 travelling for almost  a  year
    before arriving in Britain.

6.   The judge also heard evidence  from  a  Mr  Rabani,  a  cousin  of  the
    appellant who stated that the appellant would not be safe on return  to
    Afghanistan and also that he was aged 16 or 17.

7.   It was submitted by the appellant's representative that  the  appellant
    was a child and that background evidence showed that the Taliban  would
    recruit children to become  soldiers.   It  was  argued  that  cultural
    difficulties had led to the discrepancy in age.

8.   The judge did not find  the  appellant  to  be  credible.   She  placed
    weight on the age assessment, where the appellant had claimed  that  he
    had left Afghanistan at the age of 13 and fact he had been assessed  in
    June 2016 as  being  aged  between  18  and  19.   She  considered  the
    submission that the report should be given little weight as it was  not
    a contemporaneous note, but the judge has stated that the appellant had
    had the opportunity to comment on the assessment when it was made.  The
    judge emphasised that this matter damaged the appellant's  credibility.



9.   With regard to the appellant's account of having  been of  interest  to
    the  Taliban  in  Afghanistan,  she  stated  that   his   account   was
    inconsistent - the appellant had claimed that the Taliban had  visited
    his home but that he had heard them coming as they knocked on the  gate
    and managed to hide and that this had happened five or six times over a
    period of two to three years, but the appellant had also said  that  it
    had been a year before he left and that his mother would speak  to  the
    Taliban and they would leave as they would not  disrespect  her.   They
    did not search the  house.   However,  if  the  appellant  was  playing
    cricket with his friends, as he had said and that the local police were
    involved with the Taliban they would have been aware of  his  movements
    but he himself was never approached.  Although he had claimed  that  he
    had heard the Taliban forcibly removing children from  his  neighbour's
    house he had himself never been directly  approached  despite  spending
    much of his time in a public place.

10.  The judge also stated that although the appellant claimed to be  unable
    to read and write he appeared to have a Facebook account  on  which  he
    had messaged his friends.  That raised the  issue  of  his  credibility
    regarding education but also because his cousin  was  on  his  friend's
    list.

11.  Moreover the applicant had not claimed asylum en route to Britain.

12.  The judge assessed all these factors and concluded that  the  applicant
    was not credibility and would not be at risk on return.

13.  The judge then applied the country  guidance  case  of  AS  (Safety  of
    Kabul) Afghanistan [2018] UKUT 00118, which held that a person who  was
    of lower level  interest  of  the  Taliban  -  that  is  not  a  senior
    Government or security services official or a spy, was not at real risk
    of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul.

14.  The judge having found that the appellant  was  not  credible,  pointed
    out that the conclusion in AS was that, in general,  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single adult male in good health  to
    relocate to Kabul even if he did not have any specific  connections  or
    support network there.  The judge stated that she did not  accept  that
    the appellant had no family support on return and did not  accept  that
    the appellant did not know where his mother was living in  Afghanistan.



15.  She concluded that the current security situation  in  Kabul  was  such
    that internal relocation was not unreasonable or unduly harsh.  She did
    not accept that he would be at risk wherever he located in Afghanistan.



16.  The judge also found that the appellant  could  not  benefit  from  the
    provisions of Article 8 of the ECHR.

17.  The grounds of appeal argued that the appellant's claim  was  plausible
    and therefore the judge had erred in her findings  that  the  appellant
    was not credible, and  that  her  conclusions  were  inadequate.   They
    emphasised that it was not necessary for an appellant  to  be  able  to
    prove every aspect of his claim and it was submitted that the judge had
    applied too high a standard of proof and furthermore that she  had  not
    stated whether she accepted or rejected the evidence of the appellant's
    cousin.

18.  At the hearing before me Mr Raza took me through the  findings  of  the
    judge and stated that the judge had not given  reasons  for  dismissing
    the evidence.  He referred to the appellant's witness statement and  to
    the bundle of documentation which he asserted showed that there was the
    forced recruitment of children to become child soldiers and indeed that
    other children had been kidnapped and forced to become suicide bombers.
     He argued that the judge had r ignored the evidence of the appellant's
    cousin and his lack of detailed reasoning meant that the  determination
    was unsafe.  While he  accepted  that  from  the  determination  in  AS
    internal relocation would be open to the appellant, he stated that  the
    judge had erred in not considering the issue  of  whether  or  not  the
    appellant would be in danger in his home area.

19.  Ms Isherwood asked me to find there was no material  error  of  law  in
    the determination and stated that even taking the appellant's claim  at
    its highest there is no evidence that the Taliban would be looking  for
    him on return.

Discussion

20.  The reality is that the judge did consider the  appellant's  claim  and
    gave reasons  for  finding  that  his  claim  was  not  credible.   The
    appellant's claim is indeed slight.  He states that the Taliban came to
    his mother's house to recruit him but he hid and they made no  attempts
    to force entry or to take him with them.  Moreover, although he asserts
    that they were looking for him for some time, the reality was  that  he
    was living much of his life out  of  doors  and  was  playing  cricket.
    Should the Taliban have wished to pick him up they would  clearly  have
    been able to do so.  The fact that they did not or  did  not  make  any
    particular effort to kidnap him or  take  him  with  them  is  a  clear
    indication that his claim was not plausible.  Moreover, the  judge  was
    correct to  place  weight  on  the  Merton  compliant  age  assessment.
    Clearly the appellant had not told the truth  about  his  age  and  the
    judge was entitled to place weight on that, as well as  the  fact  that
    the appellant had not claimed asylum en route to find,  having  weighed
    up the evidence, that the appellant was not credible.

21.  The statement of Mr Rabani does not assist the  appellant.    He  could
    clearly not speak to the appellant's claim that he was  sought  by  the
    Taliban and although he says  that  the  situation  in  Afghanistan  is
    dangerous and the Taliban were still actively trying to  recruit  young
    boys, his conclusion that the appellant would be a target and forced to
    do their bidding, was not one for which he had any particular  evidence
    and again, of course what he said was not based on any direct  evidence
    of the appellant's particular circumstances.  I would add that  clearly
    his statement with regard to the appellant's age is at  odds  with  the
    age assessment and that that too diminishes his evidence.

22.  I have  considered  the  background  documentation  to  which  Mr  Raza
    referred.  The reality is of course that while that documentation  does
    talk of children being taken by the Taliban,  this  appellant  was  not
    taken by the Taliban when he was a child and by the time the  appellant
    claimed asylum here he was not a child - he was assessed as being 18 or
    19.  The methods the Taliban use to abduct children  were  clearly  not
    used in respect of this appellant before he left Afghanistan. Therefore
    the background documentation which refers to children being groomed  to
    be suicide bombers or even killed by the Taliban does not apply to  the
    appellant.  There was simply nothing to  indicate  that  when  he  left
    Afghanistan there would be any likelihood that the appellant would face
    persecution or ill-treatment from the Taliban.

23.   However,  even  taking  the  appellant's  claim  at  its  highest  and
    accepting that the Taliban had sought to  recruit  him  in  a  somewhat
    desultory fashion internal relocation to the city  of  Kabul  would  be
    open to him.  There is simply no evidence whatsoever to  indicate  that
    the Taliban would have any interest in him  on  return.   The  guidance
    given in AS Afghanistan is quite clear in that regard and the judge was
    entitled to place weight thereon.

24.  While Mr Raza argued that  the  judge  should  have  made  findings  on
    whether or not the appellant would face persecution in  his  home  area
    before going on to consider the  issue  of  internal  relocation,  that
    argument is incorrect. The judge, by finding that the appellant was not
    credible clearly found that he would not face persecution in  his  home
    area.  But in any event the reality is that the judge had  to  consider
    whether or not the appellant was entitled to protection here.  The fact
    that the appellant could relocate to Kabul would not  face  persecution
    there, is effectively determinative of this appeal given the fact  that
    the appellant is a young and healthy man who clearly has lived for most
    of his life in  Afghanistan  and  indeed  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider that it was likely that he would have family members in Kabul.

25.  I therefore consider that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the judge in the First-tier Tribunal and therefore her
    decision shall stand.


Decision.

This appeal is dismissed and the determination of the Judge  in  the  First-
    tier shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 7 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

