
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00186/2020 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Teams                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2021                               |On 25 June 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN

                                   Between

                                    D K E
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONFIRMED)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr. A Joseph, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr. S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of the respondent not to grant
    him leave to remain on asylum grounds, or alternatively on humanitarian
    protection grounds. The respondent's  decision  is  dated  23  December
    2019.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal (JFtT Havard) dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    by a decision dated 5 May 2020. The appellant was granted permission to
    appeal by UTJ Macleman by a decision sent to the parties on  28  August
    2020. By a decision dated 10 November 2020  this  Tribunal  (UTJ  Gill)
    allowed the appeal to the extent that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was set aside, and it would be remade by this Tribunal.

 3. UTJ Gill detailed at [20] of her decision  the  present  scope  of  the
    appeal before me:

         '20.  ...  Accordingly,  the  re-making  of  the  decision  on  the
            appellant's appeal will not include Article 8. It is limited  to
            the appellant's asylum claim, humanitarian protection claim  and
            related Article 3 claim and is further limited to the assessment
            of the future risk of persecution, serious harm  or  inhuman  or
            degrading treatment or punishment. ...'

 4. In addition, at [20] of her decision, UTJ Gill preserved  the  findings
    of fact made by Judge Havard, at [32]-[55] of his decision,  which  are
    detailed below.

Hearing

 5. The hearing before me was a Teams video conference hearing held  during
    the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing room at Field  House.
    The hearing room and the building were open to the public. The  hearing
    and its start time were listed in the cause list. I  was  addressed  by
    the representatives in the same way as  if  we  were  together  in  the
    hearing room. I am satisfied: that this constituted a hearing  in  open
    court; that the open justice principle has been secured; that no  party
    has  been  prejudiced;  and  that,  insofar  as  there  has  been   any
    restriction on a right or interest, it is justified  as  necessary  and
    proportionate.

Anonymity

 6. Judge Havard issued an anonymity order, and  no  request  was  made  by
    either party for such order to be set aside. I confirm the order at the
    conclusion of this decision.  I  do  so  as  it  is  presently  in  the
    interests of justice that the appellant is not publicly  recognised  as
    someone  seeking  international  protection:  paragraph  13  of   Upper
    Tribunal Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  Guidance  Note  2013  No  1:
    Anonymity Order'.

Background

 7. The appellant is  a  national  of  Ethiopia  and  is  aged  48.  He  is
    ethnically Amhara.

 8. He was employed as a human resources officer for a state-owned armament
    engineering factory and at the same time was  involved  with  Ginbot  7
    ('PG7') an Ethiopian  opposition  political  organisation,  founded  in
    2008, and at that time a proscribed terrorist organisation.

 9. In June 2015 he passed on sensitive information to a  colleague  active
    with PG7.  The  information  was  concerned  with  army  personnel  and
    employees working at the factory.

10. The appellant was arrested at a secret political meeting in August 2015
    and detained for four months. During his detention, he was  beaten  and
    submerged into a container of  cold  dirty  water.  Such  ill-treatment
    amounts to torture.

11. The home of his friend was searched,  and  the  classified  information
    found by the Ethiopian authorities. Consequently, his wife was arrested
    and detained for five days.

12. On 25 December 2015, a police officer placed him in a car, covered  his
    eyes with a cloth and drove him from the prison. After an hour, he  was
    required to change vehicles and in the second car he found  his  uncle.
    He was informed that his uncle had secured  his  release  by  paying  a
    bribe.

13. The Ethiopian Police issued a summons for the appellant's arrest on  28
    December 2015, identifying his  escape  from  custody  and  his  having
    transferred a stolen government document to a third party connected  to
    PG7.

14. The appellant hid for two weeks before leaving Ethiopia in January 2016
    and travelling across various countries before reaching United  Kingdom
    clandestinely on 13 September 2018.

15. The respondent refused the asylum claim by decision dated  23  December
    2019. Though Judge Havard  found  the  appellant  credible  as  to  his
    personal history he concluded that the appellant  did  not  possess  an
    objectively well-founded fear of persecution consequent to the  present
    circumstances in Ethiopia.

16. In setting aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  UTJ  Gill
    reasoned, at [13]-[16]:

         '13. The grounds contend  that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  his
            assessment of the  risk  on  return.  Para.  6  of  the  grounds
            contends  that  the  Judge  identified  that   the   appellant's
            disclosure of classified  personnel  information  needed  to  be
            considered separately to his affiliation with PG7 but he  failed
            to consider the risk and return arising from this aspect of  the
            appellant's evidence.


         14. I agree that the Judge did plainly fail to assess the  risk  of
            persecution  arising  from   the   appellant's   disclosure   of
            classified personnel information.


         15. I also  agree  with  para.  7  of  the  grounds  that,  in  his
            assessment of the risk on return, the Judge failed to take  into
            account the appellant's evidence, which he accepted, that he had
            escaped from detention.


         16. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge did  materially  erring
            law,  in  that,  there  were  two  material  omissions  in   his
            assessment of the risk on return.'

Preserved Findings of Fact

17. Though lengthy, it is appropriate that the preserved findings of  Judge
    Havard are detailed in their entirety:

         '32. It is the Respondent's case that the Appellant's  account  was
            not credible and the version  of  events  he  had  provided  was
            either  inconsistent  or  implausible.   The   Respondent   also
            maintained that, even if the Appellant was a supporter  of  PG7,
            he would not be at real risk of persecution on return.


         33. I had read the accounts  provided  by  the  Appellant:  at  his
            screening interview on 14 September 2018; the written  statement
            dated 3  January  2019;  the  answers  he  gave  as  his  asylum
            interview on 21 January 2019, and the further statement dated 30
            January 2020 he had provided in advance of the hearing  of  this
            appeal. I also listened carefully to the Appellant when he  gave
            his oral evidence.


         34. As part of my assessment of the credibility of the  Appellant's
            account, I have considered the issues raised by  the  Respondent
            in  the  RFRL  on  which  Mr.  Holt  relied  together  with  the
            submissions he made at the hearing of the appeal.


         35. Whilst there were certain inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
            various accounts to which  reference  is  made  below,  I  found
            overall the Appellant  to  be  credible.  He  responded  to  the
            questions which were quite properly put to him by Mr Holt  in  a
            measured way and did not seek to exaggerate or  to  be  evasive.
            His responses were full and made without hesitation. I have also
            taken into account in my assessment of his credibility the  fact
            that the Appellant claimed asylum as soon as he arrived  in  the
            UK.


         36. It was not  disputed  that  the  Appellant  is  a  national  of
            Ethiopia and is an ethnic Amhara. Furthermore,  the  Appellant's
            employment history was not challenged but it is suggested  that,
            whilst acknowledging that Amharas had  been  considered  by  the
            Tigrayan Peoples Liberation Front as an enemy, the Appellant had
            not only worked at an armament engineering factory from 1997 but
            have been promoted to act as a human resources  officer.  To  be
            treated in  this  way  was  inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's
            suggestion that the regime would give preferential treatment  to
            the Tigrayan people.


         37. However, the Appellant's evidence was that, even though he  was
            the acting human resources officer, he was paid  less,  and  his
            appointment was never confirmed. The  activities  undertaken  at
            the factory were not sensitive  as  it  no  longer  manufactured
            armaments but it  related  to  their  maintenance,  rather  than
            manufacture. The Appellant stated  that  the  company  was  also
            involved in the production of civilian  items  for  the  textile
            industry. I found his explanation to be plausible.


         38. Furthermore, I do not consider that the  Appellant's  promotion
            to acting human resources officer, the period  during  which  he
            held that post which was never made permanent, and the fact that
            he was paid less than the position merited  were  factors  which
            were inconsistent with the Appellant's  description  of  Amharas
            generally being the subject of  discriminatory  behaviour  which
            the Appellant opposed.


         39. Indeed, at paragraph 35 of the RFRL, the Respondent  refers  to
            background information which confirms in  general  terms,  'that
            Amharas have had problems previously'.


         40. I have found that the Appellant's  account  of  his  employment
            history was plausible. Indeed, the Appellant was  not  challenge
            to any extent with regard to  his  work  on  the  role  that  he
            fulfilled.


         41.  I  also  found  the  Appellant's  accounts  of  him  initially
            becoming a supporter of PG7, as  opposed  to  a  member,  to  be
            plausible. He provided a consistent account of the way in  which
            he was approached  by  his  colleague  in  work  and  that  they
            discovered that they shared similar beliefs and concerns.  I  do
            not accept that the Appellant's account of the way in  which  he
            joined PG7 was inconsistent. He described how, in July 2014,  he
            had joined one of the two  organisations  which  had  merged  in
            January 2015 to become PG7.


         42. It was accepted by the Respondent that  he  had  been  able  to
            answer the various questions put to him about PG7 in the  course
            of his AIR such as the names of the leaders of the  party,  when
            the party was founded, and the aims  and  objectives  of  party.
            However, even though he answered such questions that were put to
            him about PG7 correctly, the Respondent then suggested that such
            knowledge did not amount to proof of involvement.


         43. I did not consider it to be material that the Appellant  failed
            to name the political party when  questioned  at  the  screening
            interview. This was very much a  preliminary  interview  and  he
            made it clear that he had been imprisoned due to  his  political
            connections.


         44. I also found his account of his  conversations  with  his  work
            colleague leading to him becoming  a  supporter  of  PG7  to  be
            consistent and plausible. I accepted  the  Appellant's  evidence
            and found that, having  become  a  supporter,  he  would  attend
            meetings organised by a member of PG7 which would involve  other
            supporters  and  that  he  then  distributed  leaflets  on   two
            occasions.


         45. The account provided by the Appellant relating to his detention
            and that of his wife set out in his witness  statement  dated  3
            January 2019 was inconsistent with the account that he  provided
            at his AIR on 21 January 2019.


         46. In his statement of 3  January  2019  on  which  the  Appellant
            relied when he gave his oral evidence, he stated that he was  at
            a secret meeting at a house of a member of PG7 which was  raided
            by  the  authorities  who   searched   the   house   and   found
            undistributed leaflets; he was taken to Beshefitu Police Station
            where he was kept for four months. It was  during  interrogation
            that he told the authorities the identity of the person who  had
            introduced him to  PG7.  He  said  that  when  they  raided  his
            colleague's house, the classified information  he  had  provided
            with regard to the names and personal information  of  employees
            was discovered.


         47. He went on to say in his statement that on 25 December  2015  a
            police officer told the Appellant to follow him and he was taken
            by car away from the prison and then transfered to  another  car
            in which he found his uncle who told him that he had  bribed  an
            officer in order to secure his release. It  was  at  this  stage
            that he was told  that,  whilst  detained,  his  wife  had  been
            arrested and detained for five days and they had  also  searched
            the Appellant's  home.  He  also  learnt  the  authorities  were
            threatening his wife and mother to disclose his whereabouts.


         48. In his AIR, the Appellant was consistent  with  regard  to  the
            circumstances leading to his detention  and  the  conditions  he
            experienced whilst in detention. However, when  asked  when  the
            Appellant's  mother  and  wife  were  arrested,  the   Appellant
            confirmed that his mother was cautioned and returned on the same
            day, whereas his  wife  was  detained  for  five  days  and  his
            response suggests that this took place during the two weeks that
            he was hiding following his release.


         49.  When cross-examined by Mr Holt and when the responses that  he
            gave in the course of the AIR were put  to  him,  the  Appellant
            stated that this was an error by the interpreter. The  Appellant
            confirmed that the police came to search his house following his
            release and asked where he  was,  but  he  maintained  that  his
            wife's detention for 5 days took place at the same time  as  the
            Appellant was being detained.


         50.  I took into consideration the fact that the witness  statement
            dated 3 January 2019 had been prepared by the Appellant with the
            assistance of  his  solicitors  and  it  was  submitted  to  the
            Respondent   attached    to    the    Preliminary    Information
            Questionnaire. The  account  provided  in  his  statement  of  3
            January 2019 is clear, has been confirmed in the statement dated
            20 January 2020 prepared for the purposes of the appeal hearing,
            and the Appellant remained firm in his account when he gave oral
            evidence. I therefore find that the Appellant  was  detained  in
            August 2015 for a period of four months and that it  was  during
            this period of detention that his wife had  also  been  arrested
            and detained for  five  days  and  during  this  time  they  had
            searched the Appellant's house.


         51.  It  has  also  been  considered  by  the  Respondent   to   be
            inconsistent for the Appellant to  indicate  that  he  had  been
            released but then for the police to be searching for him. I find
            that it is plausible that an individual police officer  received
            a bribe in return for which he arranged for the Appellant to  be
            released from detention, and that once the police discovered  he
            had been released, they attempted to search for him in order  to
            bring him back into detention.


         52. In support of this finding, the Appellant had produced  at  the
            hearing a document described as  a  summons  dated  28  December
            2015. It was claimed by the Appellant that his wife had  located
            the document when she went to their house to mourn following the
            death of his mother.


         53. What appears to be an  original  document  from  the  Ethiopian
            Federal Police  Commission  dated  28  December  2015  has  been
            translated at the request of the Appellant's solicitors  and  it
            relates to the Appellant's escape from  detention,  having  been
            imprisoned because of his involvement with Ginbot 7 and  of  his
            intention to transfer a stolen government document  to  a  third
            party. The Appellant had asked his solicitors whether  it  would
            be important for this document to be provided to  the  Tribunal.
            When he was told that it was important, arrangements  were  made
            for it to be sent.  I  have  noted  that  there  are  two  dates
            endorsed on the envelope namely 5 February 2020 and 10 February.
            The sender's name is consistent with  that  of  the  Appellant's
            wife  with  the  sender's  address  shown  as  Addis  Ababa   in
            Ethiopian.


         54. Whilst I do not consider  that  the  documents,  in  isolation,
            would be sufficient proof of the  Appellant's  affiliation  with
            PG7, his detention, and the fact that he  was  released  in  the
            circumstances outlined, I have included it in  my  deliberations
            as to the Appellant's credibility. The  document  is  consistent
            with the Appellant's account of having escaped from detention on
            25 December 2015 with the assistance  of  a  person  or  persons
            working at the prison, and a summons being issued by the  police
            three days later  requiring  the  Appellant  to  report  to  the
            police.


         55. I have also taken into consideration,  in  the  same  way,  the
            email dated 7 December 2018  to  the  Appellant  confirming  his
            membership of PG7.'

18. Judge Harvard concluded as to his findings of fact, at [56]-[57]

         '56. To conclude, I have taken a step back and  considered  all  of
            the evidence in the round. I have found that the  appellant  has
            proved, to the lower standard: that he  became  a  supporter  of
            PG7; that he  attended  secret  meetings;  that  he  distributed
            leaflets supporting the cause of  PG7;  that,  in  his  role  as
            acting human resources officer, he  had  access  to  information
            relating to the names and details of employees; that he provided
            this information to his work colleague who had introduced him to
            PG7; that he was arrested in August 2015 following a raid by the
            authorities of a meeting of PG7 that he was attending;  that  he
            was detained for four  months  and  interrogated,  and  that  he
            escaped from detention on 25 December  2015,  his  uncle  having
            bribed someone working at the prison to facilitate his escape.


         57. I have also found that, with the  support  of  his  uncle,  the
            Appellant left Ethiopia  in  January  2016,  and  travelled  via
            Sudan, Libya, Italy  and  France  to  the  UK,  arriving  on  13
            September 2018, claiming asylum the following day.'

Decision

19. At the hearing Mr. Walker informed me that upon  noting  the  preserved
    findings of fact, in particular the appellant's escape from prison  and
    the existence of a police summons in respect of an offence  of  passing
    on sensitive State information, and also upon considering the objective
    evidence filed by the appellant, in particular the  evidence  concerned
    with prison facilities, the respondent accepted that the  appellant  is
    presently at real risk of serious harm breaching  protected  article  3
    rights upon return to Ethiopia. Consequently, the respondent  asked  me
    to allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

20. As  to  the  appeal  on  Refugee  Convention  grounds,  the  respondent
    identified this matter as being a classic prosecution  not  persecution
    case. The interest of the Ethiopian authorities in the appellant  flows
    from his passing on sensitive  State  information,  not  his  political
    opinion. Consequently, the respondent  requested  that  the  appeal  be
    dismissed on Refugee Convention grounds.

21. Mr. Joseph confirmed on behalf of the appellant  that  he  was  content
    with the approach to this appeal identified by Mr. Walker, and  he  did
    not pursue the appeal on asylum grounds.

22. Having considered the evidence in this matter I am satisfied  that  the
    parties have adopted the correct approach to  the  conclusion  of  this
    appeal. On the face of the appellant's evidence, his prosecution is for
    legitimate and acceptable reasons and cannot properly  to  be  said  to
    have been  politically  inspired  or  to  repress  political  activity.
    National states can properly take steps to prosecute under criminal law
    the unauthorised distribution of  sensitive  State  information.  I  am
    therefore satisfied that the appellant cannot establish that  he  falls
    for protection under the Refugee Convention.

23. However, I am satisfied that he faces a real risk of being detained  in
    poor prison conditions upon return to Ethiopia, and his poor  treatment
    will be exacerbated because of his actions  in  distributing  sensitive
    State information to  a  member  of  a  formerly  proscribed  political
    organisation. For the reasons outlined by Mr. Walker before  me,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant has established  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that if returned to Ethiopia he would face  a  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm. Such serious harm would consist of  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment during the time of his prison incarceration,  which
    is likely to be lengthy: paragraph 339C and 339CA  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

24. I am  further  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  not  excluded  from
    humanitarian protection.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and was  set  aside  by  this  Tribunal  pursuant  to
    section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('the
    2007 Act').

26. The decision is remade.

27. The appellant's appeal is dismissed on Refugee Convention grounds.

28. The appellant's appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

29. The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights (article 3) grounds.

Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

30. The anonymity order issued by the First-tier Tribunal is  confirmed  in
    the following terms:

         Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of
         these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly
         or indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies to,
         amongst others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure to
         comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
         proceedings.

Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Dated: 16 June 2021




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid and so no fee award is made.

Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Dated: 16 June 2021

