
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00021/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2016                            |On 13 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           RESGAR IBRAHIM NARIMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent, and to the respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Resgar Ibrahim Nariman, was born on  29  May
    1983 and is a male citizen of Iraq.  His  application  for  asylum  was
    refused on 13 November 2002  but  that  decision  was  withdrawn.   The
    appellant was subsequently interviewed in relation to his asylum  claim
    in September 2005  and  his  claim  refused  by  a  decision  dated  12
    September 2005.  His child (C) was born in January 2007.  In June 2007,
    the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain.  However,  on  10
    September 2007, at Grimsby Crown Court the appellant was  convicted  of
    assisting an offender who had committed murder.  He  was  sentenced  to
    eighteen months' imprisonment.  On 16 May  2008,  he  was  served  with
    notice of liability to deportation and then raised asylum issues in his
    response in May 2008.  His appeal against the deportation decision  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 5 September 2008.  In 2009, the
    appellant entered an Islamic marriage with Rebecca Leggott,  a  British
    citizen and the mother of C.  The couple were  married  legally  on  17
    February 2010 and their second  son  (L)  was  born  in  October  2010.
    Further submissions were submitted to the respondent  in  2011  but  by
    decision dated 3 March 2015  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's
    claim and refused to  revoke  the  deportation  order.   The  appellant
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Caswell)  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 5 September  2016,  allowed  the  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.



 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, the decision of Judge  Caswell
    is challenged on the basis that she  has  failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for her findings on material matters.  At [20],  Judge  Caswell
    wrote:

         20.  Mr Mullarkey, in departure from any previous attitude  of  the
         Respondent, submits that the Appellant is from  the  KRI,  not  the
         Kirkuk governorate. He relies on various matters, including an  odd
         ID card, apparently obtained by a friend in  Iraq,  which  gives  a
         different name for the place of  birth,  and  apparently  has  been
         issued in Suleimanya. The Appellant's explanation is that he  asked
         his friend to try to get his ID card, he did  not  know  what  this
         card said because he is illiterate, and that his  friend  may  have
         bought the document thinking that it would help  the  Appellant.  I
         find this explanation to be credible, and do not  hold  it  against
         the Appellant that he put forward the ID card for the appeal, given
         the Appellant's own illiteracy. However, he states the details  are
         correct. The reason another name is given  for  the  birthplace  is
         that this is a town near his very small village.  Again,  I  accept
         this as credible. Mr Mullarkey also asks me to find  the  Appellant
         and his wife lied when  they  gave  his  occupation  on  the  birth
         certificate of their son  as  a  van  driver.  However,  they  both
         explained that they did this as the Appellant did not want his  son
         to grow up thinking his father was a "good for nothing" who did not
         work. In the  circumstances,  and  having  formed  a  view  of  the
         Appellant and his wife over  lengthy  cross-examination,  I  accept
         this explanation, and in any event do not find  this  small  matter
         impacts significantly on the Appellant's  overall  credibility.  Mr
         Mullarkey relies on a part of the social worker report which states
         at paragraph 10 that the  Appellant  "was  sad  talking  about  his
         parents, who are still alive." The Appellant's explanation for this
         was that she may have thought they  were  still  alive  because  he
         hoped they were. He does not know they are dead. He simply  has  no
         news of them. He has had no contact with them for many years and so
         does not know what has happened to them. Again,  given  this  is  a
         minor detail without amplification, in a very substantial report, I
         do not find the discrepancy significant in terms of credibility.  I
         also accept that the Appellant, when the report was  read  to  him,
         may have missed this small detail or have thought it unnecessary to
         correct it.  I note from the original screening interview  in  2002
         and the original  asylum  interview  in  September  2005  that  the
         Appellant was saying he was from Dureda(n), was born in  Diyala  in
         the Kirkuk region, and was not from the Kurdish area to the  north.



 3. The respondent asserts that no adequate reasoning has been provided  to
    explain why the judge accepted the appellant's evidence concerning  his
    ID card given that he had left from a  different  area  of  Iraq.   The
    grounds record that "the  appellant's  explanation  for  the  differing
    birth place on  the  ID  card  is  accepted  as  credible  without  any
    reference to verifiable objective evidence as to the existence  of  the
    town he claims to have been born in".

 4. The Upper Tribunal should hesitate before interfering with findings  of
    fact reached by the First-tier Tribunal.  Judge Caswell has provided  a
    detailed and thorough  analysis  of  the  facts  of  this  appeal.   In
    circumstances where there was no other evidence from either side (as in
    the details appearing on the appellant's ID card), the judge has had no
    alternative but to  make  an  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's own account.  I have no doubt that she  has  done  that  by
    adopting a holistic approach to an analysis of the evidence; indeed, it
    is clear from any reading of the decision that  she  has  adopted  that
    approach.  Therefore, having found the appellant a credible witness  in
    respect of other aspects of his account, it was open to  the  judge  to
    accept the appellant's account concerning his ID card.  The  fact  that
    the  appellant  had  not  produced  additional  evidence  or,   indeed,
    "verifiable objective evidence" as to the existence of the town of  his
    birth is not a reason in itself for  challenging  the  outcome  of  the
    judge's analysis.   The  judge  has  identified  the  apparent  anomaly
    concerned with the fact that the appellant's  ID  card  was  issued  in
    Suleimanya (a city located within the IKR) and the grounds are wrong to
    suggest that the judge has overlooked that apparent anomaly.   However,
    there was nothing perverse or irrational in  the  judge  accepting  the
    explanation given by the appellant which resolved the seeming  anomaly.
    It was for the judge to consider the evidence that was before her;  she
    was not required to compel the appellant to produce additional evidence
    regarding his birth  place  or  (and  there  appear  to  have  been  no
    submissions on the matter) to find the appellant's evidence  incredible
    because he had not produced additional material.

 5. The other ground of appeal concerns the judge's findings in relation to
    Article 8 ECHR.  These are set out at [28] - [29]:

         28.  Alternatively, and in  addition,  in  relation  to  the  human
         rights appeal, I find that this is a very close and loving  family,
         that the Appellant's wife, who has  been  relying  on  him  as  her
         partner for the last 11 years  since  she  was  15,  and  his  four
         children, with whom he has a close and loving  relationship,  would
         all suffer undue hardship if he  were  removed  from  their  family
         unit, and it would certainly not be in the best  interests  of  the
         children. I also find that it would not be reasonable to expect the
         Appellant's wife and children, all British Citizens, to relocate to
         Iraq, leaving behind the benefits  of  their  British  Citizenship,
         including the health service which she and the children are already
         using, and the benefits of a British education,  which  the  eldest
         children are also gaining a  great  deal  from,  according  to  the
         school reports.

         29.  The evidence before me is overwhelming that the Appellant  has
         a genuine as subsisting relationship with his wife, and  a  genuine
         and subsisting parental relationship with his four sons, and I have
         no hesitation in finding that the effect of his removal on  all  of
         them, and also the effects on all of them of returning to Iraq as a
         family, would be unduly harsh, or "excessively cruel", in the terms
         used in MM (Uganda) above. In coming to  this  conclusion,  I  have
         regard  to  the  guidance  given  in  that  case   that   all   the
         circumstances, including the Appellant's criminal history, must  be
         taken into account. Bearing in mind the offence, although  serious,
         at bottom involved the Appellant in helping a  friend  rather  than
         committing any acts of violence or initiating any  crimes  himself,
         and bearing in mind  the very long period of time which has elapsed
         since he  committed  it,  and  the  relatively  limited  course  of
         previous offending, namely one conviction some  years  earlier  for
         driving offences for which he received a six month prison sentence,
         I find that  the  Appellant  has  effectively  fully  rehabilitated
         himself. I accept that  he  has  shown  remorse  for  his  previous
         actions, and has become fully involved in  his  family  as  it  has
         developed since then, so that he is very unlikely to  re-offend.  I
         find the Appellant's presence is now integral to the well being and
         development of his four sons, as the independent social worker  has
         concluded, and that the Article 8 rights of him and all the  family
         members would be breached if he were not  allowed  to  remain  with
         them in the UK.

 6. The Secretary of State asserts that  the  judge  has  played  down  the
    seriousness  of  the  appellant's  offending.    However,   the   judge
    accurately describes the offending as  "serious"  but  noted  that  the
    appellant had "fully rehabilitated himself" and had "shown remorse  for
    his previous actions".  The Secretary of State may not agree with those
    findings, that does not mean that they are  irrational.   The  findings
    were available to the judge on the  face  of  the  evidence.   She  has
    supported her conclusions with clear and cogent reasons.

 7. Further, the Secretary of State challenges the judge's decision on  the
    grounds that she has failed properly to apply the "unduly  harsh"  test
    set out in paragraphs 399(a) and 399(b) of HC 395 (as amended) and also
    Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended).  The  grounds  cite  MM  (Uganda)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450  as
    authority to support her challenge to the judge's decision on the basis
    that she has failed properly  to  take  into  account  the  appellant's
    serious  criminality  and  immigration  history  in  deciding   whether
    deportation would have an "unduly harsh  outcome"  on  the  appellant's
    children and partner.  I disagree.  The judge  refers  to  MM  (Uganda)
    more than once in the decision and does so at [29] when considering the
    question of the harshness of the effect of the appellant's  deportation
    on his family.  Quite properly, the judge has taken  into  account  the
    very particular circumstances of this family.  The children suffer from
    Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a devastating and aggressive illness.  The
    judge was very clear in her finding that the appellant's  presence  was
    "now integral to the wellbeing and development of his four sons" as the
    expert evidence from a social  worker  also  corroborated.   Given  the
    seriousness of the  medical  condition  of  the  children,  it  is  not
    arguable that  the  judge's  decision  may  properly  be  described  as
    irrational or perverse.  Since I find that to be the case, the question
    remains whether the judge has failed to give  proper  reasons  for  her
    decision or has failed to apply the law correctly.  In my opinion,  she
    has fallen into neither of those traps.  Her analysis of  the  evidence
    is even-handed and objective, whilst her determination of a possibility
    of separation having an unduly harsh effect upon the family  does  not,
    as the grounds suggest, play down the public  interest  concerned  with
    the appellant's removal.  Another judge faced with the same  facts  may
    have come to a different conclusion; however, that is not the point.  I
    do not find that Judge Caswell has erred in law either for the  reasons
    stated in the grounds of appeal or at all.



Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 9 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

