
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00400/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6th September 2017                  |On 12th September 2017              |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     ZS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, instructed by Fountain solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as ZS. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. The appellant, from the Sulimaniya Governate of the IKR  and  a  minor
      date of birth 28th April 2000, was refused asylum  by  the  respondent
      for the reasons set out in the annex to a letter dated  29th  December
      2016. He was granted discretionary leave to remain until 28th  October
      2017. The basis of his asylum claim was:
   i) His father had been killed by a high-ranking member of  the  KDP  when
      he, the appellant was aged about 3;
  ii) He was left in the care of his maternal grandmother aged about  7  and
      has had no contact with his mother since then;
 iii) Around the end of 2014 his grandmother told him he had either to  take
      revenge for the killing of his father or leave home;
  iv)  He  feared  the  general  security  situation  in  Iraq  and   feared
      recruitment by ISIS and further abuse from his grandmother.


   2. The appellant's appeal against the decision was heard and dismissed by
      First-tier Tribunal judge Ghani in a decision promulgated on 1st March
      2017. The appellant was aged 16 years and 10 months at that time.  The
      First-tier Tribunal Judge found it  not  credible  that  his  maternal
      grandmother would require him to seek revenge for the alleged  killing
      of his father; that he did not have a dispute  with  his  grandmother;
      that he was not at risk of being recruited  by  ISIS.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge found that  he  could  return  to  IKR  from  where  he
      originates  and  that  even  if  the  account  of  problems  with  his
      grandmother were to be accepted, there was sufficiency  of  protection
      available in the IKR. In so far as he feared recruitment by ISIS,  the
      First-tier Tribunal judge found, although not explicitly stated, there
      was no evidence to indicate the appellant was at risk  of  recruitment
      by ISIS, that Sulimaniya is not contested and  is  virtually  violence
      free.


   3. Permission to appeal was sought, and granted, on the grounds that

   a) The judge erred in law in failing to take into account in reaching his
      decision that  the  appellant  is  a  minor  and  thus  falls  into  a
      Particular Social Group;
   b) That the judge erred in law in failing to consider and  make  findings
      on how he could return to the IKR as a minor and find his family
   c) The judge erred in law in failing to adequately consider s55 BCIA 2009
      in that he only considered this in the context of Article 8 and not in
      the context of  return  and  whether  there  were  adequate  reception
      arrangements;


   4. The appellant was a minor at the date of  the  hearing.  It  does  not
      appear from the documents before the  Tribunal  that  any  documentary
      evidence was placed before the Tribunal on the issue of return to IKR.
      The appellant's evidence was that his uncle's wife  was  someone  with
      whom he did not wish to live and that his uncle had paid  for  him  to
      leave IKR because he didn't want him around. The appellant  also  gave
      evidence that his grandmother was bedridden, after being bitten  by  a
      snake, and was living with the uncle and his wife.


   5. The essence of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge were that
      the appellant's claim to be at risk or in dispute  with  his  maternal
      grandmother were not credible. The appellant gave his uncle's  address
      to the respondent but said he did not want to live with him  and  that
      he has had no contact with him since leaving the IKR. There  has  been
      no tracing undertaken by the respondent. Nor was it credible  that  he
      was at risk of forced recruitment to ISIS.

        Error of law

   6. There was no challenge to the credibility findings by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge, rather it was a claim that the  judge  had  failed  to
      make findings with regard to the appellant's return to the IKR.  There
      was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, other than that  which
      was disbelieved, in relation to his grandmother  and  his  uncle.  The
      appellant knows where  his  uncle  lives  and  has  expressed  nothing
      significant other than he did not wish to live with him. There was  no
      significant evidence that the uncle was not suitable or unable to care
      for the appellant. A desire not to be cared for  by  a  relative  does
      not, without more,  enable  a  finding  to  be  made  that  there  are
      inadequate reception arrangements available.  The  appellant  did  not
      assert there were no adequate reception arrangements; he  relied  upon
      an account which was disbelieved namely that his grandmother had  been
      threatening him. The grandmother may, in any event, be  bedridden  but
      she has not, according to the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge, been threatening towards the appellant.


   7. It does not appear that it was argued before the  First-tier  Tribunal
      that the appellant was a member of a  Particular  Social  Group  (lone
      minor) and at risk of  being  persecuted  because  of  that.  Although
      permission was sought and granted on that  ground,  it  cannot  be  an
      error of law by the First-tier Tribunal to fail to consider and  reach
      a decision on something that has  not  been  pleaded.  It  seems  this
      ground is relied upon because of the adverse findings  by  the  First-
      tier Tribunal judge for the appellant's earlier account. In any  event
      if the appellant is within the rubric of PSG, there  was  no  evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal that he would be or may be  subject  to
      persecutory action because of that. Although Mr Howard said that if  I
      were to find an error of law he would seek to file  evidence  relating
      to this, that is not the purpose of the hearing before me today.  This
      is not a rolling appeal where new grounds  or  claims  can  be  raised
      before the Upper Tribunal when considering whether there is  an  error
      of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision. There is no error of law
      by the First-tier Tribunal failing to take a decision on a matter that
      was not pleaded either in documents or orally, and where  no  evidence
      had been submitted to support such a claim.


   8. Although the First-tier Tribunal did not make  a  finding  that  there
      were adequate reception facilities available for  the  appellant,  the
      credible evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge was that he had
      an uncle whose address he  knew,  and  a  grandmother.  There  was  no
      evidence of persecution  of  teenagers  with  family  members  and  no
      credible evidence that this appellant was at risk of being  persecuted
      on return to Sulimaniya. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge
      were that the appellant was not at risk of harm from his  grandmother.
      There was no suggestion that he was at risk  of  being  persecuted  or
      harmed by his uncle. On this basis, the fact that the  judge  made  no
      specific findings on adequate reception facilities is not an error  of
      law - the appellant would be returning to  family  in  the  IKR  where
      there is no risk of being persecuted.

   9. Although the grounds of appeal assert  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge failed to consider adequately s55 BCIA 2009 in  the  context  of
      the mechanics of return  and  whether  there  are  adequate  reception
      facilities, this ground is unparticularised.  There  is  no  assertion
      that evidence was placed before the First-tier Tribunal judge that the
      respondent would seek to return the appellant as if he were  an  adult
      rather than as a minor with the usual safeguards that apply for minors
      travelling alone. Furthermore, the findings of the  judge  as  regards
      family are such that in the absence of credible evidence and  findings
      by the judge that the appellant would not be met by  his  family  with
      whom he has no conflict, there is every reason  to  suppose  that  the
      appellant would be met by his family and would return to  their  care.
      This is particularly so given the appellant's own evidence that it was
      his uncle who helped him leave the country.

  10. In summary, therefore there is no  error  of  law  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge such as results in the decision being set aside  to  be
      remade.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  dismissing  the  appeal
stands.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


[pic]

                                    Date 7th September 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

