
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/01550/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On August 24, 2017                       |   On September 11, 2017          |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                  MISS M B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend the anonymity direction previously made under Rule 14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is an Albanian national.  The appellant left  Albania  on
    February 10, 2016 and travelled to Germany via Turkey with her  mother.
    She then travelled to the Canary Islands on a  false  Italian  passport
    and attempted to enter the United Kingdom.

 3. She was stopped and returned to Germany. At the beginning of June  2016
    she travelled from Germany to France on  her  own  passport  where  she
    remained for around 6 weeks. From France she travelled to this  country
    entering clandestinely on July 22, 2016. She claimed asylum  on  August
    10, 2016 and on October 9, 2016 she attended her substantive interview.



 4. The respondent refused her asylum  claim  on  February  6,  2017  under
    paragraphs 336 and 339M/339F HC 395.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  on  February  13,  2017  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Her
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  PJS   White
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on March 14, 2017 and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on April 4, 2017 he refused the appellant's appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 6. The appellant appealed this decision on April 8,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Ford
    on April 28, 2017 but when those grounds  were  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt
    on July 12, 2017.

 7. The respondent lodged a Rule 24 response dated August 1, 2017 in  which
    she opposed all grounds of appeal.

 8. The matter came before me on the above date.  The appellant was present
    and represented as set out above.

    Submissions

 9. Ms Iqbal adopted, in particular, the  amended  grounds  of  appeal  and
    submitted  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  a  number  of  errors.  In
    particular, she submitted:

      a) The Judge had misdirected himself in law by failing to  follow  the
         decision of Secretary of State for the Home Department v  K  [2006]
         UKHL 46 where the House of Lords found that being  a  member  of  a
         family constituted membership of a  particular  social  group.  Two
         previous Tribunals had concluded her sisters were trafficked  by  D
         and that her family were dysfunctional. Her subjective fear  was  D
         would come looking for her.  A  previous  Tribunal  had  found  the
         threat from D was genuine and Ms Iqbal submitted it was a  material
         error to go behind that finding.

      b) The Judge failed to make a finding whether he accepted the evidence
         from the sisters about D's propensity to perpetuate harm. Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal  Baptiste  had  previously  found  (in  the
         sister's appeal) that D came to the family  home  looking  for  the
         appellant's sister but the Judge in this current appeal found  that
         to be implausible.

10. Mr Armstrong adopted the Rule 24 and submitted the Judge had regard  to
    the sisters' evidence and the previous decisions but found  there  were
    differences in the cases because (a) this appellant had  never  met  D;
    (b) she had no acute vulnerabilities and (c) she lived  an  independent
    life in Albania. The appellant had used false documents and  failed  to
    claim asylum at the earliest opportunity in Germany or Spain.

11.  I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

12. Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt.  She
    found the grounds arguable and in particular found  it  arguable  "that
    the decision does not indicate  if  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    sisters, found to be credible in their own asylum claim,  was  credible
    and capable of showing the appellant's claim to be made out."

13. This appellant's appeal had a background in that her  two  sisters  had
    fled Albania in 2013 and their applications for asylum, based on a fear
    of D, had been recognised.

14. The main thrust of the challenge to the decision  lay  in  the  Judge's
    distinction of the appellant's case from her sisters' and the departure
    from certain findings made about the  D  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Baptiste.

15. In Shah and Islam and Others v SSHD HL (1999)INLR 144 Steyn LJ accepted
    that women in Pakistan were a  social  group  based  on  the  immutable
    characteristic of gender and the fact  that,  as  a  group,  they  were
    unprotected.

16. In SSHD v K and Fornah v SSHD [2006] UKHL 46 Lord Bingham  derived  the
    following  principles  from  the  legal  authorities,   including   the
    Qualification Directive.

      a) The  Refugee  Convention  was  not  concerned  with  all  cases  of
         discrimination, only with persecution based on discrimination,  the
         making of distinctions which principles of fundamental human rights
         regarded as inconsistent with the right of every human being.

      b) To identify a social group the society of which it formed part  had
         to  first  be  identified;  a  particular  social  group  might  be
         recognisable as such in one country but not in another.

      c) A social group need not be cohesive to be recognised as such.

      d) There could only  be  a  particular  social  group  if  it  existed
         independently of the persecution to which it was subject.

17. The Judge in this appeal concluded on the evidence before him that  the
    appellant was not a member of a  particular  social  group  because  he
    differentiated between the appellant and her sisters in that they  were
    trafficked and she was not.

18. Ms Iqbal submitted that the Judge's  definition  of  particular  social
    group was too restrictive because as a female  family  member  she  was
    also risk in light of the fact D had been found to pose a  real  threat
    to her sisters and family.

19. However, contrary to this earlier finding the Judge backtracked on that
    finding stating in [25] his reason for doing so was  a  lack  objective
    evidence of his behaviour. This finding is clearly against the  finding
    of Judge Baptiste and the Judge's own findings about D in [23] and [24]
    when he accepted that D had attempted to find O and had exploited O and
    L's separation.

20. It is at [27] the Judge makes findings and he rejects  the  appellant's
    claim because she had never met  D.  Judge  Baptiste  accepted  that  D
    continued to visit the home looking for the appellant's sister (L)  and
    Ms Iqbal's submission that the family was threatened by  D's  continued
    pursuit of L is not given sufficient weight in this decision. The Judge
    discounts the threat to  the  appellant  because  she  had  never  been
    threatened herself and because he believed  she  would  not  return  to
    Albania to sort out personal issues.

21. In giving permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt felt that  the
    Judge failed to make clear  why  the  previous  findings  made  in  the
    sister's cases should not carry into this appeal. If the Judge accepted
    those findings then she felt it  was  arguable  that  as  it  had  been
    accepted D was still looking for the appellant then  that  should  have
    been given more weight because the appellant's claim  was  she  was  at
    risk from D because of what happened to her sisters.

22. I accept there is merit in that argument and in  the  circumstances.  I
    find there has been an error in law.

23. Both Ms Iqbal and Mr Armstrong asked that if there was  an  error  then
    this case should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  fresh
    findings on all matters.

24. In light of Part 3, Section 7.1 to 7.3  of  the  Practice  Statement  I
    direct the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

25. I do not intend to preserve any findings and the hearing  should  be  a
    full de novo hearing but  the  next  Tribunal  should  start  from  the
    position that the sisters' decisions are unchallenged and then consider
    to what extent their cases impact on this appellant's  case  especially
    as D is a common link.

    DECISION

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error  on  a  point  of  law.   I  remit  the  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection issues back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing.

Signed                              Date     06.09.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made because none was paid.


Signed                              Date     06.09.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis







