

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01843/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 November 2019                     | On 20 December 2019               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                    M F M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bradshaw, Counsel, instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the adjourned hearing  of  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant  FM,
    following a hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  on  3  September  2019
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley.  A transfer order has today  been
    made by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor under paragraph 9 of the Practice
    Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chambers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on  the  basis  that  it  is  not
    practicable for the original Tribunal to complete the hearing  or  give
    its determination without undue delay, and directing that the appeal be
    heard by a differently  constituted  Tribunal.  At  the  hearing  of  3
    September 2019 Judge Chalkley ruled that the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal dated  10  June  2019  by  Judge  V  C  Dean,  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal, contained a material error of law.  The Appellant's
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal had related to the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 12 February 2019 refusing  his  protection  and  human
    rights claim.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and had arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in or around December 2015 and had made a claim for  asylum  in
    February 2016.  The nature of his claim for protection was that he  had
    come to the adverse attention of two local Islamist, by reason  of  the
    Appellant's alleged activities of financially supporting the family  of
    a Christian pastor who had been imprisoned, accused of blasphemy.   The
    Appellant was also  said  to  have  provided  practical  assistance  to
    members of the pastor's family by giving them a lift on  two  different
    occasions.  It had been said that in June 2015 the Appellant  had  been
    warned off in no uncertain terms by the  two  Islamists,  and  that  in
    November 2015,  upon  them  seemingly  witnessing  him  giving  further
    practical assistance to the pastor's family, had physically beaten  him
    and made threats to kill him.  It was said that  he  had  only  escaped
    from that scenario by the intervention of  bystanders.   The  Appellant
    was said to have moved to Lahore but then upon finding that a fatwa had
    been made against him, decided to  leave  Pakistan  altogether  and  to
    travel to the  United  Kingdom.   He  had  already  been  issued  entry
    clearance as a visitor which he utilised to enter the UK.

3.   The Respondent had rejected the credibility of the Appellant's  account
    to have come to the adverse attention of the Islamist group for reasons
    set out in the decision letter of 12 February 2019.

4.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  against  that  decision,  the
    matter coming before Judge Dean at the Birmingham hearing centre  on  1
    May 2019.  In the judge's decision the events which were said  to  have
    led to the Appellant's departure from Pakistan were  not  accepted.  In
    particular the judge had relied upon  a  Document  Verification  Report
    obtained by the Respondent which suggested that a First Incident Report
    (FIR) relied upon by the Appellant was simply not genuine.

5.   It is relevant to note that as  part  of  the  Appellant's  account  as
    given to the Respondent in the SEF interview on 31 October  2018  there
    were references to the Appellant's older brother S  M.   The  Appellant
    and other members of his family are Christian but were  Christian  from
    birth and  are  not  converts  to  Christianity.   For  his  part,  the
    Appellant had  stated  in  his  SEF  interview  that  his  was  not  an
    Evangelical faith (question 21) and that it was not  important  in  his
    faith to convert others (question 22).   He  stated  that  he  had  not
    actively tried to convert others to his faith (question 23).   However,
    the Appellant's brother had, it was  claimed  by  the  Appellant,  been
    evangelical in his Christian activities.  The  Appellant  described  at
    question 115 that his brother had been active in  evangelising  persons
    in the street in Pakistan and had at one point  disappeared  (see  also
    question 78).  The family were concerned about him;  when  the  brother
    was later found he stated that he had been kidnapped by  Islamists  and
    seriously mistreated.  The Appellant is said to have assisted his older
    brother in leaving Pakistan for, ultimately, Nepal.

6.   There was no reference to that matter within the Respondent's  decision
    and although there was a document before the First-tier Judge  at  page
    11 of the  Appellant's  bundle,  issued  by  the  United  Nations  High
    Commission for Refugees in relation to SM, stating  that  he  had  been
    recognised as a refugee on 24 November 2014 after a thorough assessment
    of his refugee claim, no details are given within that document  as  to
    what the nature of SM's claim for protection had been.  The  judge  did
    not make any reference to the brother's position or the  fact  that  he
    had allegedly been recognised as a refugee by UNHCR  in  his  decision.
    But the judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that he agreed with the
    position of the Respondent that the Appellant's account  of  events  in
    Pakistan had not been true.

7.   The Appellant appealed against that  decision  on  grounds  in  summary
    that the judge had erred in law in failing to have regard  to  material
    evidence, being that the brother had been recognised as  a  refugee  by
    UNHCR, and in failing to make any finding as to any risk of  harm  that
    may exist to the Appellant as a Christian per se.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted on those two grounds  and  the  matter
    came before Judge Chalkley on  3  September.   Judge  Chalkley  made  a
    ruling that the decision contained an error of law as is set out in his
    brief decision dated 13 September.  He  stated  that  unfortunately  in
    dismissing the appeal '... the judge failed to consider the risk if any
    to the Appellant as a Christian on return to Pakistan.  It was accepted
    by the Respondent that the Appellant is a Christian.  That matter needs
    to be decided.  The adverse findings made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge are preserved'.  Judge Chalkley adjourned the  hearing  in  order
    that the question of the risk to the  Appellant  as  a  Christian  upon
    return to Pakistan could be considered at a later date.  The matter was
    reserved to the Upper Tribunal and no interpreter would be booked since
    it was said by Judge Chalkley that the evidence had already been heard.



9.   There was in fact a letter sent by the Appellant's  solicitors  to  the
    Tribunal querying the reasons for the error of law, suggesting that  if
    the findings of fact were to be retained that any  subsequent  decision
    remade by the Upper Tribunal would similarly contain an error  of  law.
    For my part, I do not understand the Appellant's query in that  regard.
    The query was in fact responded to by Judge Chalkley in directions,  in
    which Judge Chalkley had stated that those  acting  for  the  Appellant
    should simply read his decision in full.

10.  It has been necessary for me to recount the basis  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, Judge Chalkley's decision on the error of
    law, the  subsequent  correspondence  from  the  Appellant,  and  Judge
    Chalkley's response, because when the matter came before me to  be  re-
    heard, the Appellant has sought to rely upon an expert report  prepared
    by Dr Farhaan Wali, lecturer in religious  studies  at  the  School  of
    History, Social Science and Philosophy at Bangor University.   He  sets
    out his expertise on matters relating to Pakistan and  states  that  he
    has provided country expert reports in a number of cases.  He sets  out
    at paragraph 12 of his report the scope of his  instructions.   He  was
    asked to comment on the following issues:

         "(i) The risk that the Appellant and his  family  would  face  upon
             return to Pakistan as a result of his religion.


         (ii) We require the report to comment on whether our  client  would
             be stopped by the authorities as a  result  of  his  brother's
             problems (evidence provided that he has been  granted  refugee
             status).


         (iii)    Whether our client would be detained upon arrival  due  to
             the allegations of blasphemy.


         (iv) What sentence would be  imposed  upon  our  client  if  he  is
             accused of blasphemy.


         (v)  What treatment our client's family would face upon  return  if
             the Appellant is arrested.


         (vi) Whether there are any areas of Pakistan  where  the  Appellant
             would be able to reside without facing any problems due to his
             religion (Christian communities).


         (vii)    Whether our client would  be  able  to  secure  employment
             having left Pakistan illegally and having  claimed  asylum  in
             the United Kingdom (previous employment  with  the  Australian
             High Commission).


         (viii)   Once you have reviewed the documents please  also  comment
             on other risks in your expertise you believe the Appellant and
             his family would face upon return to Pakistan.


         (ix) Please also comment on the risks that the Appellant's wife and
             two children face upon return i.e. obtaining accommodation and
             attending  school  on  the  basis  that  they  are  practising
             Christianity."

11.  I have had regard to the content of that report in more detail.  It  is
    to be noted however that the Appellant made a written  application  for
    an adjournment of the present appeal hearing by letter of  12  November
    2019 after that expert report had been filed and  served  (although  Mr
    McVeety only received his copy this morning) seeking an adjournment  of
    the appeal for the following reasons:

         "Unfortunately at the time of sending instructions  to  the  expert
         the findings of UTJ Chalkley were misunderstood and the expert  has
         been wrongly instructed as a result.  The report  is  contained  in
         the Appellant's  bundle  which  was  served  on  6  November  2019.
         Instructing solicitors apologise for the inconvenience and  request
         that an adjournment of four weeks can  be  granted  to  enable  the
         expert to amend the report to reflect the  findings  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal Judge."

12.  That application was decided by Ms  A  Hussain,  Lawyer  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, on 13 November 2019, refusing the adjournment on  the  basis,
    in summary, that the Appellant had had ample opportunity to  comprehend
    the error of law decision by Judge Chalkley and to instruct an  expert.
    It was unsatisfactory that the adjournment application was  being  made
    so late.

13.  I have received this morning a skeleton argument from Mr Bradshaw,  who
    appears on behalf of the Appellant, which stated that  he  may  make  a
    renewed application for an adjournment in the present  appeal.   Indeed
    he did so before me.  The Appellant's basis for seeking an  adjournment
    are that the instructing solicitors did not focus the instructions that
    were sent to the expert with sufficient clarity to  elicit  a  response
    that more directly addressed the issues remaining in the appeal.  It is
    accepted on behalf of the Appellant that the  majority  of  the  expert
    report is framed on the assumed basis that the Appellant is accused  of
    blasphemy in Pakistan.   However  on  the  basis  of  Judge  Chalkley's
    findings  the  Appellant's  account  of  having  been  so  accused  was
    disbelieved and indeed there was no direct challenge to those  findings
    in the Appellant's grounds of appeal.

14.  Mr Bradshaw accepted that  the  content  of  the  expert  report  which
    addresses the difficulties which  may  be  faced  by  persons  who  are
    accused of blasphemy is no longer directly relevant to  the  issues  in
    the appeal and suggested that it would be appropriate  to  adjourn  the
    matter so that further and more direct instructions could  be  provided
    to the expert for  him  to  comment  about  any  deterioration  in  the
    situation for Christians in Pakistan which has  arisen  in  the  recent
    years.

15.  The application was formally resisted by Mr McVeety.

16.  I ruled that the matter should not be adjourned.  I,  having  read  the
    report  of  the  expert,  am  satisfied  that  there  was  neither  any
    misapprehension on his part as to the scope of  the  instructions  that
    were provided to him, nor any error in the  series  of  questions  that
    were posed.  Mr Bradshaw puts his case today on the  basis  that  there
    has been a deterioration of the situation for  Christians  in  Pakistan
    such that the  acknowledged  level  of  discrimination  that  that  the
    minority Christian community  face  in  Pakistan  has  now  passed  the
    threshold into  persecution  rather  than  simply  discrimination.   An
    associated element to this present Appellant's appeal is the  potential
    effect on him of the fact that his brother is said to be recognised  as
    a refugee in Nepal by UNHCR.

17.  However, both of those matters were put to the expert.  The  fact  that
    the expert has not provided very much information by  way  of  response
    does not necessarily mean that he was asked the wrong questions or  has
    misapprehended the scope of his instructions.  It seems to me that  the
    Appellant is seeking to have another bite of the cherry  of  trying  to
    muster evidence in support of his appeal, but there  is  no  legitimate
    basis for the matter being adjourned and I  therefore  ruled  that  the
    appeal should proceed.  The appeal therefore did  proceed,  by  way  of
    submissions only.

18.  For his part Mr McVeety drew my  attention  to  a  number  of  passages
    within recent  human  rights  and  press  reports  contained  within  a
    supplementary bundle provided by the Appellant for the purposes of this
    rehearing which for formal purposes I confirm  I  admit  into  evidence
    under Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  Mr McVeety suggested that  the  majority  of  the  human  rights
    reports and news articles set out within the Appellant's  supplementary
    bundle related to persons who are specifically accused of blasphemy  in
    Pakistan.  Although there were some incidents of violence to Christians
    generally, it  was  noted  that  on  one  occasion  some  persons  were
    suspected of theft, and it was merely a coincidence that they  happened
    to be Christian, and that any  violence  towards  Christians  that  was
    demonstrated by the country information did not  demonstrate  that  the
    level of discrimination against Christians in Pakistan had increased in
    any material way, and had not increased in any way which permitted  any
    departure from the country  guidance  given  in  the  case  of  AK  and
    SK(Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569 (IAC).

19.  For his part Mr Bradshaw accepted that the  press  reports  within  the
    Appellant's supplementary bundle did largely relate to persons who have
    been accused of blasphemy which was not, subsequent to  the  First-tier
    findings of  fact,  the  Appellant's  case  any  longer.   Mr  Bradshaw
    helpfully took me through passages contained  within  the  Home  Office
    Country Policy and Information Note entitled 'Pakistan  Christians  and
    Christian  Converts'  dated  September  2018.   He  asserted  that  the
    evidence set out within certain passages of that report established the
    proposition that there had been a deterioration in  the  situation  for
    Christians in Pakistan (and we are here referring to persons  who  were
    born Christian, not necessarily converts  or  evangelising  Christians)
    such that they can now be deemed to be at real  risk  of  serious  harm
    amounting to persecution merely by reason of their own Christianity.

20.  At its highest I find that the evidence set out at paragraph  8.1.3  of
    that report establishes that, according to the Foreign and Commonwealth
    Office's annual human rights report of 2017, that  intolerance  towards
    Pakistan's religious minorities including Christians increased over the
    last year.  It was  noted  that  discrimination  and  violence  against
    Christians was  widespread  and  Pakistan  was  ranked  fourth  on  the
    Christian Support Group Open Doors World Watch  List  2017  of  the  50
    countries where it was most difficult to be a Christian.   Mr  Bradshaw
    drew my attention to a number of other passages within the CPIN  report
    which set out discriminatory practices in certain  parts  of  Pakistan,
    interfering with Christians continuing their worship.  There  was  some
    evidence set out of prohibition on the setting up of new  churches  and
    the geographical location of churches in relation to mosques and  other
    Muslim residential areas.   Mr  Bradshaw  also  drew  my  attention  to
    evidence of violence at the hands of the number of different  Islamists
    groups and militia which exist in Pakistan, for example that set out at
    paragraph 7.2.4.  However I note that the existence of violence at  the
    hands of hard-line  Islamist  organisations  was  a  feature  that  was
    already considered by the Upper Tribunal in the case of AK and  SK  and
    Mr Bradshaw candidly accepted  that  paragraph  190  of  that  decision
    discussed that very phenomenon.

21.  Mr Bradshaw ultimately advanced the case that the  Appellant  would  be
    at real risk of serious harm because of his Christianity  per  se.   He
    did not  advance  the  proposition  that  the  Appellant  would  be  at
    heightened risk of serious harm  by  reason  of  association  with  his
    brother, who I am prepared to accept and find as a fact  was  a  street
    evangeliser in Pakistan and has been recognised by UNHCR as  a  refugee
    for that particular reason.  However Mr Bradshaw did  not  advance  the
    proposition that the present Appellant would be at  increased  risk  of
    serious harm by reason of his association with his brother.  Rather  he
    argued that if the Appellant were to come to the adverse  attention  of
    the authorities in Pakistan for being targeted as a Christian then  the
    brother's position would  be  likely  to  be  known  by  the  Pakistani
    authorities who would as a consequence be less inclined to  afford  the
    present Appellant effective protection.  That is the way in  which  the
    Appellant's case is put today.

22.  I make the following findings therefore in  relation  to  this  appeal.
    Notwithstanding Mr Bradshaw's valiant efforts to persuade me, I am  not
    satisfied, having regard to the country information I  have  summarised
    above, that there has been any material change of circumstances in  the
    security situation for Christians in Pakistan subsequent to the country
    guidance case of  AK  and  SK  which  demonstrates  that  the  risk  to
    Christians in Pakistan per se is any different to the assessment of the
    level of risk of harm identified by the Tribunal  within  that  country
    guidance case.  The country guidance given in that case is as  follows,
    providing here the paragraphs of the headnote which  are  relevant  for
    present purposes.

         "1.  Christians in  Pakistan  are  a  religious  minority  who,  in
             general, suffer discrimination but this is not  sufficient  to
             amount to a real risk of persecution.


         2.   Unlike the position of  Ahmadis,  Christians  in  general  are
             permitted  to  practise  their  faith,  can   attend   church,
             participate in religious activities and have their own schools
             and hospitals.


         3.   Evangelism by its very  nature  involves  some  obligation  to
             proselytise.  Someone who seeks to broadcast  their  faith  to
             strangers so  as  to  encourage  them  to  convert,  may  find
             themselves  facing  a  charge  of  blasphemy.   In  that  way,
             evangelical  Christians  face  a  greater  risk   than   those
             Christians who are not publicly active.  It will  be  for  the
             judicial fact-finder  to  assess  on  a  case  by  case  basis
             whether, notwithstanding attendance at an evangelical  church,
             it is important to the individual  to  behave  in  evangelical
             ways that may lead to a real risk of persecution."

    There are other paragraphs of the headnote which are not  necessary  to
    set out at this stage.

23.  In addition to my finding that the level of risk of harm to  Christians
    in Pakistan has not  materially  changed  since  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    assessment in AK and SK, I also consider for myself, quite  aside  from
    Mr  Bradshaw's  apparent  concession  that  the  Appellant's  brother's
    position does not materially alter the  profile  of  the  Appellant  or
    increase the likelihood of him being targeted, that it is  relevant  to
    note that within the country expert report that is relied upon  by  the
    Appellant that there is a passage at  paragraph  109  which  states  as
    follows:

         "It is unlikely that the authorities  would  stop  (the  Appellant)
         because of his brother  being  granted  refugee  status  in  Nepal.
         Instead it is more likely that he will be arrested and stopped  for
         the FIR filed against him."

    That paragraph comes below the title 'We require the report to  comment
    on whether our client would be stopped by the authorities as  a  result
    of his brother's problems (evidence provided that he has  been  granted
    refugee status)'.

24.  There was some discussion between Mr Bradshaw and myself as to  whether
    the expert had, when providing his opinion at  paragraph  109,  limited
    his assessment of risk merely to the basis that the Appellant's brother
    had been recognised as a refugee in Nepal, on the one hand, or  on  the
    other whether the assessment of risk of harm was on the  basis  of  the
    brother's activities in Pakistan.  For my part I find that the scope of
    the question posed to the expert is  sufficiently  clear,  as  it  asks
    about  the  consequence  as  a  result  of  the  Appellant's  brother's
    problems, which are clearly that he was targeted by  Islamists  because
    of his street proselytising activities, and the expert's  opinion  that
    it is unlikely the authorities would stop the present Appellant because
    of his brother being recognised as a  refugee  in  Nepal,  answers  the
    question definitively that the  Appellant  will  not  suffer  any  real
    consequence as a result of his brother's profile.

25.  On the basis that I have found that the Appellant will not as a  result
    of the general situation in Pakistan be at real risk of serious harm by
    reason of his being a Christian per se it is not necessary  for  me  to
    consider whether the level of protection that might be afforded to  him
    as a result of his brother's activities may be lessened.  The Appellant
    is simply not at risk of serious  harm  in  Pakistan  at  all  with  or
    without  any  effective  protection.   I  therefore   find   that   the
    Appellant's claim for protection  is  not  made  out.   I  dismiss  the
    appeal.

     Decision

    The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  10  June  2019  was
    previously set aside by the Upper Tribunal on 13 September 2019.

     I remake the decision, dismissing the Appellant's appeal


Signed                     Date 17.12.19
[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                     Date 17.12.19
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

