
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01228/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Video Link  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 April 2021                     |On 28 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     Z R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Fitzsimons, instructed by Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of the Secretary of State made
    on 4 January 2018 to refuse his protection claim and human rights claim
    subsequent to a deportation order being made against him by  virtue  of
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  That, in turn, was  read  on
    the basis of his conviction on 13 October 2017 for being  concerned  in
    the supply of a controlled class A drug due to be sentenced to fourteen
    months' imprisonment.

 2. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by the First-
    tier Tribunal for the reasons given in a  decision  promulgated  on  21
    September 2019.  For the reasons set out in my decision of 20  December
    2019 that decision was set aside in part, a copy of  that  decision  is
    attached to this decision.

 3. The appellant's case is that the Taliban had killed his  father,  uncle
    and cousin and that his older brother had run away  from  home  as  had
    another brother.  He had remained at home with his mother  but  on  one
    day in around May 2015 he was abducted  by  the  Taliban  when  he  was
    approximately 18.  He was held for four or five days but  was  able  to
    escape.  His mother then tried to arrange for him to be removed but the
    Taliban returned, beat him and took him back to the base saying that if
    he ran away again they would kill him.  He left the country  in  August
    2015 travelling by land.

 4. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter  of  15  January
    2018.  In summary, the respondent did not accept that the appellant had
    been forcibly taken by the Taliban as claimed or that he  escaped  from
    them or that he had received threats from them.  It was considered also
    that there would be a sufficiency of protection for him and/or that  he
    would be able to relocate.  The Secretary of State  was  not  satisfied
    either that  he  was  entitled  to  discretionary  leave  nor  was  she
    satisfied that his removal would be contrary to Article 8 of the  Human
    Rights Convention noting that he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph  399(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  nor  were  there   very
    compelling   circumstances    such    that    his    deportation    was
    disproportionate.

 5. The Secretary of State noted his claim to have made suicide threats and
    self-harmed in custody but concluded that his  removal  to  Afghanistan
    would not be in breach of Article 8.

 6. On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the judge found [24] that:

      i) the appellant's account of forcible abduction and being taken to  a
         cave was not inconsistent with the background  material,  the  fact
         that he was able to walk out of it without being noticed by anybody
         was not credible bearing in mind that he had  been  taken  forcibly
         and his captures would wish to avoid him escaping; as there was  no
         attempt to hide him after he returned to his mother's  house;  that
         there was no proper explanation of the incident in which he was hit
         on the head by the Taliban, there being no particular  evidence  of
         this, a Section 35 report specifically stating that  there  was  no
         scarring; and, that it was not credible that the Taliban would have
         allowed him to wait at his mother's house to recover;

     ii) the appellant had not told the  truth  about  his  brother  in  the
         United Kingdom [25] concluding that the appellant was sensitive  to
         the allegation that he left Afghanistan to join his brother in  the
         United Kingdom which explained the anomalies in his account  noting
         a "staggering coincidence" that the man met somebody in  a  refugee
         camp in Hungary who turned out to have his brother's  phone  number
         there being no explanation for this, it also being incredible  that
         the appellant's brother would not have told his mother where he is;
         that the truth of the matter is  that  the  appellant  deliberately
         left Afghanistan to join his brother in the United Kingdom and that
         the appellant and his brother were in fact  in  contact  with  her;
         that there is no reason why  the  appellant  could  not  return  to
         Kabul; that he would have family support if  he  returns  [28]  and
         even if not so, it would not be unduly harsh to  return  him  there
         despite the fact that he suffers from depression  and  PTSD,  there
         being no suggestion that he proposes to commit suicide;

    iii) the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph  399A  and
         having had regard to the factors set out in  Section  117C  of  the
         2002 Act, his deportation was proportionate.

 7. The basis of the appeal is as directed:

         "Whilst the judge's findings of fact are  to  be  preserved,  there
         will need to be a fresh analysis of the risk to  the  appellant  in
         terms of  humanitarian  protection  and/or  risk  pursuant  to  the
         Refugee Convention and the Human Rights Convention with regards  to
         his home area and/or whether he could  be  expected  to  return  to
         Kabul."

Proceedings

 8. It is unfortunate that the remake of the  appeal  did  not  take  place
    until 27 April  2021  owing  to  a  culmination  of  the  appeal  being
    adjourned pending a country guidance decision on Afghanistan  and  then
    owing to COVID-19.

The Hearing

 9. I heard submissions from both representatives who  also  both  provided
    skeleton arguments.  In addition, I had the following before me:-

      i) Respondent's bundle

     ii) Appellant's bundle provided for the First-tier Tribunal

    iii) Supplementary bundle

     iv) Letter from the appellant's treating psychiatrist dated 18 February
         2021

      v) EASO country guidance on Afghanistan, published January 2021

     vi) EASO COI Report on Afghanistan's security situation, September 2020
         (section on Paktia Province)

    vii) Home Office's country background note: Afghanistan December 2020

   viii)  Country  Policy  Information  Note:   Afghanistan,   medical   and
         healthcare provision December 2020

     ix)  Country  Policy  Information  Note:  Afghanistan,  anti-government
         elements, June 2020

      x) Country Policy Information Note: security, Afghanistan, May 2020

The Law

10. It is for the appellant to demonstrate to the lower standard  of  proof
    that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Afghanistan  or  that
    he is entitled to humanitarian protection.  Similarly, it  is  for  the
    appellant to show that he is at risk on return to  Afghanistan  if  ill
    treatment is of sufficient severity to engage Article  3  or  that  his
    right to private and family life would be infringed to such  an  extent
    that it would be disproportionate.

11. In assessing the evidence before me, I have  considered  details  as  a
    whole and I have taken it  all  into  account  even  if  not  expressly
    referred to.

12. I bear in mind that the appellant is a foreign criminal as defined.  It
    is not, however, submitted  that  he  is  as  a  result  excluded  from
    humanitarian protection or that section 72 of the 2002 Act applies.

    The appellant's mental health

13. I start my analysis by consideration of the material  relating  to  the
    appellant's mental ill health.  The Secretary of State does not dispute
    that the appellant is suffering from depression and PTSD but does  take
    issue with the more recent reports of Dr Nuwan Galappathie  which,  she
    submits, should not be given weight.  The earliest material relating to
    the appellant's mental ill health is from 2016 and is in the form of  a
    letter  from  a  nurse  practitioner  identifying  that  he  has   been
    prescribed medication for poor sleep, anxiety and depression.  It  said
    also that his mood and mental health is very fragile.  A letter from 29
    December  2016  from  a  clinical  practitioner/counsellor,   indicates
    depression and anxiety, very low mood and poor motivation.  Symptoms of
    PTSD are also identified.  The detention centre Rule 35 Report  records
    detention exacerbating sleep disturbance and stress but makes no  other
    relevant comments about mental ill health.

14. Prior to the previous appeal, the appellant was seen by  Peter  Thorne,
    (a consultant clinical psychologist until 2015).  Mr Thorne prepared  a
    re-examination report on 21 August 2019.

15. In his first report, Mr  Thorne  notes  [18]  that  he  had  not  found
    evidence of psychosis the appellant denying  hallucinations.   He  did,
    however, note that the screening tools he used  for  the  detection  of
    symptoms associated with depression and anxiety indicated the appellant
    scored in the severe range on both, concluding [28] that the  appellant
    met the criteria for a diagnosis of a depressive  order  present  to  a
    moderate degree of severity.  He also concluded the appellant currently
    presented with a mixture of chronic and  complex  PTSD  and  associated
    secondary depressed mood as a result of past traumatic experiences [39]
    noting from his medical records that he presented with these  prior  to
    conviction and imprisonment.

16. Mr Thorne noted [56] that the appellant's GP records show that  he  had
    reported problems with his mental health before arrest, he  was  coping
    poorly with symptoms of PTSD and depression, was finding the  pressures
    and chances of life in a very different cultural environment  difficult
    to adjust to, he was struggling to  cope  with  being  in  an  intimate
    relationship.  The period of imprisonment appeared to  have  compounded
    the difficulties.  He stated,

         "My overall impression of [the appellant] was that  he  was  deeply
         pessimistic, hopeless about his prospects in life  and  his  future
         safety, troubled by continuing mental health problems and lacking a
         sense of direction, other than remaining in the relative safety  of
         the UK."

17. In the second report Mr Thorne  notes  that,  in  addition  to  the  GP
    medical records, he had updated records including information from  the
    local community mental health team.  He noted [13] no evidence of  true
    psychosis and that although he sometimes  imagined  people  approaching
    him, this appeared to be due to hyper vigilance  associated  with  PTSD
    symptoms rather than psychotic paranoia.  He notes  also  that  he  had
    reported to staff at his surgery that  he  sometimes  hears  voices  of
    family members but "these sound like dissociative PTSD phenomena rather
    than psychotic symptoms".

18. Mr Thorne repeated the two self-screening tools used before  and  noted
    that the appellant continued to score in the higher range and [23] that
    the appellant continues  to  meet  the  criteria  for  a  diagnosis  of
    depressive order with a moderate degree of severity.  He also concluded
    that there was the presence of chronic symptoms of PTSD [24] and  [33];
    that the appellant continues to have a mixture of chronic  and  complex
    PTSD with comorbid depressed mood; and,  his depression was of moderate
    severity and his PTSD was severe.

19. With regards to the likely  impact  of  being  forcibly  sent  back  to
    Afghanistan including the risk  of  self-harm  or  suicide,  Mr  Thorne
    indicated that the risk would increase [37] and noting in  the  medical
    records [38] a letter from a CBT therapist at  Wellbeing  Suffolk  that
    the  appellant  had  presented  with  severe  depression  and  frequent
    suicidal thoughts and reported that he had "frequent suicidal ideation"
    with some planning.  He notes also that the doctor who produced a  Rule
    35 Report noted that the  appellant  has  a  history  of  self-harm  by
    cutting his arms and recorded that he made an attempt to  hang  himself
    whilst in prison.

20. In his witness statement dated 31 December 2020, the appellant gives an
    account that he is homeless and since November  2019  having  had  more
    support from the mental health team in Ipswich.  He has also spoken  to
    psychiatrists on the telephone and has a support worker to speak to  if
    he has a problem.  He has also had contact with the Samaritans when  he
    had been worried that he was going to harm himself and cut himself.  He
    explains that he was worried about leaving Ipswich as he has a  support
    network there and although assisted by Suffolk Refugee Support to apply
    for emergency accommodation, he  was  then  taken  to  Derby  which  he
    stressed to me had been far away from Ipswich where he had been  living
    for five years.  He as a result became distressed, took an overdose and
    cut himself which resulted in him being taken to hospital.

21. The appellant says he has also lost contact with  his  brother,  Yusuf,
    whom he has now been told has been using drugs and got into debt and so
    had had to leave Ipswich.  He has since learned from contact  with  his
    brother that he is in Pakistan his wife and children and  would  return
    to the United Kingdom.

22. The first letter from Charity Muchemwa, senior community mental  health
    nurse, of 6 December 2019 records that the appellant has been  referred
    to the Ipswich IDT youth team given concerns about his  mental  health.
    As at that date he had not started on any work but had  been  receiving
    regular welfare calls to check on his wellbeing.  Ms Muchemwa's  second
    letter of 2 July 2020  indicates  that  although  the  appellant  would
    benefit from PTSD therapy this cannot  be  commenced  yet  due  to  his
    destabilisation factors of  stress  such  as  accommodation  as  he  is
    currently homeless and his immigration status.  It is recorded:

         "As [the appellant] is currently homeless, this has been a  concern
         within our team/service since he has no recourse  to  public  funds
         and we are trying to source out accommodation for him  during  this
         coronavirus pandemic period which has been very difficult and  non-
         existent to what is available for him at this time.   This  appears
         to be increasing his current stresses and impacting  negatively  on
         his mental health.  [The appellant] has also been referred  to  our
         sister services whilst still within our service such  as  the  home
         treatment team when his mental state had deteriorated  due  to  the
         home  treatment  team  offering  intensive  support  in   a   short
         timescale.  [The appellant] is to see the psychiatrist on  15  July
         2020 at 10am and possibly his  medication  may  be  reviewed  again
         following this appointment.  He is currently on an anti-depressant,
         citalopram 40mgs once a day and an anti-psychotic, risperidone  1mg
         as a calming agent and also to help with nightmares.

         Due to [the appellant]'s suicide high risk and other risks, we have
         been maintaining contact with him  on  a  weekly  basis  either  by
         telephone or face-to-face.  Currently this is increasing and we are
         having contact with him three  times  a  week  because  his  mental
         health has deteriorated further in the past month."

23. The letter from Dr Franklin Obeng-Asare, consultant  psychiatrist  (and
    to whom the appellant had been referred), dated 16  July  2020  records
    that since the initial  referral  the  appellant  had  missed  multiple
    outpatient appointments for various reasons and that  he  was  recently
    under the home treatment team due  to  being  suicidal  and  also  then
    records the appellant's history and how he had presented noting that he
    could not elicit any psychotic phenomena.  The diagnosis  is  described
    as PTSD and chronic adjustment disorder.

24. It is useful to consider also the letters from the appellant's  support
    worker, Stephen Emery.  Mr Emery records on 7  January  2021  that  the
    appellant was discussed in multi-discipline team meetings on  a  weekly
    basis as they deemed the risks of him harming himself to be  high.   He
    records also the appellant being concerned about his mother and feeling
    guilty that she is on her own and talks about not knowing where she  is
    which results in him becoming tearful.  He has noted also the appellant
    reports self-harm by burning himself with  cigarettes  and  scars  have
    been observed on his forearm.  Mr Emery states:

         "The ongoing stress of sofa surfing and not having a place  he  can
         call home is something [the appellant] brings up  in  almost  every
         conversation with the team.  He regularly talks about  walking  the
         streets at night as he has nowhere  to  go.   It  is  during  these
         periods that [the  appellant]  reports  feeling  suicidal  and  not
         wanting to carry on.  He reports minimum food intake  and  says  he
         does not feel hungry and he is only getting a few  hours  sleep  at
         night.  When seen in person [the appellant] will present as flat in
         mood and appear tired."

25. The most recent letter from Dr Obeng-Asare of 18 February  2021  states
    that the appellant was reviewed on 17 February 2021 by  telephone.   He
    notes the appellant's reporting paranoia, admitting  to  self-harm  but
    notes that he has no suicide intent or plan.  It is recorded  that  the
    appellant has not noticed any change  in  his  thoughts  of  perception
    experiences  in  spite  of  the  increased  dose  of  risperidone  with
    duloxetine.

26. Dr Obeng-Asare notes that the  appellant  has  agreed  to  a  trial  of
    quetiapine to be given his  significant  sleep  problems.   Again,  the
    diagnosis is post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and  chronic  adjustment
    disorder.

27. Dr Galappathie's report must be  considered  in  the  context  of  this
    material.  Dr Galappathie, who is a consultant  forensic  psychiatrist,
    states that he has read the respondent's bundle as well as Mr  Thorne's
    reports, the decisions of the First-tier and Upper Tribunal as well  as
    medical records including the letters from Miss Muchemwa and  Mr  Emery
    and Dr Obeng-Asare's letter of 16 July 2020.

28. The examination was conducted by video with the assistance of a  Pashtu
    interpreter.  The doctor records the  appellant's  history  of  trauma,
    albeit that that is not believed as he noted [26].  He notes  the  past
    psychiatric history [44] and the information from GP  records  [46]  to
    [63].  In summary,  these  demonstrate  anxiety,  depression  and  PTSD
    including in 2017 an indication of severe depression and some  suicidal
    ideation.  The analysis of the IRC health records  confirms  continuing
    problems as too the information  from  GP  records  from  January  2019
    onwards.

29. Dr Galappathie states at [83] that he had spoken with Mr Emery.

30. In Dr Galappathie's opinion, the  appellant  has  a  severe  depressive
    episode indicated by his account of suffering from a  low  mood  and  a
    range of depressive symptoms [96].  He states:-

         "Clinically, he presented as an individual  suffering  from  severe
         depression.  This would be indicated by the number  and  extent  of
         his symptoms and the impact they have had on his  level  of  social
         and  occupational  functioning.   Objectively,  he   presented   as
         depressed as indicated by his reduction in  speech  which  required
         prompting  in  evidence  of  black  mood  and   reduced   emotional
         activity."

31. He used the same depression rating test as did Mr  Thorne  in  defining
    that it indicated severe  depression.   He  also  considered  that  the
    health records were consistent with the diagnosis of depression  noting
    that these confirm the appellant has presented with  frequent  thoughts
    and acts of self-harming including instances  of  burning  himself  and
    cutting himself and trying to hang himself in prison.  He  states  also
    that "In my opinion, his depression has worsened since he was  assessed
    by Dr Peter Thorne".

32. Dr Galappathie also concluded the appellant  suffers  from  generalised
    anxiety disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder noting that despite
    the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  findings  [108]  that  the  appellant
    describes having recurrent and distressing memories of  past  traumatic
    events and, having completed the impact of events scale revised (IES-R)
    and a score of 67 out of a possible 88 is well above the cut-off  of  a
    probable diagnosis of PTSD.

33. Dr Galappathie says that in his opinion  the  depression  is  currently
    severe [112] as is his PTSD, the  latter  being  likely  to  have  been
    caused by trauma he experienced in Afghanistan or during his journey to
    the United Kingdom.

34. I found little merit in the respondent's challenge to Dr  Galappathie's
    report.  Contrary to what is submitted the report is not  based  solely
    on what the  appellant  has  told  him  through  an  interpreter  in  a
    relatively short time period; on the contrary, it involved  a  detailed
    analysis of the medical records made available to him covering a number
    of years and a discussion with  the  appellant's  support  worker.   In
    reality there is no inconsistency with the assessment that, as at  that
    date, the appellant was suffering from  a  severe  depressive  episode.
    That is consistent with the picture of the evidence of the  appellant's
    ill health deteriorating perhaps exacerbated by sofa  surfing  and  the
    effects of isolation during the COVID pandemic but it is not  a  reason
    not to follow Dr Galappathie's conclusions.  The doctor  gave  adequate
    reasons for his conclusions with reference to the  relevant  diagnostic
    criteria in tests.

35. I  do  not  consider  that  there  is  any  inconsistency  between  the
    appellant's account of incidents of  self-harm  and  suicidal  thoughts
    being omitted from witness statements  of  his  former  girlfriend  and
    brother.  He no longer resides with the brother and  the  incidents  of
    self-harm are recorded in several places both in the GP records and  in
    the other material provided to me.  I am at a loss  to  understand  why
    the failure  of  a  girlfriend  and  brother  to  record  weight  loss,
    trembling, lack of attention, shaking,  sweats,  palpitations  etc.  is
    relevant.  They are not medically qualified and there is no  indication
    that they were asked to provide evidence on that issue.  Further, I  do
    not consider that this is in marked contrast to aspirations for further
    education, marrying and starting a family.

36. Whilst I accept that there is a history  of  the  appellant  not  being
    believed, I remind myself that that does not  mean  that  he  has  been
    untruthful in everything he has said.  There is a remarkable degree  of
    consistency in the appellant's account of his symptoms  of  mental  ill
    health noted by several people over a period of four years.  There  is,
    in reality, no evidential basis for the submission  by  the  respondent
    that  the  appellant's  diagnosis  of  severe  depressive  episode  are
    predominantly due to his failure to obtain immigration  status  in  the
    United Kingdom.  On  the  contrary,  they  appear  to  be  perhaps  the
    inevitable result of the  appellant's  underlying  serious  mental  ill
    health exacerbated by additional stresses.  Insofar as  Dr  Galappathie
    has sought to revisit the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that
    decision does not make any finding that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    exposed to trauma, albeit of a different type from that claimed and the
    judge simply expresses [24] that there was no evidence  before  him  of
    scarring as a result of being hit on the head.  The Section  35  Report
    does not positively say that there is no scarring it says the appellant
    does not report any or indication of any  physical  examination  having
    been  undertaken  of  the  scalp.  I  note  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusions on that matter, but absence of evidence is not evidence  of
    absence.

37. That said, I do record that Dr Galappathie does not make any opinion on
    the findings of if the appellant would benefit from family  support  on
    return to Afghanistan but equally, that would have been speculative.

38. I accept that the letters from Dr Obeng-Asare do not refer to  concerns
    about suicide but the letters are brief.  They are not  provided  as  a
    comprehensive report for the purposes of a Tribunal and they are silent
    as to the diagnosis of depression.  But equally, they do not  take  any
    issue with what is observed from the other medical notes  from  the  GP
    and the health workers giving a  consistent  thread  of  the  appellant
    having depression.  The reviews  that  Dr  Obeng-Asare  held  with  the
    appellant appear to have been done by telephone  rather  than  face-to-
    face.

39. Accordingly, I am satisfied that I can give weight to the report of  Dr
    Galappathie.

    Current situation in the appellant's home area

40. I then turn to background material relevant  to  Afghanistan,  and  the
    appellant's home province in particular, viewing it through the lens of
    AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2020]  UKUT  130  (IAC)  and  the
    guidance it gives.

41. The starting point is to consider the appellant's position in his  home
    area.

42. The most recent EASO Security Situation report on Paktia sets  out  the
    background to the situation as it is in Paktia which is  summarised  in
    the EASO Country Guidance Report at pages 141 to 143:

    Paktya is located in  eastern  Afghanistan  and  has  a  population  of
    approximately 612 000. The main ethnic groups are Pashtuns, followed by
    Tajiks. The province is  divided  into  15  districts,  including  four
    temporary districts. It borders Pakistan and the  provinces  of  Logar,
    Khost, Paktika, and  Ghazni.  The  Kabul-Gardez  highway  connects  the
    provincial capital to Kabul City and the Gardez-Khost highway  runs  to
    the Afghan-Pakistani border.Paktya province  is  witnessing  an  active
    insurgency,  which  is  reportedly   constrained   by   strong   tribal
    affiliations  and  cohesive  local  communities.  The  province  is   a
    stronghold of the Taliban, but the  Haqqani  Network  has  also  become
    powerful in the province.  The  network  allied  with  Al  Qaedaforeign
    fighters in order to reach the provincial capital and potentially Kabul
    by demanding transit rights through Zurmat valley. The presence of  the
    Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan is also reported.LWJ considered four  of  the
    districts as contested, two districts as under Taliban control, and the
    remaining  four  districts,  including  the   capital   Gardez,   under
    government control or undetermined.ACLED collected data on 651  violent
    events in the period from 1 March 2019 to 30 June 2020 (average of  9.4
    incidents per week), of which 450  were  coded  as  'battles',  176  as
    'explosions/remote violence' and 25 as 'violence against civilians'.

    Example of incidents include two suicide attacks in Gardez in March and
    May 2020, and a long-lasting clash, in June 2019, between  the  Taliban
    and a police unit in  Ahmadaba  district.  During  the  September  2019
    presidential election, only  five  of  twenty-two  polling  centres  in
    Zurmat district were actually open. Afghan and foreign security  forces
    carried  out  operations  and  airstrikes  against  insurgents  in  the
    districts of  Ahmadabad,  Zurmat  and  Sayedkaram,  which  also  caused
    civilian casualties. Further examples of incidents  include  a  Taliban
    attack on a convoy  of  provincial  officials  and  the  kidnapping  of
    passengers on the Kabul-Gardez  highway.  It  was  also  reported  that
    militants allegedly belonging to the Khost  Protection  Force  executed
    civilians on more than one occasions. ISKP attacked a Shia  mosque  and
    at least 38 worshippers were  killed.Further  impact  on  the  civilian
    population included, for example, collection of taxes  by  the  Taliban
    from truck drivers going from Paktya to  Ghazni,  and  the  closure  of
    polling centres. UNAMA documented 218 civilian  casualties  (78  deaths
    and 140 injured) in 2019, representing 36civilian victims per  100  000
    inhabitants. This is a decrease of 49 % compared to 2018.  The  leading
    causes for the civilian casualties were ground engagements, followed by
    targeted/deliberate killings and search operations. RS ranked Paktya in
    the category of provinces where the number of civilian  casualties  was
    between 26 and 50 or the first quarter of 2020, and between 76 and  100
    for the second quarter. In the period 1 March 2019 - 30  June  2020,  2
    541 persons were displaced from the province of Paktya,  mainly  within
    the province itself. In the same period, 161  persons  were  internally
    displaced to Paktya, coming from Logar.

43. The EASO Security Situation Report provides  more  detail   on  current
    trends:

    27.3.1 General

    In 2019, UNAMA documented 218 civilian casualties (78  deaths  and  140
    injured) in Paktya province. This represents a decrease of 49% compared
    to 2018. Leading causes of casualties were ground engagements  followed
    by  targeted/deliberate  killings  and  search  operations.3012Resolute
    Support recorded between 102 and 150 civilian casualties in  Paktya  in
    the first half of 2020, reporting a marked increase during  the  second
    quarter compared to the first.3013In regard with the  severity  of  the
    conflict,  Resolute  Support  recorded  between  501  and  1000  enemy-
    initiated attacks in Paktya  province  over  the  full  year  2019  -an
    increase in comparison with 2018 (301-500).3014In 2020, interviewed  by
    AAN after the February 'reduction in  violence'  period  had  ended,  a
    local journalist stated that  the  Taliban  had  soon  resumed  attacks
    against security forces posts  in  the  districts  of  Jaji  (Alikhel),
    Zurmat, Sayedkaram  and  Rohani  Baba  (Zurmat).3015In  April  2020,  a
    resident  of  Shawak  district  observed  that  violence  had  remained
    'somewhat reduced', due to weather conditions and  longing  of  Taliban
    for peace. In Zurmat, a local elder noted that the Taliban had  stopped
    pressuring people for food or questioning them about their travel.

44. The EASO Security report also provides at 27.3 1 at pages 264-265;

         Out of the 25 recorded events of  violence  against  civilians,  14
         were attributed to Afghan security  forces  and  its  NATO  allies,
         primarily in Gardez,  Jaji  and  Zurmat  districts.3033Such  events
         include the killing of five civilians from a single family  by  the
         KPF, during a  search  operation  against  the  Taliban  in  Zurmat
         district in March 2019. This incident prompted local  residents  to
         organise  a  protest  in   front   of   the   provincial   governor
         headquarters.3034Also illustrating this trend is the killing of  11
         civilians on 11August 2019, during a night raid carried out by  the
         NDS-01 Special Forces Unit and US forces, in the  Kulalgo  area  of
         Zurmat district. While Afghan officials claimed  that  the  victims
         were Taliban fighters, family members and local  elders  denied  it
         and added that they should have been questioned  instead  of  being
         shot  from  close  range.  The  Afghan   authorities   ordered   an
         investigation  on  the  matter  but,  several  months  later,   its
         conclusions  had  not  yet  been  made  public.3035UNAMA  expressed
         concern  over  several  similar  incidents  involving  NDS  Special
         Forces, the KPF and Paktika-based Shaheen Forces,  but  noted  that
         the 25 civilian deaths attributed to the KPF across  Khost,  Paktya
         and Paktika in 2019 represented a 'significant drop' from 2018  and
         that almost all of them had been reported during the first  quarter
         of 2019 alone. KPF search operations appeared to be  less  frequent
         during the remainder of the year.3036

         The Taliban were  held  responsible  for  six  events  of  violence
         against civilians by ACLED.3037These included the murder of  tribal
         elders in August 2019 and June 2020, respectively in  Zadran3038and
         Jaji (Alikhel) district.3039Besides its  high  numbers  across  the
         three ACLED categories detailed above, Gardez capital district  has
         also been the scene of increasing criminality. In  June  2019,  the
         city dwellers expressed  concerns  about  the  growing  pattern  of
         targeted  killings  by  unidentified  gunmen  and  robberies.  This
         prompted the local police chief to announce  increased  efforts  to
         tackle  violence.3040According  to  Pajhwok,  in  early  2020,  the
         Taliban were preventing Paktya's health centres to receive  medical
         supplies,  reportedly  because  of  their  discontent  towards  the
         quality of services provided  by  the  NGO  in  charge  of  medical
         supplies.3041In mid-February 2020, UNOCHA noted that 45 health care
         facilities had forcedly been closed by  anti-government  groups  in
         Paktya, depriving up  to  one  million  people  from  basic  health
         services.3042

45. The conclusion drawn in the EASO Country Guidance Report in the section
    directed towards article 15 (c) provides:

         Looking at the indicators, it can be concluded that  indiscriminate
         violence is taking place in the province of Paktya, however not  at
         high level and, accordingly, a higher level of individual  elements
         is required in order to show substantial grounds for believing that
         a civilian, returned to the territory, would face a  real  risk  of
         serious harm within the meaning of Article 15(c) QD.

46. While that conclusion is not binding on me, I  consider  that,  viewing
    the evidence as a whole, and taking into account the CPIN  reports,  it
    is  correct.  The  respondent's  most  recent  CPIN  provides  a  graph
    indicating that the casualty levels are relatively low  (see  paragraph
    [7.2.10]) but that is to be  considered  alongside  the  more  detailed
    account  in  the  EASO  Security  Report.  Despite   the   respondent's
    submissions, I do not consider that, viewing the evidence as  a  whole,
    that the figures are such that  the  nuanced  conclusion  in  the  EASO
    Country Guidance Report is not to be followed.  The situation does,  in
    my view, appear to be fluctuating and certainly it  would  appear  that
    whilst the government  controls  some  areas  where  their  forces  are
    concentrated that is not true of the whole  province.   It  is  evident
    that there are problems with the use of roads which,  as  a  matter  of
    common sense, are easily targeted that  had  been  the  case  with  the
    Taliban operating roadblocks and attacking convoys.  How much  of  this
    then is carried out against civilians is less clear.

47. With regard to Mr Foxley's reports, I note that he says  at  [19]  that
    the  majority  of  the  appellant's  home  province  is  controlled  or
    contested by the Taliban.  That is consistent with  the  EASO  reports,
    bearing in mind that the situation is ever-changing on the ground.  The
    incidents set out at [19] are consistent with the other reports of  car
    bombings and attacks on roads and  infrastructure.   But  beyond  that,
    there is little evidence of militants attacking civilians although I do
    note the evidence [20] that travelling may  difficult  and  that  there
    have been specific problems with security of the roads.   I  note  that
    there would be a risk  of  indirect  and  indiscriminate  risks  -  the
    appellant in fact had been caught  in  crossfire  or  as  a  result  of
    criminality from illegal checkpoints where there may  well  be  attack,
    robbery, intimidation and so on.

48. I accept, in the circumstances, that the appellant may be  at  risk  if
    travelling to his home area in the light of this and  I  bear  in  mind
    also a consistency in the reports on his mental health of being bullied
    by  militants,  perhaps  entirely  understandable  in  the  context  of
    Afghanistan.

49. To a significant degree the extent to which the  appellant  would  have
    difficulties in his home area are dependent on the extent to  which  he
    could rely on family. The respondent submits that he  can  do  so,  and
    there would in consequence  be  no  article  15  (c)  risk,  given  the
    apparent resources available to them.

50. The appellant's evidence, which was disbelieved, is that he is  not  in
    contact with his mother.  That finding  is  preserved,  notwithstanding
    the additional evidence in his new witness statement  albeit  one  that
    was not tested by cross-examination, that he is  not  in  contact  with
    her.  Given his statement that he is not in contact  with  his  brother
    who appears to have returned to Pakistan, but who  is  consistent  with
    what he has said to his care workers, I am prepared to accept that that
    is the case now.  I find it difficult to consider  that  the  appellant
    would, given his undoubted mental health problems be able  to  maintain
    such a consistent deceit.

51. While the appellant's account of not being in contact with  family  and
    not having told the truth about the family's resources and  whereabouts
    was not believed, and thus that his  evidence  on  that  point  is  not
    reliable, it is not proper then  to  conclude  positive  findings  from
    that, that  support of a particular type or from particular individuals
    is or will be available. That is not,  however,  to  say  that  as  the
    respondent  submits,  that  there  is  generally  an   expectation   in
    Afghanistan that family, clans and  tribes  even  ethnicity  will  feel
    obliged to help people or family, tribe or clans.

52. It is evident from the material and the relevant country guidance cases
    that a large percentage of the population in  Afghanistan  suffer  from
    some mental ill health if not just depression and PTSD and as a  result
    of what has happened in that country over the last 30 years.  There is,
    I accept, a stigma attached to mental ill  health,  particularly  where
    that results in behaviour issues but  there  is  insufficient  material
    before me to conclude that the appellant's family would reject  him  or
    fail to support him as a result of his current mental ill health.

53. Would that then put the appellant in a position such that he is not  at
    risk of an Article 15(c) risk in Paktia?  I  have  no  doubt  that  the
    appellant is vulnerable but it does not necessarily follow he would  be
    at enhanced risk  of  indiscriminate  violence  as  a  result.   I  do,
    however, note that he has been out of the  country  for  a  significant
    period of time.  He left the country whilst a minor and  I  found  some
    merit in his submission that having been in the west, he  may  find  it
    more difficult to adapt.  That is not to say that he would be  targeted
    as a result merely that he may not have the  necessary  skills  or  the
    ability to develop the necessary skills to avoid situations in which he
    is placed in danger.

54. With regard to any risk flowing from the appellant being  perceived  as
    "Westernised" I have taken into account the CPIN "Afghanistan:  Afghans
    perceived as 'Westernised'", of January 2018 in which contrasting views
    emanating from a report by EASO are cited at [5.1.1] to [5.2.3].  It is
    evident that what is acceptable in terms of learned behaviour in  Kabul
    is different from that in rural areas.  It would appear  that  what  is
    accepted or at best tolerated in Kabul in certain circles would not  be
    tolerated in home areas.  The  extent  to  which  there  would  be  any
    sanctions for perceived western behaviour  in  a  rural  area  is  more
    difficult to assess.  At [5.2.3] Ali Latifi is quoted  as  saying  that
    those who do not adhere to local customs can  "play  it  off  as  being
    urbanised" as the reason  they  do  not  know  the  local  custom.   Dr
    Schuster quoted at [5.2.1] remarks that a person in Afghanistan must be
    constantly conscious about one's actions, body  language  and  how  and
    what one is saying and how one is perceived.  Someone  who  comes  back
    from Europe and does not know the unspoken  rules,  forgets,  errs,  or
    makes  mistakes,  could  be  perceived  to   be   "cheeky",   rude   or
    disrespectful.   Equally,  at  [5.1.2]  Dr  Schuster  opined  that  the
    development of a critical stance on Islam whilst in the  West  is  what
    puts people at most risk.  And that it will all turn  on  the  specific
    location where a person is returning to, the nature  and  attitudes  of
    their immediate community and family in assessing  whether  the  person
    would encounter problems.

55. It is in this case difficult to  assess  how  the  appellant  would  be
    received on return to his home area in Paktia, it  being  unclear  what
    family he has there.  It is also not entirely clear the extent to which
    he has become "westernised" in his habits  but  I  do  note  that,  for
    example, he does not drink.  There is nothing to suggest that he has  a
    critical stance towards Islam but equally he  left  the  country  at  a
    relatively young age, and whilst he has had some contact with relatives
    in the United Kingdom and has associated with Afghan  people,  it  does
    not follow that he has any idea about how to behave  in  Paktia  as  an
    adult.  Equally, that province is one described as conservative and  it
    is reasonable to expect people to be  more  circumspect  and  to  avoid
    trouble, people self-censure to a significant degree and  adherence  to
    more conservative norms are expected.

56. Added to this, there is the appellant's continuing  mental  ill  health
    which affects  how  he  interacts  with  others,  as  is  seen  in  his
    perception of being followed and hyper-vigilance.

57. Whilst I accept that  there  may  well  be  an  enhanced  risk  of  the
    appellant being exploited given his vulnerable  position,  it  is  less
    clear that that will be so if  he  has  the  support  of  family.   For
    example, if supported by them financially, it would be unnecessary  for
    him to be seeking employment thereby putting himself in a situation  of
    being exploited for trafficking or forced labour.

58. Equally, where there is merit in the respondent's submission  that  his
    family must have had money to send him out of Afghanistan but  it  does
    not necessarily follow that having  done  that  once,  they  have  much
    resources left.  And, as was noted in AS (Afghanistan) [2020]  UKUT  at
    Appendix A, paragraph 111:
         111. Many returnees from Europe have  problems  with  their  family
         because the family has sold all their resources to send the  family
         member to Europe and if he fails, the  family  are  unable  to  pay
         their debts. Return can also be perceived as a  kind  of  shame  or
         indication that the person committed a  crime  (and  therefore  was
         deported).

59. There is then the issue of  whether  the  appellant  would,  even  with
    family support, be able to travel safely to his home  area.   I  accept
    that there continue to be a large number of people in the area  but  it
    does not necessarily mean that they are able to travel easily or to  be
    able to travel from there to Kabul.  The  risk  of  violence  to  those
    travelling by road appears to be higher than those who are  not  moving
    and it is unclear how  the  wealth  or  any  other  attributes  of  the
    appellant's family will be such as to be able to  protect  him  on  the
    journey.

60.  Drawing  these  strands  together,  and  applying  the  principle   in
    Elgafaji, [2009] EUECJ C- 456/07 that the more the applicant is able to
    show that he is specifically affected by reason of factors   particular
    to his personal circumstances, the lower the  level  of  indiscriminate
    violence required, I am satisfied that on the particular facts of  this
    case, given the  appellant's  particular  vulnerability  owing  to  his
    mental ill-health and length of time outside his home area, that he  is
    at risk, despite family support, owing to the accumulation  of  factors
    set out above on account of treatment contrary to article 15 (c) of the
    Directive. He would at best be financially reliant on them,  and  would
    be at enhanced risk were he to go out  and  interact  with  others;  he
    could not be expected to remain entirely within the family setting.

61. I am not, however, persuaded that this is sufficiently connected to any
    Convention reason such that he has a well-founded fear of  persecution.
    IN reaching that conclusion I have applied DH (Particular Social Group:
    Mental Health) Afghanistan [2020] UKUT 223 (IAC) but  I  consider  that
    can be distinguished on its facts. The nature of the  illness  here  is
    not so severe as to amount to a serious mental illness, nor is there  a
    likelihood of disinhibited behaviour, and thus less of  a  stigma  will
    arise.

    Relocation to Kabul

62. Having found that the appellant is at risk in his  home  area,  I  must
    consider whether he it is reasonable for him to relocate to  Kabul.  In
    doing so, I have applied AS(Afghanistan). I  have  considered  also  Mr
    Foxley's report, but I conclude that at present, as the respondent  has
    submitted, that it does  not  displace  the  guidance  set  out  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) which provides
         Reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul
         (iii) Having regard to the security and humanitarian  situation  in
         Kabul as well as the difficulties faced by  the  population  living
         there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other  returnees,
         which are not dissimilar to the conditions  faced  throughout  many
         other  parts  of  Afghanistan)  it  will  not,   in   general,   be
         unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single adult male in good health
         to relocate to  Kabul  even  if  he  does  not  have  any  specific
         connections or support network in Kabul and even  if  he  does  not
         have a Tazkera.


          (iv) However, the particular circumstances of an individual
         applicant must be taken into account in the context of conditions
         in the place of relocation, including a person's age, nature and
         quality of support network/connections with Kabul/Afghanistan,
         their physical and mental health, and their language, education and
         vocational skills when determining whether a person falls within
         the general position set out above. Given the limited options for
         employment, capability to undertake manual work may be relevant.


          (v)   A person with a support network or specific connections in
         Kabul is likely to be in a more advantageous position on return,
         which may counter a particular vulnerability of an individual on
         return. A person without a network may be able to develop one
         following return. A person's familiarity with the cultural and
         societal norms of Afghanistan (which may be affected by the age at
         which he left the country and his length of absence) will be
         relevant to whether, and if so how quickly and successfully, he
         will be able to build a network.


         Previous Country Guidance
         (vi) The country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
         [2012]  UKUT  163  (IAC)  in  relation  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
         Qualification Directive remains unaffected by this decision.


         (vii)           The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c))
         Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to the
         (un)reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul (and other
         potential places of internal relocation) for certain categories of
         women remains unaffected by this decision.


         (viii)         The country guidance in AA (unattended children)
         Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16 (IAC) also remains unaffected by this
         decision.

63. Whether or not the appellant would  be  safe  in  Kabul  depends  to  a
    significant degree as to whether he has support of  family  there.  The
    appellant has been disbelieved on the issue of family  and  where  they
    are, the First-tier  Tribunal  finding  that  he  was,  in  effect,  an
    economic migrant following in his  brother's  footsteps.  He  has  been
    found not to  tell  the  truth,  but  equally  there  is  a  degree  of
    consistency in his account of his mental  ill-health.  He  clearly  had
    some support in the past in terms of the resources spent on having  him
    smuggled out of Afghanistan, but I accept that he is estranged from his
    brother now.  The lack of contact with the mother is now  confirmed  by
    several of the psychological reports, and it is unlikely that he  could
    maintain such a deceit.

64. While I am satisfied that there would be some sort of family support in
    his home area, be it from extended family, tribe  or  village,  viewing
    the evidence as a whole, and bearing in mind how his mental  ill-health
    manifests itself, I consider it unlikely that the  appellant  would  be
    able to  access  meaningful  support  in  Kabul  from  family  or  more
    attenuated connections. Even with support, he would  not  I  expect  be
    able to get a job and indeed given his mental ill health it is unlikely
    that he would be able to undertake any employment successfully.

65. If he does not have support of family, I bear in mind that he will have
    some financial support in the form of grant on  return  and  that  this
    might assist  him  so  that  he  would  be  able  to  find  inexpensive
    accommodation in a "chai khana" [tea house].

66. I accept that the appellant does speak some English, but  I  find  that
    given his lack  of  other  skills,  mental  ill-health  and  consequent
    vulnerability that this would not assist him in getting work as  a  day
    labourer; he has no other employable  skills  gained  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  There is, I accept, only one mental  hospital  in  Kabul  but
    there is no indication that the appellant requires in-patient treatment
    or anything more than he is currently receiving.

67. The appellant is not a single, healthy, well young man in the  paradigm
    in the country guidance of AS (Afghanistan) and I consider  that  there
    would be some risk, given his vulnerability, to him being exploited  in
    the sense of forced labour.  I  consider  that  the  material  to  that
    effect adduced by the appellant is reliable.  Given the  high  rate  of
    unemployment, exploitation is perhaps inevitable.

68. That said, I find it unlikely that the Taliban would  seek  to  recruit
    somebody of the appellant's position.  As the  respondent  points  out,
    the EASO guidance indicates that the Taliban have  no  little  need  to
    forced recruitment let alone of people of the appellant's  age.   There
    is insufficient evidence to show that the fact that he  is  westernised
    to any degree would result in him  being  targeted  nor  is  there  any
    proper indication as to the purpose of him being recruited.

69. Drawing these strands together, I find  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect the appellant to relocate to Kabul to live on  that  basis,  and
    indeed unduly harsh.  That is through  a  combination  of  factors.   I
    consider that whilst his mental ill health may well be treated by drugs
    which might be available to him and certainly would be  given  that  he
    has access to funds on return as a result of the  grant  given  to  him
    which would allow him to be accommodated and supported for a  time,  he
    would not be able to reintegrate into a society where he has no  skills
    and in a place where he has not lived.  His support would therefore run
    out relatively quickly and he would be left destitute.

70. Accordingly, for these reasons, I am satisfied that the appeal falls to
    be allowed on Humanitarian Protection grounds.

71. I do  not,  however,  accept  that  the  appellant's  ill-treatment  is
    sufficiently connected with his mental ill-health or any  other  reason
    such that it engages the Refugee Convention.

    Human Rights Convention grounds

    Article 3 - Suicidal Ideation

72. In assessing this issue, I have applied J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629. I
    am not satisfied that the risk of suicidal ideation is, bearing in mind
    the high threshold, such that there is a risk of an Article 3 breach on
    return to Afghanistan. That is speculative and insufficiently borne out
    by the psychiatric evidence.

Article 8

73. Given that I have found that the appellant is at risk of Article  15(c)
    he is entitled to humanitarian protection, I am  satisfied  that  there
    are very compelling circumstances over and above  Exceptions  1  and  2
    such that his removal will be disproportionate and I therefore formally
    allow the appeal on that ground also.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 17 May 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01228/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 December 2019                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     Z R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fitzsimmons, instructed by Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge D Ross promulgated on 25 September 2019, dismissing
    his protection appeal.  The appellant's case is that  the  Taliban  had
    killed his father, uncle and cousin and that his older brother had  run
    away from home as had another brother.  He had remained  at  home  with
    his mother but on one day in around May 2015 he  was  abducted  by  the
    Taliban when he was approximately 18.  He was held  for  four  or  five
    days but was able to escape.  His mother then tried to arrange for  him
    to be removed but the Taliban returned, beat him and took him  back  to
    the base saying that if he ran away again they would kill him.  He left
    the country in August 2015 travelling by land.

 2. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter  of  15  January
    2018.  In summary, the respondent did not accept that the appellant had
    been forcibly taken by the Taliban as claimed or that he  escaped  from
    them or that he had received threats from them.  It was considered also
    that there would be a sufficiency of protection for him and/or that  he
    would be able to relocate.  The Secretary of State  was  not  satisfied
    either that  he  was  entitled  to  discretionary  leave  nor  was  she
    satisfied that his removal would be contrary to Article 8 of the  Human
    Rights Convention noting that he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph  399(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  nor  were  there   very
    compelling   circumstances    such    that    his    deportation    was
    disproportionate.

 3. The Secretary of State noted his claim to have made suicide threats and
    self-harmed in custody but concluded that his  removal  to  Afghanistan
    would not be in breach of Article 8.

 4. The judge directed himself [22] that  the  appellant  is  a  vulnerable
    witness and this would be taken into account in assessing his evidence.
     He noted there were inconsistencies in the appellant's account at [23]
    but did not place much weight on these.  The judge found [24] that:

      i) the appellant's account of forcible abduction and being taken to  a
         cave was not inconsistent with the background  material,  the  fact
         that he was able to walk out of it without being noticed by anybody
         not being credible bearing in mind that he had been taken  forcibly
         and his captures would wish to avoid him escaping; as there was  no
         attempt to hide him after he returned to his mother's  house;  that
         there was no proper explanation of the incident in which he was hit
         on the head by the Taliban, there being no particular  evidence  of
         this, a Section 35 report specifically stating that  there  was  no
         scarring; and, that it was not credible that the Taliban would have
         allowed him to wait at his mother's house to recover;

     ii) the appellant had not told the  truth  about  his  brother  in  the
         United Kingdom [25] concluding that the appellant was sensitive  to
         the allegation that he left Afghanistan to join his brother in  the
         United Kingdom which explained the anomalies in his account  noting
         a "staggering coincidence" that the man met somebody in  a  refugee
         camp in Hungary who turned out to have his brother's  phone  number
         there being no explanation for this, it also being incredible  that
         the appellant's brother would not have told his mother where he is;
         that the truth of the matter is  that  the  appellant  deliberately
         left Afghanistan to join his brother in the United Kingdom and that
         the appellant and his brother were in fact  in  contact  with  her;
         that there is no reason why  the  appellant  could  not  return  to
         Kabul; that he would have family support if  he  returns  [28]  and
         even if not so, it would not be unduly harsh to  return  him  there
         despite the fact that he suffers from depression  and  PTSD,  there
         being no suggestion that he proposes to commit suicide;

    iii) the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph  399A  and
         having had regard to the factors set out in  Section  117C  of  the
         2002 Act, his deportation was proportionate.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal against that  decision  which
    was granted on 20 October  2019  it  being  observed  that  Judge  Ross
    appeared not to have engaged with the psychologist's report insofar  as
    it impacts the appellant on return and in respect  of  the  substantive
    claim.

 6. I address the grounds in turn.

1     Making  an  Adverse  Credibility  Finding  without   regard   to   the
    Corroborative Force of the  Psychological  Reports  and  Other  Medical
    Evidence, contrary to Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367

 7. It is evident that the judge did bear in mind the  medical  reports  as
    can be seen from the determination.  It is clear also that he was aware
    of the appellant's vulnerability.  It was open to  the  judge  to  note
    [22] that the appellant appeared to understand the  questions  to  give
    appropriate answers and to  note,  importantly,  that  the  psychiatric
    report at paragraph 47, in response to the question:

         "Please comment on whether any of the mental  health  problems  you
         have identified would  be  likely  to  impact  on  the  appellant's
         ability to coherently recall events and experiences".

    provided:

         "I did not observe any specific  difficulty  in  [the  appellant's]
         recall  or  recounting  of  past  experiences.   However,  he   was
         relatively relaxed in his interview with me.   In  a  situation  he
         perceived as threatening, emotional arousal  and  fear  could  well
         contribute to give cognitive errors and  problems  with  recall  of
         remote events".

 8. It is clear from what the judge wrote at [22] that he  had  taken  into
    account in the context of inconsistencies in his account.  He also took
    into account that the appellant was only 18 at the  time  when  he  was
    first interviewed.  There is thus no merit in the submission  that  the
    judge erred in not taking the medical report into account in  assessing
    the appellant's  credibility  or  the  apparent  discrepancies  in  the
    account.

 9. The medical report states at [39] that the appellant  presents  with  a
    mixture of chronic and complex PTSD with associated secondary depressed
    mood as a result of  past  traumatic  experiences  including  degrading
    treatment, violent assault, threats to  his  life  and  abduction.   At
    paragraph [41] the doctor also wrote that the appellant appears to have
    tried to bury his emotions and memories as far  as  possible  which  is
    common.  The judge also directed himself at [49] that he was  aware  of
    the possibilities of malingering and that the appellant's symptoms were
    exaggerated or feigned.

10. On that basis, it is argued that it should have been taken into account
    in assessing whether the appellant had suffered as claimed.

11. Whilst I accept that a doctor may,  following  the  Istanbul  Protocol,
    make weighty observations on the wider context of an injury it is  less
    evident that this is so where somebody suffers from an accepted  mental
    illness. In this case the challenge is not that the judge did not  take
    into account the possibility of the appellant's mental health  problems
    accounting for apparent difficulties in recall, but  rather  the  judge
    did not take into account the possible  corroborative  effect  of  PTSD
    confirming what had happened to the appellant.

12. It was open to the judge to note that there was  no  physical  scarring
    report but there is no indication that he took this as definitive.

13. It must be borne in mind  also  that  at  its  highest  the  report  is
    confirmation that the appellant had suffered violence and trauma in the
    past   That is the necessary inference  from  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD.
    What that report is not is confirmation of who  inflicted  the  trauma,
    when and where.

14. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that ground 1 is made out as I  am  not
    satisfied that  the  judge  improperly  failed  to  take  into  account
    evidence of PTSD as corroborating the appellant's account.  He  clearly
    bore the report in mind, but it cannot be said that he failed  to  take
    it into account as  having  weight  as  corroborating  the  appellant's
    account.

    Ground 2 - irrational approach to the Rule 35(3) medical report.

15. I find no merit in this submission.  All that the judge did was to note
    that the  report  did  not  confirm  scarring.   That  is  an  accurate
    assessment.  It is clear that the judge did take into account the  Rule
    35 report which was at its highest that the appellant may have  been  a
    victim of torture but reached conclusions open to him on the evidence

    Ground 3 - failure to have regard to the expert report of Mr Foxley.

16. I find no merit in this submission.  The judge  clearly  accepted  that
    the account could have happened, that is that he was abducted, taken to
    a cave, but rejected the specific account on its specific  facts.   The
    judge clearly also noted that the appellant was 18 when interviewed and
    given that these events took place when the appellant was (he was  born
    on 1 January 1997, therefore leaving at the end of July 2015 he was  18
    in any event) is of little merit or substance.

    Ground 3(A) and ground 4.

17. Despite Mr Tufan's submissions, I find that the  judge  had  failed  to
    determine the humanitarian protection claim.  He also  failed  to  deal
    with  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  which  have  come  into  being  since  AS
    (Afghanistan) was heard.  There is, however, no attempt to address  the
    issue of humanitarian protection and  it  is  not  suggested  that  the
    appellant  is  excluded  from  humanitarian  protection   despite   his
    conviction.

18. That said, the question then arises whether it is  material  given  the
    unchallenged adverse credibility  findings  at  paragraph  25  and  the
    findings that the appellant is in contact with  his  mother  and  could
    have support on return to Afghanistan.

19. There are significant problems with  return  to  the  appellant's  home
    province of Paktia in any event.  The judge does  not  appear  to  have
    engaged with difficulties that there might be in the  appellant's  home
    province although he does at [18] summarise Mr  Foxley's  report.   But
    what he does not do is set out what his assessment of the  risks  might
    be. Ground 4 is therefore made out.

    Ground 5 - inadequately reasoned findings on Kabul.

20. I consider that this ground is made out.  There is no proper engagement
    with the expert report or the difficulties that the appellant might  be
    even with family support on return  to  Afghanistan  given  his  mental
    health.  That is a factor which needs to be taken into account.   There
    is no sufficient analysis of that point.

    Ground 6

21. I am not satisfied that the judge erred materially in his assessment of
    the risk of suicide.  This was dealt with  in  Dr  Thorne's  report  in
    terms of removal to Afghanistan in that he might become distressed  but
    this is not, in my view, a sufficient basis in  which  it  is  said  it
    could be material given the lack of sufficient evidence  to  show  that
    the threat is imminent and thus can meet the threshold in J v SSHD.  It
    is not arguable that this is in any way analogous with  Y  and  Z  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362.  This is not  a  case  in  which  it
    could be said that there is a real risk of suicide or that this was  as
    a result of a subjective fear of  being  again  tortured  by  the  same
    perpetrators on an analogy with Y and Z.

22. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that ground 6 is made out.

    Conclusion

23. For the reasons set out above, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    did involve the making of an error of law.  I consider that whilst  the
    judge's findings of fact are to be preserved, there will need to  be  a
    fresh analysis of the risk to the appellant in  terms  of  humanitarian
    protection and/or risk pursuant to the Refugee Convention and the Human
    Rights Convention with regard to his home area and/or whether he  could
    be expected to return to Kabul.

Directions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal will be reheard in the Upper Tribunal on a date to be fixed.



 3. Any new material upon which either party wishes to rely must be served
    at least 10 working days before the hearing.

 4. It is assumed that the appellant does not wish to give any further oral
    evidence. If he wishes to do so, he must notify the Upper Tribunal at
    least 10 working days before the hearing, stating whether an
    interpreter is required. That notification must include full witness
    statements capable of standing as evidence in chief.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Jeremy K H Rintoul

Signed   Date 18 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

