
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration               and                Asylum                Chamber)
      Appeal Number: PA016202015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On               the               1st               June               2016
                     On the 10th June 2016

Before:     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:    M.U.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimant: Ms Benfield (Counsel)
For the  Secretary  of  State:  Mr  Tufan  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Veloso promulgated on the 27th  January  2016,  in
      which she allowed the Claimant's  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
      grounds.  Although this is the Secretary of State's  appeal,  for  the
      purposes of clarity throughout this decision, the Secretary  of  State
      will be referred as "the Secretary of  State"  and  Ms  M.U.  will  be
      referred to as "the Claimant".

   2. The Claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born in  1991.   It  is
      her case that her father had been a sergeant major in the  Sri  Lankan
      army, from which he retired in 2002 and that he had subsequently  been
      a supporter of Mahinda Rajapaksa and that her father,  stepmother  and
      brother had been kidnapped on the [ ] 2015 and it is her case that her
      father had been openly critical of Maithripala Sirisena and had called
      him and others traitors and that he had openly spoken out against  the
      new President and had been targeted as a result.  It is her case  that
      the authorities have been visiting her aunt asking about the  family's
      political activities and the Claimant's  whereabouts  and  that  these
      visits were ongoing, albeit less frequently since the  involvement  of
      her aunt's lawyer.  This account was accepted by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Veloso, who on this basis allowed  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
      protection grounds.

   3. Within the original Grounds of Appeal it was argued by  the  Secretary
      of State that First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso materially  misdirected
      herself in law in her findings at paragraph [42] of the judgement.  It
      was said that the Judge had considered that  the  Claimant  on  return
      would be subject to  questioning  about  her  and  her  family's  LTTE
      connections and sympathies and that the Judge  relied  upon  paragraph
      308 of the Country Guidance case of GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
      returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.  It  was  argued  that  the
      Claimant will not be subject to re-documentation as she  has  her  own
      passport and therefore would not require an emergency travel  document
      from the Sri Lankan High Commission in London and that  there  was  no
      adequate basis for concluding that the Claimant would  be  subject  to
      questioning upon return as a suspected LTTE sympathiser.  It is argued
      that the Country Guidance case of GJ made it clear that  consideration
      of returnees is informed by the Sri Lankan authorities'  sophisticated
      intelligence gathering techniques and that the Claimant is and was not
      an LTTE supporter and that there is no basis for the Claimant to be of
      interest upon return.   It  is  argued  that  the  Judge  relied  upon
      paragraph 347 of GJ for finding that the Claimant would be obliged  to
      give her address and would be  visited  upon  return,  but  given  the
      Judge's misapplication of paragraph 308 of GJ  the  finding  that  the
      Claimant will suffer adverse interest because she will be  subject  to
      questioning and become emotional is said  to  have  been  inadequately
      reasoned.

   4. It was further argued that the finding  that  the  Claimant  would  be
      subject to interview upon return and this would lead to a real risk of
      detention and persecution was inadequately reasoned and that prior  to
      her father's political statements in 2015, the Claimant  had  been  in
      the UK for some 3 years and the Claimant did not  have  any  political
      views and had not undertaken political activities  and  there  was  no
      reason to support the  assumption  that  the  authorities  would  have
      anything more than a passing interest in the Claimant.  It was  argued
      that there was insufficient evidence to support the finding  that  the
      Claimant is at a real risk of persecution upon return and that she may
      be subject to some degree of harassment not amounting  to  persecution
      and that the interest in the Claimant has waned since the  involvement
      of her aunt's lawyer.

   5. Permission to appeal was originally  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Andrew on the  17th  March  2016  who  found  that  the  grounds
      amounted  to  nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
      findings.  The Secretary of State sought to appeal  then  directly  to
      the Upper Tribunal, and in their renewed  Grounds  of  Appeal  it  was
      argued that First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew failed  to  engage  fully
      with the Grounds of Appeal and sought to renew those grounds in  their
      entirety and repeats the fact that the Claimant's  claim  is  not  one
      which refers to the LTTE and past or present involvement and that  the
      government  of  Sri  Lanka's  sophisticated   intelligence   gathering
      approach means  that  they  will  easily  be  able  to  eliminate  the
      Claimant's as a potential threat, given that she has had no  political
      involvement at all and their intelligence is equally applicable to any
      political opposition not simply the LTTE.  It was argued that the fact
      that her step-aunt and family remain  unmolested  by  the  authorities
      despite their links to the Claimant's  father  and  stepmother  is  an
      indication that they would equally have no interest in the Claimant.

   6. Permission to appeal was then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on
      the 7th April 2016, who stated that:

         "The Respondent seeks permission to appeal on 2 grounds.   I  grant
         permission on the first primarily because of the  Judge's  reliance
         on paragraph 308 of GJ.  It is arguable that the Judge  has  failed
         to recognise that the  Appellant  will  be  returning  on  her  own
         passport and therefore the paragraph arguably has no application to
         her case.  The  second  of  the  Respondent's  grounds  is  weaker,
         particularly  in  circumstances  where  the  Judge   accepted   the
         Appellant's account of her  family  having  been  'disappeared'  by
         state actors.  However, it may be arguable that if the first ground
         is made out,  this  would  impact  on  the  issue  of  whether  the
         Appellant would come to the adverse attention  of  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities on return and accordingly, I do not limit the grant  of
         permission."

   7. It was on that basis that  the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   8.  On the 27th May 2016, the Secretary of State filed  a  Rule  15(2)(a)
      Notice containing the Document Verification Report referred to  within
      the original refusal decision made by the Secretary of  State  on  the
      25th September 2015.  However, within the Secretary  of  State's  Rule
      15(2)(a) Notice, it was stated that the Document  Verification  Report
      would be sought to be relied upon if an error of law  was  found.   It
      was not stated within that notice that the document was sought  to  be
      relied upon in establishing an  error  of  law  in  the  first  place.
      However, in his oral submissions, Mr Tufan did seek to argue that  the
      Document Verification Report should  be  relied  upon  in  considering
      whether or not there was a material error of law in  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso.

   9. In his oral submissions, Mr Tufan sought to argue  that  the  Claimant
      would be returning to Sri Lanka on he own passport and that there  was
      no reason why she would be deemed to have been forcibly returned.  She
      had come to the UK as a student and students may be  unsuccessful  and
      return home.  Although he agreed that forced returnees  may  be  asked
      questions, he argued that it was a matter for her as  to  whether  she
      was asked questions as a forced returnee and that there is  no  reason
      why she would be considered to be a forced returnee and would  not  be
      asked questions.  He argued that the Claimant herself was not going to
      destabilise Sri Lanka.  He further argued that  there  was  inadequate
      reasoning to support the contention that she would be interviewed  and
      that there was a real risk of detention and persecution.

  10. Mr Tufan conceded that  the  Document  Verification  Report  following
      enquiries by RALON in Colombo who had contacted  the  Grama  Niladhari
      who was  said  to  have  confirmed  that  the  Claimant's  family  was
      currently residing in Homogama and that therefore the Claimant's claim
      that her family had  relocated  to  Habarakada  at  the  time  of  the
      disappearance was false.  He stated that the evidence was on the  Home
      Office's file and he did not know  why  that  evidence  had  not  been
      submitted before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   However  he  argued
      that the overriding objective required justice to be done and that the
      system should not be abused.

  11. In her submissions on behalf of the Claimant Ms Benfield  relied  upon
      her Skeleton Argument which I have  fully  taken  into  account.   She
      argued that the Rule  15(2)(a)  Notice  had  said  that  the  Document
      Verification Report was irrelevant until any error of  law  was  found
      and was therefore immaterial to whether or not  there  was  an  error.
      She argued that the Document Verification Report was  not  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge and that  there  had  been  an  unreasonable
      delay in producing  the  evidence.   She  argued  that  it  was  dated
      September 2015 and therefore was in the possession of the Secretary of
      State at the time of the First-tier decision and that  no  explanation
      had been given as to why it was not  produced  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

  12. Ms Benfield further argued that the 2 Grounds of Appeal had no  merit.
      She argued that the first ground asked whether or not paragraph 308 of
      GJ applied and she argued that the only distinction drawn in paragraph
      308 was whether or not the return was voluntary or forced, and that it
      did not matter as to whether or not the Claimant would be returning on
      her own passport or on an emergency travel document.  She relied  upon
      paragraph 169 of GJ in which she said that the Secretary of State  had
      conceded that forced returnees would be asked questions.

  13. In respect of the second Ground of Appeal, Ms Benfield argued that the
      Secretary of State was trying re-run the case.  She  argued  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge has  accepted  that  the  Claimant  was  the
      daughter of someone who had a profile in the military and that he  had
      been a supporter of Mr Rajapaksa.   She  argued  that  the  Judge  was
      entitled to find that the Claimant would  be  at  risk  and  that  the
      reasoning was sufficient  and  that  the  Secretary  of  State  simply
      disagreed with the decision.   She  argued  that  the  Judge  had  not
      allowed the appeal on asylum grounds, but on  humanitarian  protection
      grounds and that in light of the finding that the Claimant's immediate
      family had disappeared  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
      Claimant would be at risk upon return.  She further  argued  that  the
      Judge had made reference to the fact that  the  Document  Verification
      Report was not before her, despite having been referred to within  the
      original refusal at [39]  of  her  decision,  and  therefore  had  not
      overlooked that evidence, it was simply that the  Secretary  of  State
      had not sought to rely upon it before the First-tier Tribunal.

   My Finding on Error of Law and Materiality

  14. In respect of the Document Verification  Report  from  RALON  although
      under Rule 15(2)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008, as amended, the Upper Tribunal may admit evidence which was  not
      available to a previous decision-maker, I bear in mind that under Rule
      15(2)(A) "In an asylum case or an immigration case - (a)  if  a  party
      wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that was not before the
      First-tier Tribunal, that party must send or deliver a notice  to  the
      Upper Tribunal and any other party - (i) indicating the nature of  the
      evidence; and (ii) explaining why it was not submitted to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal; and (b) when considering whether to admit evidence that
      was not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge the Upper  Tribunal  must
      have regard to whether there has been unreasonable delay in  producing
      that evidence".

  15. In this regard I do bear in mind that the  Rule  15(2)(a)  Notice  was
      only produced with the Document Verification Report  being  filed  and
      served on the 27th May 2016, on the business  day  before  the  appeal
      hearing in the Upper Tribunal.  I further bear  in  mind  that  within
      that notice it was said that the evidence was sought to be relied upon
      if an error of law was established, rather than seeking to argue  that
      it was relevant to the establishment of an error of law  and  that  it
      was only at the appeal hearing itself that Mr Tufan  sought  to  argue
      that it was relevant in  establishing  an  error  of  law  itself.   I
      further bear in mind that within that notice there is  no  explanation
      as to why the evidence was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal as
      required by Rule 15(2)(A)(a)(ii), and when  I  asked  Mr  Tufan  about
      that, he could not explain why that document  had  not  been  produced
      before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  when  clearly  it  was  within  the
      Secretary of State's possession, and indeed was evidence  relied  upon
      by the Secretary of  State  within  the  original  refusal  notice  in
      September 2015.

  16. I therefore consider, taking into account as  I  must  the  overriding
      objective, that in circumstances where no good  explanation  has  been
      given for the failure to submit that evidence  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and in circumstances where in my judgement there has been  an
      unreasonable delay in producing that evidence, in that it  should  and
      could have been produced before the First-tier Tribunal and  has  only
      been produced very shortly before the Upper Tribunal hearing, for what
      within the notice was said to be a  different  purpose  from  what  Mr
      Tufan seeks now to rely upon it, that permission should not be granted
      to the Secretary of State to rely upon that evidence in now in seeking
      to establish an error or law.   It  cannot  be  in  the  interests  of
      justice for the Secretary of State simply to seek to rely at the Upper
      Tribunal appeal hearing upon evidence which could and should have been
      produced before the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  which  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge specifically noted she had not been referred to and had
      not been produced before her within her decision, and which  therefore
      she was not able to take into account, as the Judge  properly  herself
      noted at [39] of her decision, in circumstances where no  good  reason
      has been given for the  failure  to  disclose  it  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal or until so shortly before the hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

  17. In respect of the first Ground of Appeal as argued,  the  argument  by
      the Secretary of State that the Claimant would be returning on her own
      passport and that therefore there was no adequate basis for concluding
      that the Claimant would be subject to questioning upon return  by  the
      authorities, in my judgement holds no merit.  Although  the  Secretary
      of State refers to paragraphs 307 to  309  of  the  judgement  of  GJ,
      paragraph 307 although talking about Sri Lankans returning  without  a
      Sri Lankan passport requiring an emergency travel document  for  which
      they will need to apply to the Sri Lankan High  Commission  in  London
      and that full disclosure of all relevant identity information is given
      in the process of  obtaining  such  a  travel  document  including  in
      interview  and  lengthy  disclosure,  the  Upper  Tribunal   was   not
      indicating that only those who required an emergency  travel  document
      would be subject to being asked questions upon return.

  18. Paragraph 308 of the judgement in GJ states specifically that  "During
      the re-documentation process in the United Kingdom, or at the  airport
      on return, a forced returnee can expect to be asked about his own  and
      his family's LTTE connections and sympathies".  Paragraph 309 goes  on
      to state "Those with  Sri  Lankan  passports  returning  on  scheduled
      flights  will  be  able  to  walk  through  Colombo  Airport   without
      difficulty, unless their names are on a "stop" list, by reason  of  an
      outstanding court order or arrest warrant.  Those on  a  "watch"  list
      are not stopped at the airport but will be monitored and if considered
      to be destabilisation risk, may be picked up from their home area".

  19. However, paragraph 308 makes it clear that the distinction is  between
      those who are forced returnees and those who are voluntary  returnees.
      Although Mr Tufan seeks to argue that  it  is  down  to  the  Claimant
      herself as to whether she returns voluntarily or is forced, given that
      the Claimant has not sought to return voluntarily to  Sri  Lanka,  but
      has claimed asylum, in my judgement there was sufficient basis for the
      Judge to consider that she may be returned as a forced returnee and to
      find that even though the Claimant arrived in  the  UK  with  her  own
      passport,  on  arrival  at  the  airport  in  Sri  Lanka   she   would
      nevertheless be asked about her and her family's LTTE connections  and
      sympathies, although she does not have any, but that such  questioning
      would lead to adverse interest in her [42].  The  distinction  is  not
      whether or not she has a passport, but whether or not  her  return  is
      forced.  In my judgement the Secretary of State has not established  a
      basis for finding that the Claimant would voluntarily return and would
      not be forced, and there were  no  findings  by  the  Judge  that  the
      Claimant would simply voluntarily return and if forced, she  would  be
      subject to questioning as established at [308] of the decision in  GJ.



  20. Further, given the Judge's  findings  that  the  Claimant's  immediate
      family have disappeared as a result of the political activities of the
      father and that the authorities have come looking  for  the  Claimant,
      albeit  with  lesser  frequency  following  the  involvement  of   the
      Claimant's aunt's lawyer, there is no  adequate  evidential  basis  to
      assume that the Claimant would simply be able to proceed  through  the
      airport either unhindered, on her  own  passport,  or  if  subject  to
      questioning, that the authorities would have no interest  in  her,  as
      contended by the Secretary of State.  The Judge's  clear  finding  was
      that the authorities were interested in  the  Claimant  and  had  come
      visiting her aunt looking for her at [39] of  the  judgement.  It  was
      open to the Judge on her findings to conclude that applying the  lower
      standard of proof applicable that the Appellant  would  be  questioned
      upon return and would thereby come to the adverse attention of the Sri
      Lankan authorities, even though she had arrived on  her  own  passport
      and was not subject to re-documentation.

  21. I further find that the second Ground of Appeal equally has no  merit.
      The First-tier Tribunal Judge adequately and sufficiently reasoned  at
      [42] that the Claimant would be required to give her  address  in  Sri
      Lanka and would be visited after 1 week following paragraph 347 of  GJ
      when stopped and asked questions at the airport and that although  she
      was able to fully answer all questions both in  examination  in  chief
      and cross-examination, the Judge found  that  this  was  "not  without
      emotion and on more than 1 occasion becoming very tearful"  the  Judge
      went on to find that such a reaction when faced by the authorities was
      likely to lead to adverse interest and that at [43] "Checks  conducted
      by the authorities following the Appellant's arrival  at  and  passage
      through the airport are likely in any event  to  bring  her  to  their
      adverse interest on account of the visits made to her  aunt's  address
      and questions  put  to  her  about  the  Appellant  and  her  family's
      political activities"  and  that  "To  the  lower  standard  that  the
      authorities will pick her up for interview,  in  the  process  of  and
      during which the Appellant would be at risk of persecution,  including
      detention and disappearance".

  22. Given the Judge's findings regarding her acceptance of the account  of
      the Claimant's father and  immediate  family  being  detained  by  the
      authorities and having disappeared, and  her  findings  regarding  the
      continued interest shown in the Claimant by  the  authorities,  albeit
      now to a lesser  extent,  the  finding  that  the  Claimant  would  be
      questioned and would be at a risk of persecution  is  both  adequately
      and sufficiently reasoned.

  23. The First-tier Tribunal Judge came to such findings on  the  basis  of
      the evidence presented before her and she  did  specifically  have  in
      mind the reference to the information obtained by RALON  at  paragraph
      17 and 20 of the refusal letter which was said  to  confirm  that  the
      Claimant's immediate family had not moved from  Homogama  contrary  to
      her claim, but  the Judge noted that the Secretary of  State's  appeal
      bundle did not include a copy of  the  document  verification  report,
      notwithstanding CK Law's Solicitors specific reference to it in  their
      Grounds of Appeal and that in answer to  her  query  the  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer said that he had not seen any such  document.   The
      Judge found that the Claimant's claim that the  family  had  sold  the
      property in Homogama was supported by an instrument of  transfer  with
      certified translation, the original of which was handed over to her at
      the hearing and that the move to Habarakada was confirmed by a  letter
      from the Grama Niladhari and a witness statement from her aunt and the
      Judge preferred that evidence on the lower standard  to  the  at  that
      stage unverified assertions by the Secretary of State.  As  stated  at
      the start of my decision, the Secretary of State could and should have
      produced that RALON  report  at  the  original  hearing  and  no  good
      explanation has been given for the  failure  to  produce  that  report
      before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, in circumstances  where  it  was
      relied upon originally by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  refusal
      letter.  The Judge properly considered all of the  evidence  that  was
      put before her.

  24.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso  does  not  disclose
      any material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Veloso  does  not  contain  any
material error of law and is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity direction, pursuant to  Rule
13 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum
Chamber) Rules 2014, and in such circumstances I  further  order  anonymity.
Unless and until a Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed
R F McGinty
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty   Dated 4th June 2016

