
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01786/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On 8 July 2021                       |On 28 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     mmu
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Sanders instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP
(Oxford)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (MMU).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal:  MMU  (the  appellant)  and  the  Secretary  of  State   (the
    respondent).

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  29  January
    1986.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on a student visa  on  2  March
    2010.  On 7 October 2015 he claimed asylum on the basis that  he  would
    be at risk on return to Bangladesh as a Muslim  who  had  converted  to
    Christianity.  That application was refused on 3 October 2016  and  his
    subsequent appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hall)
    on 24 November 2017.  It was not accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a
    genuine Christian convert.

 4. On 5 November 2019, the appellant made further submissions in  relation
    to his  asylum  claim  based  upon  being  a  Christian  convert.   The
    Secretary of State again refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and under the ECHR on  12  February  2020.   In
    that decision, the Secretary of State now accepted that  the  appellant
    was a genuine Christian convert but did not accept  that  there  was  a
    real risk to him on that basis on return to Bangladesh.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was  accepted
    before the judge that the appellant was a  genuine  Christian  convert.
    The appellant relied upon background evidence and an expert report from
    Dr Ashraf Ul Hoque to establish that as a result of his  conversion  he
    would be at real risk on return particularly from extremist groups such
    as Hefazat-ul-Islam ("HI") and that the Bangladesh authorities would be
    unable to provide him with a sufficiency of protection.  The  appellant
    also relied on the fact that he was a party to an  interfaith  marriage
    and that his wife was a practising Muslim.  He also relied on the  fact
    that he wished to be ordained as a  priest  and  that  as  an  Anglican
    Christian, on return to Bangladesh, he would openly speak and  practise
    his religion which would draw him to the attention of non-state  actors
    such as HI.

 6. Having set out extracts from Dr Hoque's expert  report  and  background
    evidence such as the CPIN, "Bangladesh: Religious  Minorities"  (2018),
    the judge reached his conclusions at paras 55-64.

 7. At para 55, the  judge  accepted,  as  had  the  respondent,  that  the
    appellant was a genuine Christian convert.  The judge accepted that the
    appellant would wear a cross, would not wear a beard and  would  openly
    talk about his Christianity.

 8. At paras 56-57, the judge described the  appellant's  circumstances  on
    return to Bangladesh as follows:

         "56. The circumstances of this case  are  that  the  appellant  has
             converted from Islam to Christianity,  he  will  practise  his
             religion openly in Bangladesh  and  will  be  returned  to  an
             interfaith marriage where his wife  is  a  practising  Muslim.
             This would result in [her] wearing traditional  Islamic  dress
             for females, yet her husband named [] would not be  wearing  a
             beard, instead wearing a cross.  This combination, I  find  on
             the lower burden of proof would attract the curiosity  of  the
             community as the appellant stated in  his  oral  evidence  and
             alluded to  in  Mr  Hoque's  report.   Generally,  conversion,
             interfaith marriages are not an issue however  the  issue  for
             this appellant is the fact that he is a convert from Islam, in
             an interfaith marriage and will openly talk about his religion
             (CPIN: Bangladesh: Religious minorities section 2).

         57.  Returning to his home where his family want to  force  him  to
             return to Islam, not wearing a beard but a cross will  attract
             negative attention as an  apostate.   This  would  be  further
             aggravated by  his  interfaith  marriage.   Couple  this  with
             speaking openly about his religion the appellant will  on  the
             lower standard of probabilities that the appellant will breach
             the Penal Code in relation to  blasphemy.   In  light  of  the
             overwhelming objective evidence, I am satisfied on  the  lower
             burden of proof that the  appellant's  conversion,  interfaith
             marriage and the fact he would openly  practise  his  religion
             would attract such negative attention  that  would  amount  to
             persecution from non-state actors (see paragraph  40  above)".



 9. At para 58, the judge referred back to the objective evidence which  he
    had set out at length in paras 32-53:

         "58. The objective evidence tells me that generally  Bangladesh  is
             tolerant of  different  faiths  insofar  as  such  individuals
             remain  silent,  as  speaking  openly  about  one's  faith  is
             perceived as  upsetting  the  public  order  of  the  country.
             Muslims who have converted from Islam into another faith  face
             a higher risk of attacks and being socially  ostracised.   The
             appellant has stated  that  [his]  family  are  no  longer  in
             communication with him and will force him to accept  Islam  if
             returned home.  I do find him to be credible on this point  on
             the lower standard of proof due  to  the  objective  evidence.
             Further, both the objective material  and  Mr  Hoque's  report
             support  the  view  that  whilst  Bangladesh  government   has
             structures in place to protect its subjects prima  facie,  the
             reality is that due to corruption and insufficient  resourcing
             in reality the minimum protections cannot be  provided.   [The
             appellant]  is   an   Anglican   Christian,   an   inescapable
             characteristic  and  fact.   If  internally  relocated  within
             Bangladesh given his circumstances, I do not find that he will
             be safe from non-state actors or that he  will  be  adequately
             protected by the state".

10. At para 59, the judge referred to the appellant's various posts on  his
    Facebook page sharing his religious beliefs and views with  the  world.
    The judge, however, did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's  wife  had
    received threats as a result of his posts.

11.  At  para  60,  the  judge  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  claimed
    affiliation with the Jamaat-e-Islami Party which Judge  Hall  had  also
    previously not accepted.

12.  Then  at  paras  61-63,  the  judge  returned   to   the   appellant's
    circumstances and the practise of his  Christianity  in  Bangladesh  as
    follows:

         "61. The appellant has stated that he wishes to be  ordained  as  a
             priest.  The appellant has  completed  the  Lichfield  Diocese
             Pathways to Ministry course.  Given the content  of  paragraph
             49 above I am not satisfied that the appellant will  be  given
             the opportunity [to] become a leader of a church in Bangladesh
             due to the negative attention he would draw to himself.  It is
             accepted that  there  are  Anglican  Churches  in  Bangladesh.
             Would this appellant [be] allowed  to  join  as  an  ex-Muslim
             married to a Muslim?  His circumstances (see paragraphs 49 and
             51 above) are such that I find on the lower burden of proof he
             would not be an 'attractive' member of the congregation.   The
             risks that he would attract are heightened as he would want to
             share and discuss his religion openly with the  community  and
             the individuals.

         62.  As an Anglican Christian openly speaking  and  practising  his
             religion, I do find that the appellant would  attract  adverse
             attention from non-state actors.  This  adverse  attention  is
             further exacerbated by the fact that he will have  an  Islamic
             name, not adhere to  the  social  norms  i.e.  wear  a  beard,
             instead wear a cross and live with his wife  who  will  be  in
             traditional Islamic dress.  I do not find that  the  appellant
             can be returned to his home address to live with  his  Islamic
             wife  due  to  his  conversion.    Similarly,   due   to   the
             circumstances of his case the appellant cannot  be  internally
             relocated due  to  the  state  being  unable  to  protect  him
             adequately from non-state actors given his openness about  his
             religion.

         63.  In applying the Supreme Court decision of  HJ  (Iran)  to  the
             appellant's circumstances.  I accept that he  is  an  Anglican
             Christian who would preach and 'wear' his religion openly.  If
             returned to Bangladesh, he would not be able to be open  about
             his religion and as an ex-Muslim he would be perceived  as  an
             apostate and blasphemous.  ... He is entitled to  live  openly
             as a Christian.  The appellant would be at risk from non-state
             actors and I do not find there would  be  adequate  protection
             from the state".

13. At para 64, the judge concluded that the appellant was  a  refugee  and
    entitled to protection under  the  Refugee  Convention  on  grounds  of
    religion.  As a consequence, the judge allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

14. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on a number of grounds: that the judge erred  in  law  (1)  in
    finding that the appellant would be at risk on return to Bangladesh  as
    a Christian convert; (2) in finding that the appellant could not become
    a priest in Bangladesh; and (3) in finding that the appellant could not
    safely internally relocate within Bangladesh.

15. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge J M Holmes) on 25 November 2020.  On renewed application to  the
    Upper Tribunal, UTJ Kebede granted the Secretary of State permission to
    appeal on 25 January 2021.

16. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice
    Centre on 8 July 2021.  I was  based  in  court  and  Ms  Sanders,  who
    represented the appellant, and Ms Aboni, who represented the  Secretary
    of State, joined the hearing remotely by Microsoft Teams.

17. I heard oral submissions from both representatives.

The Submissions

18. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Aboni relied upon  the  grounds
    of appeal which, she submitted, established that the  judge's  decision
    contained material errors of law.

19. First, Ms Aboni submitted that the judge had made a mistake of fact  in
    relying upon the expert report of Dr Hoque as support for  his  finding
    that the appellant would be at real risk of persecution on return.  She
    submitted that the expert report only supported a real risk  on  return
    to those who were involved in 'anti-Islamic activity' and that did  not
    arise simply because the appellant was a Christian convert.  She relied
    on the fact that the background evidence, in particular the CPIN  (June
    2018), demonstrated  that  there  were  a  large  number  of  Christian
    converts living in  Bangladesh.   The  evidence  did  not  support  the
    judge's finding that the appellant, as a Christian convert, was at real
    risk of persecution on return.

20. Secondly, Ms Aboni submitted that the judge had failed to give adequate
    consideration to  the  issue  of  internal  relocation.   Relying  upon
    sections 9 and 12 of  the  CPIN,  she  submitted  that  the  background
    evidence demonstrated that there were areas predominantly of Christians
    and it was not suggested that Christians were at risk in those areas.

21. Finally, Ms Aboni challenged the judge's finding in para  61  that  the
    appellant would not be able to become a priest as there was no evidence
    to support that.

22. Ms Aboni invited me to set aside the judge's decision.

23. Ms Sanders relied upon her skeleton argument dated 8 July 2021which she
    expanded upon in her oral submissions.

24. First, Ms Sanders submitted that the respondent's ground of appeal  was
    misconceived that the judge had made "a mistake as to a material  fact"
    by relying upon Dr Hoque's report which only supported the targeting of
    "anti-Islamic" individuals in Bangladesh rather than those who were the
    Christian converts who promoted their new faith.   She  submitted  that
    the judge was clearly well aware of the appellant's claim which she set
    out in paras 5-12 of her decision.  She submitted that the judge, where
    she had set out the expert's  report  at  paras  41-45,  had  given  as
    examples  targeting  of  "anti-Islamic   bloggers   and   those   [who]
    deliberately attempting to defame the Prophet Muhammad".  She submitted
    that the expert specifically identified that  it  was  the  appellant's
    conversion and open expression and promotion of his views which will be
    "perceived to be anti-Islamic" and give rise  to  a  risk  of  "violent
    and/or fatal reprisals" (para 46 of the report).  Ms Sanders  submitted
    that the expert's report, read as a  whole,  made  it  clear  that  the
    appellant's circumstances as a former  Muslim,  who  had  converted  to
    Christianity and who would openly  express  his  new  faith,  would  be
    perceived  as  anti-Islamic  by  extremists  and  be  at  risk   as   a
    consequence.

25. Secondly, Ms Sanders  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  failed  to
    consider properly  relocation  to  another  area  in  Bangladesh.   The
    respondent's submission that there were other areas in Bangladesh which
    were "predominantly Christian"  or  "a  major  city  where  inter-faith
    marriage and religious conversion is accepted" was not supported by any
    of the background material.  The respondent did not refer to any in the
    grounds although the reference was  presumably  to  the  CPIN  (October
    2018).  However, Ms Sanders submitted that the CPIN, at sections 9  and
    12, gave no examples of "areas" in Bangladesh which were "predominantly
    Christian" and certainly not  predominantly  Christian  converts.   The
    background material did not establish  that  Christian  converts  could
    safely live in other areas in Bangladesh  including  in  major  cities.
    She submitted that the judge had been entitled to find, on the basis of
    the background evidence and Dr Hoque's report, that the appellant could
    not safely internally relocate within  Bangladesh  given  his  specific
    profile.

26. As regards the respondent's submission that the CPIN demonstrated  that
    "thousands of Muslims have converted in  recent  years"  that  was  not
    borne out by the document, although it did refer to there being  91,000
    Muslim-to-Christian conversions in the last six years and 20,000 in the
    past twelve months (section 12.1.4), but it did not deal with the  risk
    of persecution to converts which was supported by the CPIN  and  expert
    report.

27. Finally, Ms Sanders submitted that the judge had been entitled to  find
    in para 61 that the appellant would  face  difficulties  in  joining  a
    church,  in  particular  being  ordained  as  a  Christian  priest,  in
    Bangladesh.  In particular, there  was  evidence  that  house  churches
    preferred  not  to  display  any  Christian  symbols  to  avoid   being
    recognised which would be relevant given the appellant's conversion and
    circumstances.  In any event, Ms Sanders submitted  that  this  finding
    was not central to  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had
    established a real risk of persecution from non-state actors.

Discussion

28. The appellant's claim relied, in large measure, upon the expert  report
    of Dr  Hoque.   That  is  a  detailed  report  at  pages  7-25  of  the
    appellant's bundle.

29. Dr Hoque accepted that the appellant if he returned to Bangladesh would
    be perceived as an apostate but that he would not be prosecuted by  the
    state authorities: "so long as he does  not  probably  incite  communal
    tensions through the  public  propagation  of  inflammatory  ideas  and
    beliefs" (see para 30).

30. Dr Hoque's view was, however, different in  relation  to  risk  to  the
    appellant's life from extremist groups such as HI.  So, at para 32,  Dr
    Hoque said this:

         "32. ... It is my opinion that [the appellant's] life  will  be  in
             serious risk should he return to  Bangladesh  as  a  perceived
             apostate and convert to Christianity.  Islamic  organisations,
             inspired by Salafi interpretations of Islamic  apostacy  laws,
             pose the highest  threat  to  [the  appellant's]  life.   Even
             though  the  life  and  likelihood  of  religious  minorities,
             Humanists  and  atheists  are  protected  by  some  laws,  the
             historical attitude and activities  of  Islamic  organisations
             towards those they consider 'un-Islamic', in combination  with
             the ubiquitous cultural taboo that the act of apostacy invokes
             (which I will discuss in more  detail  below),  suggests  that
             [the  appellant's]  residency  in   Bangladesh   will   become
             untenable, should he return".

31. The judge specifically referred to this paragraph in Dr Hoque's  report
    at para 38 of her decision.

32. At para 35 of his report, Dr Hoque referred  to  the  position  of  the
    appellant and his circumstances on return:

         "35. The promotion of Christianity and, by implication, apostacy in
             Bangladesh by someone who was born into  a  Muslim  household,
             therefore, is a serious anti-social activity.   Censorship  of
             'anti-religious' views is supported by the central  government
             as a measure to maintain public  order.   If  [the  appellant]
             openly expresses his views and preaches Christianity, he  will
             undoubtedly encounter problems from both the wider  public  as
             well as with law enforcement  agencies.   This  is  consistent
             with wider trends in the country".

33. The judge referred to that passage at para 40 of her decision.

34. At para 36, Dr  Hoque  identified  examples  of  people  who  had  been
    targeted and killed because of their 'un-Islamic' views and  practices.
    He said this:

         "36. Since 2013, 25 people have been directly targeted and brutally
             killed in Bangladesh by militant Islamicists, for espousing so-
             called 'un-Islamic' views and  practices.   These  individuals
             include   outspoken   secularists,   members   of    religious
             minorities, academics, journalists, gay rights' activists, and
             critics of  political  Islam.   The  number  of  people  being
             targeted and killed has significantly accelerated in 2016".

35. As Ms Sanders submitted, the examples given here are no more than that,
    they are individuals who are included  within  the  grouping  that  are
    perceived as espousing "so-called un-Islamic views and practices".   Dr
    Hoque then discussed, inter alia, extremist Islamic organisations  such
    as HI who had been particularly "active against atheist bloggers"  (see
    para 44 of his report).  That chimes with the evidence  related  by  Dr
    Hoque in para 36 of his report.  At para 46 of  his  report,  Dr  Hoque
    draws an analogy between HI's response to those it perceives  as  anti-
    Islamic and the appellant as follows:

         "46. Although HI is  not  a  terrorist  organisation  per  se,  its
             members are sympathetic to the idea that those opposing  Islam
             in their actions and speech should  be  forcibly  reprimanded,
             and that the 'honour' (izzat) of the Prophet must be protected
             from  gratuitous  attacks  on  all  costs.   Members  of   HI,
             therefore,  will  not  take  kindly   to   [the   appellant's]
             conversion.  Moreover, it is important to note that members of
             HI are dispersed all over Bangladesh, in both rural and  urban
             areas.  If [the appellant] were  to  express  or  promote  his
             views anywhere in the country, they are highly  likely  to  be
             encountered by HI affiliates.  In such  circumstances,  he  is
             likely to face violence and/or fatal reprisals  (of  the  kind
             meted out  [to]  bloggers  and  activists  mentioned  in  this
             report).  If he expresses any views that may be  perceived  to
             be anti-Islamic and, therefore, inflammatory".

36. The judge referred to these passages in paras 41-43 of her decision.

37. At para 49, Dr Hoque expressed the following view  concerning  risk  to
    the appellant on return:

         "49.  Given  these  recent  developments  and   communal   tensions
             pertaining to the current political climate, [the appellant's]
             professed fear of persecution on the basis  of  conversion  to
             Christianity is plausible and  consistent  with  the  evidence
             that the authorities are unable to provide protection to those
             who are perceived as speaking or  acting  against  Islam  from
             Islamicist militants currently operating within the  country".



38. The judge referred to this passage in para 45 of her decision.

39. At paras 50-56 Dr Hoque expressed the view, first, that there had  been
    an increase since 2017 in "Islamic attacks  specifically  on  Christian
    converts" (see para 55) and secondly, that in practice the  Bangladeshi
    law enforcement agencies would be unable, due to a lack  of  sufficient
    resources, to provide the appellant with protection against attacks.

40. At paras 57-60, Dr Hoque dealt with the  general  "religious  tolerance
    and pluralism" in Bangladesh society and, at para 60, noted that:

         "60. There is  a  significant  proportion  of  the  population  who
             describe  themselves  as  agnostic,  Humanist   and   atheist,
             particularly certain prominent intellectuals  and  politicians
             who are well-known to the general public.   These  individuals
             continue to live and work in Bangladesh without  any  problems
             as they have not publicly defamed or disrespected Islam or the
             character and reputation of Prophet Muhammad".

41. Then at para 61 Dr Hoque went on to distinguish that situation and  the
    impact of religious tolerance and pluralism specifically in relation to
    the appellant:

         "61. On the other hand, concealing his  true  beliefs  may  pose  a
             threat to [the appellant's]  life  in  the  long-term  if  the
             curiosity of locals pushes him to probe him on  his  religious
             beliefs.  If [the appellant] engaged in  any  form  of  candid
             discussion with any practising Muslim regarding  his  beliefs,
             this may indeed provoke heated and violent reactions not  just
             by those involved in the conversion, but also members  of  the
             wider community.  Moreover, dissemination of his beliefs would
             be an inevitable outcome of any conversations  of  this  type,
             given the gravity and highly  controversial  nature  of  them.
             The only way [the appellant] can prevent this scenario  is  if
             he lives a conventional life conforming to overarching  social
             parameters, which, in Bangladesh, are  inherently  Islamic  in
             essence".

42. At para 62, Dr Hoque dealt with the  appellant's  ability  to  relocate
    within Bangladesh as follows:

         "62.  Furthermore,  it  is  not  difficult  to  locate  people   in
             Bangladesh, particularly if individuals act in  suspicious  or
             unorthodox ways.  Bangladesh is a communitarian society  where
             social participation in  the  local  community  is  mandatory.
             Even if he is  not  initially  recognised,  [the  appellant's]
             distinctive  Sylheti  regional  accent  will  be   immediately
             identified,  and  [he]  will  inevitably  be  asked  questions
             regarding [his] ancestral home (Desher Bari).   Reluctance  or
             refusal  to  answer  questions  of  this  nature  will  arouse
             suspicion.   In  such  circumstances,  it  will  be  extremely
             difficult for [the appellant] to maintain his anonymity".

43. Then at paras 63-65, Dr Hoque reached the following conclusions:

         "63. It is my opinion that [the appellant's] account of  his  fears
             that he may be targeted by Islamic groups in Bangladesh due to
             his conversion to Christianity, and the  general  population's
             attitude on apostacy is plausible and  consistent  with  wider
             country norms.

         64.  [The appellant] faces the biggest risk from Islamic extremists
             in Bangladesh on  return,  due  to  his  apostacy  and  public
             conversion to Christianity.  If his beliefs are kept discreet,
             he will not be persecuted based on his new faith.  However, if
             his  conversion  becomes  locally  known  (anywhere   in   the
             country), it may attract local Islamist groups, who will  seek
             to  kill  him.   It  is  my  opinion,  therefore,  that   [the
             appellant] will face intolerable persecution, possibly  death,
             should he return to Bangladesh as a  known  apostate/ex-Muslim
             and convert to Christianity.

         65.  It is my opinion that law enforcement agencies  in  Bangladesh
             do not possess the resources to be able to provide  sufficient
             protection  to  [the  appellant].   Islamicist   organisations
             operate with relative impunity due to widespread institutional
             corruption with an atmosphere  of  extra-judicial  executions.
             Moreover, organisations such as ICS are  known  to  resort  to
             fatal violence against those they perceive to be  'enemies  of
             Islam', particularly those who through their actions or  words
             express criticism of Islam".

44. Reading Dr Hoque's report as  a  whole,  and  it  was  referred  to  in
    considerable detail and cited by the judge, I do not accept Ms  Aboni's
    submission that the judge made a mistake in  understanding  Dr  Hoque's
    opinion.  Although in para 36 of his report Dr Hoque gave  examples  of
    particular individuals who had  been  directly  targeted  and  brutally
    killed by militant Islamicists  because  they  were  perceived  as  un-
    Islamic, they were no more than example categories.  Clearly, Dr  Hoque
    took the view that the appellant given  his  particular  circumstances,
    including his conversion to Christianity having been a Muslim  and  his
    open espousal of his Christian  faith  would  both  bring  him  to  the
    attention of Islamicists and create a risk to  him  of  persecution  or
    even death.  That was a risk against which the Bangladeshi  authorities
    were unable  to  provide  protection  wherever  the  appellant  was  in
    Bangladesh.

45. There is no doubt, in my judgment, that Dr Hoque's  report  provided  a
    sustainable basis for the judge's conclusion  that  the  appellant  had
    established a real  risk  of  persecution  based  upon  his  particular
    circumstances which, for the judge, included  his  interfaith  marriage
    and that he would necessarily draw attention to his conversion  because
    he would not wear a beard, but would instead wear a  cross  whilst  his
    wife would continue wearing traditional Islamic dress for a woman.  The
    evidence before the judge, which she was entitled to accept,  was  that
    the appellant would openly speak and practise his religion,  indeed  he
    wished to be ordained as a priest and work as such in Bangladesh.   The
    appellant's profile,  therefore,  went  further  than  simply  being  a
    Christian convert.

46. Ms Aboni's submission was that, in addition, the judge  had  failed  to
    take into account the evidence of the large  number  of  Christians  in
    Bangladesh.  There is no doubt that in section 9 of the CPIN, estimates
    are made  that  there  are  "600,000  Christians  in  total  reside  in
    Bangladesh".  Further, at para 12.1.4  the  CPIN  cites  evidence  that
    there are "as many as  91,000  Muslims  across  Bangladesh  [who]  have
    converted to Christianity in the last six years".  By contrast to that,
    at para 12.1.3 the  Special  Rapporteur  is  quoted  as  stating  that:
    "Religious conversions are generally rare  and,  when  they  do  occur,
    mostly take place in the context of interreligious marriages".

47. Even if the larger figure is  correct  and  the  judge  does  refer  to
    evidence concerning the size of the Christian population in  Bangladesh
    at para 49 of her decision, the appellant is (as Dr  Hoque  recognised)
    more than merely a  Christian  convert.   He  lives  in  an  interfaith
    marriage where his religious conversion (and perceived  apostacy)  will
    be all too readily apparent.  Likewise, the judge found that  both  his
    appearance and wish to openly discuss and, in effect,  openly  practise
    his religion if at all possible as a priest, were relevant  factors  in
    assessing his profile and, therefore, how  he  would  be  perceived  by
    extremist Islamic groups such as HI.  Dr Hoque's report was undoubtedly
    supportive of those circumstances giving rise to a  well-founded  claim
    for asylum on the basis of a real risk of persecution.

48. The CPIN itself does not exclude the possibility of an  individual  who
    is more than a mere Christian convert being at risk.  At  para  2.4.24,
    the CPIN states this:

         "2.4.24  The level of societal discrimination faced by a person who
                does not actively seek to publicly  express  their  lack  or
                rejection of religion or simply no longer  actively  adheres
                to a faith, is generally  low.   Many  Bangladeshis  do  not
                attend mosque on a regular basis and there are  no  apparent
                repercussions.  However,  high  profile   atheist/secularist
                bloggers and activists, deemed to have defamed Islam, face a
                high risk of discrimination  in  the  form  of  threats  and
                physical violence by Islamicist extremists ..."

49. Then at para 2.4.25, the CPIN states that:

         "2.4.25  Decision makers must consider whether there are particular
                factors  relevant  to  the  person,  which  might  make  the
                treatment serious by its nature and repetition as to  amount
                to  persecution  or  serious  harm.   Each  case   must   be
                considered on its facts, with the  onus  on  the  person  to
                demonstrate that they face a real risk".

50. In my judgment, Judge Gill  effectively  applied  this  approach.   She
    considered all the circumstances of  the  appellant  and  identified  a
    number of particular factors relevant to  the  appellant  which,  based
    upon Dr Hoque's report, she found created a real risk to the appellant.
     Nothing in the CPIN contradicted the judge's ultimate finding  in  the
    appellant's favour in this appeal.

51. I bear in mind that in order to demonstrate an  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision the respondent must establish that  the  judge  failed
    properly to consider the documentation before her, or  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for her finding or reached an irrational or Wednesbury
    unreasonable conclusion on the basis of that evidence.  The judge, in a
    very detailed decision, set out at some length extracts from Dr Hoque's
    report and from other  background  material  before  her.   As  I  have
    already noted, Dr Hoque's report  supported  her  conclusion  that  the
    appellant, given the combination of circumstances pertaining to him  on
    return to Bangladesh, faced a real risk  of  persecution.   Taking  the
    background evidence as a whole I am unable to conclude that the judge's
    reasons were inadequate  or  that  her  conclusion  was  irrational  or
    Wednesbury unreasonable in that it was a conclusion which no reasonable
    judge properly directing herself could  reach  on  the  basis  of  that
    evidence.

52. Consequently, the judge did not materially err  in  law  in  concluding
    that the appellant had established a real risk of  persecution  because
    of his religion on return to Bangladesh.  The grounds do not  focus  on
    any challenge to whether, if a real risk from  extremists  exists,  the
    Bangladeshi authorities would not be able to provide a  sufficiency  of
    protection.  Indeed, Ms Aboni did not make any  such  oral  submissions
    before me.  Plainly,  as  I  have  already  set  out  above,  Dr  Hoque
    expressed the view that the Bangladeshi authorities would be unable  or
    unwilling to provide protection  which,  in  my  judgment,  provided  a
    sustainable basis for the judge's finding that the appellant would  not
    be adequately protected by the Bangladeshi state from non-state  actors
    if he was open about his religion.

53. That finding, based upon Dr Hoque's opinion, extended to the  whole  of
    Bangladesh even if the appellant were to live in a community which  was
    predominantly Christian.  As Ms  Sanders  submitted,  the  respondent's
    ground seeking to  contend  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    evidence about the Christian areas or cities where he  could  relocate,
    fails to grapple with Dr Hoque's expert opinion  that  such  relocation
    within Bangladesh was not safe.  Dr Hoque's view was that, if open, the
    appellant's background would  become  readily  apparent  and  extremist
    groups such as  HI  had  a  reach  both  within  the  rural  and  urban
    communities in Bangladesh.

54. In my judgment, the respondent has failed to establish that the judge's
    conclusion that the appellant could not safely internally relocate  was
    irrational  or  Wednesbury  unreasonable  based  upon  the   background
    evidence and, in particular, the expert report of Dr Hoque.

55. Consequently, I reject the  main  grounds  of  appeal  challenging  the
    judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

56. The remaining ground concerns the judge's finding in para 61  that  the
    appellant would not  be  able  to  become  a  leader  of  a  church  in
    Bangladesh because of the negative attention he would draw to  himself.
    The grounds contend  that  this  finding  was  "not  supported  by  the
    evidence".

57. The judge accepted that there were Anglican churches in Bangladesh  and
    that he would not be a "attractive" member of the congregation given he
    was an ex-Muslim and married to a Muslim.  The grounds contend that the
    evidence, set out by the judge in para 49 and  cross-referred  in  para
    61, did not support her finding.  There,  in  particular,  evidence  is
    cited that "churches, especially house churches" prefer not to  display
    Christian symbols to avoid being recognised and that this would  impact
    upon the appellant's ability to join a  church,  in  particular  to  be
    ordained as a priest.

58. It may well be that the evidence upon which the judge relied was 'wafer
    thin' to support her finding.  However, as Ms  Sanders  submitted,  the
    judge's finding in para 61 played no part in her  reasons  for  finding
    that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  on  return  because  of  his
    circumstances.  The judge did not, for example, take it into account as
    an aspect of the treatment which would be meted out to the appellant on
    return and cumulatively giving rise to  persecution.   The  persecution
    which  the  judge  identified  was  his  ill-treatment  (or  worse)  by
    extremist groups because of his profile, including his openly  speaking
    about and practising his religion.  Consequently, even if this  finding
    is unsustainable it was not material to the  judge's  ultimate  finding
    which led her to allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

59. For all these reasons, the judge did  not  materially  err  in  law  in
    allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.



Decision

60. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    on asylum grounds did not involve the making of an error of  law.   The
    decision, therefore, stands.

61. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                14 July 2021

