
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01942/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2019                      |On 30 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MINUSHE [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Stackhouse, Ison Harrison, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on [~] 1989 and is a female citizen of
    Albania. On 13 March 2015, the appellant was convicted of two  offences
    of using false documents  and  sentenced  to  a  total  of  14  months'
    imprisonment. A deportation order was made against her and, by decision
    dated for  15  February  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's asylum and human rights claims. The appellant claimed  that
    she could not return to Albania because she is a lesbian. The appellant
    appealed against the refusal of her asylum and human  rights  claim  to
    the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on 7 May 2019,
    allowed  her  appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds are brief. The majority of the appellant's family  are  now
    based in Italy. She has two brothers living in Albania. A family member
    who works for the police is living in Albania.  Paragraph  [4]  of  the
    grounds of appeal reads as follows:

         "Although there is a reference to the mother's first cousin being a
         police official in Diber district that  is  in  the  north-east  of
         Albania, there is no indication as to how or  why  this  individual
         would be prepared to act as a rogue official if he was aware of the
         appellant's return or in the alternative that he has any  influence
         in the capital, Tirana."

 3. At the initial hearing at Bradford on 22 July  2019,  Mr  McVeety,  who
    appeared for the Secretary of State, acknowledged  that  there  was  no
    challenge to the credibility findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He
    sought  to  rely  entirely  upon  the  ground  articulated  above.   He
    characterised the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  as  a  'reasons
    challenge'; he did not submit that the decision of  the  judge  on  the
    facts as she found them had been perverse.

 4. In her decision at [27], the First-tier Tribunal judge wrote:

         "In my judgement, there are a combination of significant factors in
         the appellant's case, namely,  her  being  as  young  single  woman
         without family support, a lesbian and a victim of attempted  forced
         marriage as well as one who was sought by her father  and  brothers
         for a revenge as a declaration  of  sexuality  has  offended  their
         family honour has a high-ranking police officer in the  family  who
         can realistically find her in Albania and can prevent her accessing
         any state protection. These factors, taken together, that she  will
         face, on return to her country, a real risk of persecution  on  the
         grounds of being a lesbian, and also the grounds of being a  victim
         of attempted forced marriage. I accept her case that she would  not
         be able to access a sufficiency of protection from  any  source  in
         her country, and that she would not have a viable or safe  internal
         relocation option."

 5. The conclusion quoted above follows a careful and detailed analysis  of
    all the relevant evidence. The Secretary  of  State  submits  that  the
    judge has not given sufficient reasons for reaching the finding that  a
    police officer, who is a family member of the appellant,  would  either
    be aware that the appellant had returned to Albania or, indeed, that he
    would be interested at all that she  had  returned.  The  Secretary  of
    State acknowledges that there  is  no  sufficiency  of  protection  for
    homosexuals (the only country guidance case on  the  issue  deals  with
    males, not lesbians) if a state actor  seeks  to  pursue  and  harm  an
    individual. The  problem  for  the  Secretary  of  State  is  that  his
    submission overlooks the fact that the judge in the  paragraph  of  her
    decision which I have quoted above has found that the  police  officer,
    whilst not having any personal animus against the appellant,  would  be
    likely to offer assistance if asked to do so to the appellant's  father
    and brothers who wish to harm her. That was a finding plainly available
    to the judge on the evidence. To that extent, the police officer  would
    be acting to assist those fellow male family  members  rather  than  to
    satisfy any inclination towards revenge of his own. The judge  has,  in
    my opinion, provided cogent reasons for reaching the findings which she
    summarises at [27]. As Mr McVeety acknowledges that the decision of the
    judge, on the facts, is not perverse, then my finding  that  the  judge
    has given adequate reasons for her findings leads  me  to  dismiss  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.



    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 22 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



























