
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01562/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2018                           |On 21 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     H G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott of Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born in July 1975.   He  claimed  to
    have had problems in Iraq and following a message from his mother  that
    the police wanted him he escaped and applied  for  asylum  on  27  July
    2010, the day of his arrival in the United  Kingdom.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed on 29 October 2010  by  Judge  Blackford  and  the  appellant
    became appeal rights exhausted on 15 December 2010.  There  were  fresh
    representations and judicial review proceedings and in January 2018 the
    respondent refused the application following  the  representations  but
    granted an in country right of appeal.   The  appellant's  appeal  came
    before  a  First-tier  Judge  on  5  March  2018.   The  appellant  was
    represented by Mr Draycott.  Mr Scholes appeared  for  the  respondent.
    The appellant did not  appear  at  the  hearing  and  neither  did  his
    witness, his uncle.

2.   The principal issue in this case is the judge's decision to refuse  the
    application  for  the  adjournment  of  the  proceedings  and   it   is
    appropriate to set out the part of the decision where  the  application
    to adjourn is considered as follows:

         "2.  I called the case on at 10am.  Mr Draycott  informed  me  that
             the Appellant  had  not  yet  arrived,  and  neither  had  his
             witness, who is the Appellant's uncle.  Mr  Draycott  informed
             me that he would be applying for an  adjournment.   He  filed,
             twenty minutes  before  the  hearing,  an  Appellant's  bundle
             comprising  415  pages,  and  a  skeleton  argument.    Having
             assessed the relevant issues, and noting  that  the  Appellant
             intended to apply for an adjournment, the case was  called  on
             substantively at  12  noon.   At  this  stage,  there  was  no
             attendance by the Appellant, nor by his witness.  Mr  Draycott
             informed  me  that  his  instructing   solicitors   had   been
             attempting to contact the Appellant, but there  was  no  reply
             from the Appellant's mobile telephone, and they  had  no  idea
             where the Appellant was.  Having checked  the  documents  with
             the file, I was satisfied that the Appellant's  representative
             had been fully informed of the hearing, obviously, considering
             that the Appellant's  Counsel  had  turned  up.   Mr  Draycott
             informed me that the address for the witness  was  in  Dundee,
             Scotland.  Mr Draycott said it was "obvious" why  the  witness
             was not here.  There had been much traffic disruption  between
             Scotland and England in the last few days, and trains had been
             cancelled.  I asked Mr Draycott what information he  had  from
             the uncle, and whether he had spoken to the uncle  or  whether
             those instructing him had spoken to  the  uncle.   The  answer
             was, I  am  afraid,  a  resounding  "no".   Thus,  apart  from
             inferring because of snow a couple of days ago, that the uncle
             might not have made it to England, there was no information as
             to why  either  the  uncle,  or  the  Appellant,  was  not  in
             attendance.  Nevertheless, Mr Draycott pursued an  application
             for adjournment, because he said there were "multiple  issues,
             and it was necessary to have an expert report in  this  case".
             In  fact  an  application  for  adjournment  had   been   made
             previously by  the  Appellant's  representatives,  by  way  of
             lengthy letter/facsimile on 27th  February  2018,  in  similar
             terms.  This application had been refused by the  duty  judge.
             An application on  20th  February  was  refused  because  'the
             Appellant has already had one appeal which was  dismissed,  he
             has remained in the UK for over seven years and has had  ample
             time to get evidence together'.  The application  was  remade.
             This time, it was refused again on  1st  March  for  the  same
             reasons and "because the representatives have  avoided  saying
             when they  applied  for  funding  for  the  proposed  expert's
             report".


         3.   Mr Scholes opposed an adjournment.  He noted that the original
             application had been for three months,  and  now  was  revised
             down to two months, and opined that the  Appellant  had  ample
             time to prepare the case, considering how long he had been  in
             the United Kingdom.  Furthermore, he noted that there  was  no
             explanation for the absence of  the  Appellant,  nor  for  the
             witness, and he sought to  persuade  me  not  to  adjourn  the
             matter.


         4.   Given the history of the Appellant's presence  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and the fact that he has been represented throughout,
             and in particular, noting the lengthy chronology  relating  to
             litigation by the Appellant, I resolved  not  to  adjourn  the
             matter.  I was satisfied that refusing the adjournment request
             would not prevent the just disposal of the appeal and  refused
             it."

     The judge then  determined  the  appeal  on  the  material  before  him
    finding that his starting point had to be the findings  made  by  Judge
    Blackford in 2010.  Judge  Blackford  had  concluded  that  there  were
    glaring inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  evidence  and  these  so
    undermined his credibility that he came  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant was "not to be believed as regards his account of the  events
    leading up to his leaving Iraq".   The  First-tier  Judge  found  Judge
    Blackford's decision, both his starting  point  and  "I  fear,  my  end
    point."  There was no evidence from the appellant and no  reason  given
    for his absence.  There was no evidence from the appellant's witness.

3.   In considering the risks on return the  judge  took  into  account  the
    guidance in AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 544 and BA (Returns  to  Iraq)  CG
    [2017] UKUT 18.  Having found that the appellant  had  not  established
    any  subjectively  genuine  or   objectively   well-founded   fear   of
    persecution he concluded his assessment of the appellant's asylum claim
    as follows:

         "22. The  Respondent's  representative  has  raised  the  issue  of
             internal flight as an alternative to international  protection
             and has claimed that it would not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             Appellant to relocate internally.  I have considered paragraph
             3390 of the Immigration Rules.


               a) I was grateful to both  legal  representatives  for  their
                  assisting me in working through the principles outlined in
                  the country guidance case.  I note from  the  case  of  BA
                  (referred to above) that the general level of violence  in
                  Baghdad city remains significant but the current  evidence
                  does not justify departing from the country guidance  case
                  of AA, referred to above.  In  principle,  I  saw  nothing
                  within the facts within my findings, to persuade  me  that
                  the Appellant can bring himself within the risk categories
                  shown in BA.


             (b)  Turning to the case of AA, I am not  persuaded  that  the
                  Appellant comes from a so-called 'contested area' and I am
                  not persuaded that he comes from a  part  of  the  Baghdad
                  belt forming the border between  the  Baghdad  governorate
                  and other controlled areas.


             (c)  Mr Scholes said that the position of the Respondent,  was
                  that return at present was not  'feasible'  because  there
                  was no evidence that the Appellant has either  a  passport
                  or a laissez passer.  He could in fact obtain  the  latter
                  from the embassy of Iraq, Mr Scholes said.  Regardless  of
                  the feasibility of his return, it is necessary  to  decide
                  whether or not  he  has  a  CSID,  or  could  obtain  one,
                  reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  Clearly  there  is
                  evidence that he has  family  or  other  persons  able  to
                  provide means of support, in the interim before he obtains
                  the CSID.  There is no reason  why  the  Appellant  cannot
                  attend his local civil status affairs office, or, if  need
                  be, the National  Status  Court  in  Baghdad,  for  formal
                  recognition of identity.  The position which I glean  from
                  AA, is that it would not be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
                  for a person from a contested area (or of course from west
                  Baghdad) to relocate to Baghdad city or if necessary areas
                  within the Baghdad belts, and I have  taken  into  account
                  the potential risk factors set out in paragraph 15 of  the
                  annex to AA.  He could obtain a CSID.  He  speaks  Arabic.
                  He is  not  a  lone  female.   He  comes  from  a  wealthy
                  background  and  therefore   could   if   necessary   find
                  accommodation.  He is not from a minority community, being
                  a member of the Shi'a majority.


             In the case of Januzi and Others [2006] UKHL 5, it was decided
             that the test for whether it  would  be  unreasonable  for  an
             asylum seeker to relocate to  a  safe  haven  within  his  own
             country is not whether the quality of life there fails to meet
             basic norms  of  civil,  political  and  socio-economic  human
             rights, but whether he would face conditions,  such  as  utter
             destitution  or  exposure  to  cruel  or   inhuman   treatment
             threatening his most basic human rights.  The case of  AH  and
             Others [2007] UKHL 49 reminds me that if  the  Appellant  will
             face  a  standard  of  living  in  the  safe  haven  which   a
             significant proportion of his countrymen have to endure,  then
             (absent  individual  characteristics  making   the   Appellant
             particularly vulnerable) it will not be unduly harsh  for  him
             to relocate there.  In this case,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant may reasonably be expected to relocate within  their
             homeland."

4.   The judge dismissed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.   He
    found that the appellant could not meet any of the relevant  provisions
    of the Immigration Rules and dismissed  the  appeal  under  Article  8.
    There was an application for permission to appeal.  The application was
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal but the application was renewed  and
    permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on  12  October  2018  who
    found it arguable that the judge had erred in refusing to  adjourn  the
    appeal particularly in the light of what was said in paragraphs 8 and 9
    of the application for permission.  It was arguable  that  the  judge's
    findings were flawed.

5.   The respondent filed a response on 22 November 2018  arguing  that  the
    judge had given proper and anxious scrutiny to the adjournment  request
    and he had not proceeded with the  hearing  until  noon.   Neither  the
    appellant nor his uncle had even contacted the  appellant's  solicitors
    or the Tribunal to explain why they  could  or  would  not  attend  the
    hearing.   There  was  only  mere  speculation  on  the  part  of   the
    representative as to potential travel disruption by the  appellant  and
    his uncle.  The judge had  taken  all  relevant  matters  into  account
    including the fact that the appellant had been given proper notice  and
    was aware of the hearing.  The decision was open to the judge given the
    circumstances and also the history  in  this  particular  appeal.   The
    additional grounds had no merit and merely disagreed with  the  adverse
    outcome of the appeal without identifying any arguable  material  error
    of law.  The judge had considered all the evidence available to him.

6.   The application for permission  to  appeal  had  been  supported  by  a
    witness statement from a solicitor, Mr Sicher, dated 23 April 2018.  Mr
    Sicher  explains  the  background  to  the  request  to   adjourn   the
    proceedings prior to the judge's hearing.  It was desired to instruct a
    country expert to provide a report which he would not  be  able  to  do
    before the proposed hearing in March and as the appellant was  publicly
    funded it was necessary to apply for an extension of costs to cover her
    report but it was said that the legal aid  agency  would  not  consider
    granting any funds for any expert  or  exceptional  funding  until  the
    Tribunal granted an extension  of  time  for  the  full  hearing.   The
    application was refused on 22 February and  the  application  had  been
    refused by the Tribunal on 1 March 2018.  The decision was  accordingly
    taken to renew the adjournment application in  court.   Mr  Sicher  had
    emailed the appellant on 2 March 2018  and  had  informed  him  of  his
    hearing on 5 March and that both he and his uncle  should  attend.   If
    his uncle was unable to attend "for instance because  of  the  weather"
    then he should inform the barrister on the  day  of  the  hearing.   Mr
    Sicher received no response to the email or any indication that it  had
    not been received by the appellant.  He called both the  appellant  and
    his uncle on the day of the hearing but the  appellant's  number  would
    not accept a message and the appellant's uncle did not respond  but  Mr
    Sicher left a message for him to contact him.   On  13  April  2018  Mr
    Sicher contacted  the  appellant  following  receipt  of  the  decision
    dismissing his appeal but the appellant did not respond. His uncle  did
    respond and when asked why he and the appellant had  not  attended  the
    hearing he informed Mr Sicher that the appellant had no money and  that
    he was kicked out of his NASS  accommodation  and  since  he  had  been
    moving between various addresses he had no way to support himself.   He
    could only contact him through WhatsApp.  He was then able  to  contact
    the appellant who informed Mr Sicher that since being made homeless and
    destitute by NASS he had had to move to various addresses and  that  he
    often did not have any money including money to put on his mobile phone
    to be able to receive or make calls or to be able to use the  internet.
    He was unable to check his emails and that was why neither he  nor  his
    witness had attended the hearing.  It was unclear to Mr Sicher why  the
    appellant had lost his NASS support.

7.   At the hearing Counsel said there was  no  further  statement  from  Mr
    Sicher.  The appellant might or might not be out  of  the  jurisdiction
    but the appeal would not have been abandoned  he  submitted  under  the
    current legislation.  Counsel referred to the background  of  the  case
    and the applications that had been made  to  adjourn  the  proceedings.
    The proceedings had taken place during a cold snap and the trains  were
    not running at all.

8.    Counsel  referred  to  the  authorities  relevant  to  the  issue   of
    adjournment which he had helpfully lodged with his  indexed  bundle  of
    authorities and materials.  He referred to SH (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA
    Civ 1284 and Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  (IAC).
    In that case it had been said that in most cases the question would  be
    whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a  fair
    hearing.  Reference was made to AM (Cameroon) v Asylum and  Immigration
    Tribunal [2008] EWCA Civ 100.  A very high  standard  of  fairness  was
    required.

9.   In addition, in relation to Article 8 the judge  had  erred  since  the
    skeleton argument raised the issue of Article 8 but the judge  had  not
    given the matter proper consideration.  In the  light  of  the  country
    guidance it was clear that the appellant would be at risk  having  been
    out of the country for some eight years and he was Shia and  not  Sunni
    and would be returning to a part of Baghdad  which  was  dangerous  for
    him.

10.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the statement  from  Mr  Sicher  was
    new evidence and the permission of the Tribunal had not been sought  to
    lodge fresh evidence.   The  judge  had  had  no  explanation  for  the
    appellant's absence nor the absence of his witness. Sufficient time had
    been allowed to make contact with him.   She  relied  on  her  response
    that had been filed.   No  credible  explanation  for  the  appellant's
    absence had been put forward. There was nothing from the  appellant  on
    the issue and no document about the alleged issues he had had with NASS
    or any correspondence about his support or lack of it.    The  decision
    of the Fist-tier Judge had not been unfair.  She  had  been  unable  to
    find any information about his NASS support.  In the light of the  lack
    of evidence before the First-tier Judge he had  been  acting  perfectly
    fairly in refusing the application.  In the cases relied on by  Counsel
    (Kanda v Government of the Federation of Malaya [1962] AC 322 PC and In
    re D (Minors (Adoption Reports: Confidentiality) [1996] A.C.  593)  the
    individuals had not known the case against  them.   In  this  case  the
    appellant was fully aware of what the respondent's position was.

11.  In SH (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 the  respondent  had  produced
    the report to which the appellant wished to respond and the  respondent
    had not opposed the adjournment. It had been heard under the Fast-Track
    procedure.   In  AM  (Cameroon)  the  appellant  had  been  unwell  and
    unrepresented.  The First-tier Judge's approach was not unfair  in  all
    the circumstances.  In relation to the point about  the  expert  report
    there had been an  absence  of  information  about  funding  and  other
    issues.  The decision to proceed  was  not  unfair.   If  the  Tribunal
    agreed with her points that would answer a lot  of  the  other  issues.
    The judge had considered matters in the light of the decision of  Judge
    Blackford and the grounds of appeal simply represented  a  disagreement
    with his conclusions. He had  reached  a  holistic  assessment  of  the
    evidence and had properly applied the country guidance.  In relation to
    Baghdad the appellant had a  viable  relocation  option.   He  had  the
    option to find family members to assist him.  Simply  being  away  from
    Iraq was not sufficient.  He had been away from the  country  for  less
    than ten years.  The judge's assessment was not  irrational  and  there
    was no material error of law.  The appellant did  not  appear  to  have
    raised Article 8 in his witness statement.

12.  Mr Draycott in reply submitted that Mr  Sicher's  statement  should  be
    relied upon in the circumstances - it was not appropriate to apply  the
    test in Ladd v Marshall [1954] EWCA Civ 1.  It was not clear  that  the
    judge had properly applied the country guidance.  An expert report  was
    required.  Article 8 had been raised in the skeleton argument.

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  decision.   I  can
    only interfere with the decision of the  First-tier  Judge  if  it  was
    flawed in law.

14.   In  dealing  with  the  fresh  evidence  point,  under  the   standard
    directions issued and under the Procedure Rules notice should be given.
     However, the surprising feature  in  this  case  is  that  no  further
    evidence has been lodged about the  appellant  or  his  whereabouts  or
    indeed anything else.  The appellant sought to explain the  absence  of
    the uncle because of snowy conditions  at  the  time  but  Mr  Sicher's
    statement at paragraph  27  makes  no  reference  to  the  uncle  being
    inhibited from travelling because of the weather.  There is  in  effect
    nothing since April 2018  to  explain  matters  and  nothing  from  the
    appellant and it appears that his representatives have no idea where he
    is or indeed if he has left the country.

15.  Given the limited information before the First-tier Judge I agree  with
    the points made in the response and developed orally  by  Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe that there was nothing unfair about the judge's  decision.   He
    properly directed himself and had all relevant considerations in  mind.
    As was said by the Presenting Officer at the hearing the appellant  had
    ample  notice  of  the  case  he  had  to  meet  and  his  absence  was
    unexplained.  I am not satisfied  that  there  was  any  error  in  the
    judge's decision to press ahead with the hearing.  In the circumstances
    the  judge  dealt  with  the  case  appropriately,   properly   applied
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702,  and  indeed  was  not  persuaded  that
    evidence from the appellant would have taken matters much  further.  As
    Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted once it was determined that the judge had
    not acted unfairly in refusing the application for the adjournment then
    the remaining points were no more than expressions of disagreement with
    the judge's decision.   In relation to Article 8 it is  true  that  the
    issue of Article 8 featured  in  the  last  three  lines  of  Counsel's
    fourteen page skeleton argument dated 4 March 2018: it was argued  that
    the appellant was either entitled to humanitarian protection under  the
    Qualification Directive "or else should be entitled to remain in the UK
    by  reason  of  his  Article  8  family/private  life  or  through  the
    application of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules."   The
    judge properly dealt with Article 8 both under and outside the rules in
    paragraphs 25 to 31 of his decision.

16.  I have given very careful  consideration  to  the  points  made  by  Mr
    Draycott but for the reasons I have given I prefer the arguments I have
    summarised above in the respondent's response and as  developed  by  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe at the hearing.


Notice of Decision

17.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds and the decision of the  First-tier  Judge  is
    confirmed.

18.  I deem it appropriate to make an anonymity order in this case.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date: 12 December 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
