

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01659/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                 |Sent to parties on:                   |
|On 5 May 2017                       |On 18 May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR BILAL OMAR NEJAD

                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Howard      (Solicitor)


                                                       DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appeal of the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
(Secretary  of  State)  from  a  decision   of   the   First-tier Tribunal
(Judge J Robertson  hereafter  "the Judge")  whereupon  he  allowed  the
claimant's  appeal  against   the   Secretary   of   State's   decision   of
12 February 2016, refusing to grant him international protection.

2.    By way of brief background, the claimant is  an  Iranian  national  of
Kurdish ethnicity.  In  seeking  asylum  he  had  claimed  to  have  been  a
supporter of the Kurdish Democratic Party of Iran (KDPI) and  asserted  that
his loyalty to that Party had become known to the Iranian  authorities  such
that he had had to flee Iran in order  to  avoid  persecution.   Whilst  the
Secretary of State had  expressed  certain  other  credibility  concerns,  a
particular issue arose regarding the date of certain key  events.   That  is
because the claimant initially indicated (in his asylum interview)  that  he
had left Iran on 9 October 2015 (see question 25 of the interview record)
but when it subsequently came to light that he  had  been  fingerprinted  in
Greece in September 2015, he had asserted there  had  been  an  interpreter
error at the interview and  that  he  had,  in  fact,  left  Iran  in  early
September 2015.

3.    The Secretary of State refused the claim. The Judge heard the  appeal
on 2 September 2016.  The claimant was represented but, unusually I think,
the Secretary of State did not field a representative.  The Judge heard the
claimant's oral evidence, heard submissions from his representative  and  in
a determination promulgated on 20 October 2016, allowed his appeal.  As to
the evidence before him and the conclusions reached, the Judge said this:

      "Evidence

      7.    I have appeal bundles from both parties and heard oral  evidence
      from the Appellant  who  gave  his  evidence  through  an  independent
      interpreter.   I  also  have  the  Screening  Interview  conducted  on
      22nd October 2015   and   the   Asylum   Interview   Record   of
      26th January 2016.

      8.    The Appellant  adopted  his  witness  statement  and  gave  oral
      evidence.  His evidence is summarised as follows:

            i)   He was born in Iran

            ii)  He was a supporter of the KDPI for a few months  before  he
                 fled the country.   He  distributed  leaflets  at  schools,
                 mosques and where there were people passing by.  His cousin
                 was a member of the party and provided the  leaflets,  they
                 would distribute them together at night.

            iii) His house was raided and his father  was  taken  and  later
                 released.  His cousin was arrested and no  one  knows  what
                 happened to him.  He was not at home but hid at his sisters
                 and his brother in laws parents.  After a few days  he  was
                 taken by lorry to leave the country.

             iv)   He  disputes  the  answers  given  in  interview  as  the
                 interpreter had obviously not fully  understood  him.   The
                 Interpreter was Kurdish Sorani  of  Iraqi  nationality  and
                 misunderstood the months of the Farsi  calendar.   He  only
                 received the refusal letter and went through the  interview
                 record recently as his  previous  representatives  had  not
                 gone through all the details with him before.  He does  not
                 understand the English calendar and could not  convert  the
                 dates himself.  He did not raise any concern  at  interview
                 as he thought that the interpreter had understood him.

            v)   He left Iran on 8.09.15 and entered  the  UK  on  22.10.15.
                 He had not mentioned that he was fingerprinted in Greece as
                 he was afraid that he would be deported.

            vi)  He became a supporter of the KDPI in  March 2015.   People
                 did not discuss  the  details  of  their  involvement  with
                 others as if the government were to find out they would  be
                 hanged.  Being a member is a secret.  He just knew that his
                 cousin was involved and could  assist  him  in  becoming  a
                 supporter.   He  wanted  to  make  a  difference  to  those
                 suffering in Iran.

            vii) He was informed of Bhaktiar's arrest on  6.09.15.   It  was
                 reasonable to think that it was for  his  involvement  with
                 the KDPI.

            viii)      Since being in the UK he has had  some  contact  with
                 his family.  He has no family in the UK.

            ix)  It is unfair to blame him  for  the  interpreter's  errors.
                 He had a high standard of living in Iran and had no  reason
                 to leave his wife and parents other than his life being  at
                 risk.

      9.    Mr Sharif  sought  to  rely  on  his  skeleton  argument.   The
      Appellant was  introduced  to  KDPI  by  a  relative  and  distributed
      leaflets  against  the  Iranian  regime.   He  has  described  how  he
      undertook those activities and his account is consistent with his fear
      of arrest, detention and  ill treatment  due  to  acts  of  political
      dissent.  If it is accepted that he undertook those acts and that  his
      relative was arrested then it must be accepted that he was at risk  as
      the Iranian regime will not tolerate political  opposition  especially
      from a Kurdish party.  The interview record  is  consistent  with  the
      exception of the dates  which  the  Appellant  has  explained  in  his
      evidence.  The Appellant gave dates in the Persian calendar  and  they
      were converted wrong.  His explanation is  plausible  given  that  the
      interpreter was not a Farsi speaker but  conducted  the  interview  in
      Kurdish/Sorani.  The Respondent has acknowledged  that  the  Appellant
      had a good knowledge of the KDPI.  He referred me to the interview and
      submitted that the Appellant gave detailed answers.  He also  referred
      me to the case law and Country  Information  and  Guidance  submitting
      that all the subjective evidence is consistent  with  the  Appellant's
      account.  He did not address Article 8.

      Findings and Decision

      10.   I have given very careful consideration to all the evidence  put
      before me in this case which I have considered in the round.

      11.   The Appellant's claim is based upon a  fear  of  persecution  on
      return to Iran.  He  claims  to  have  exited  illegally  having  been
      involved with KDPI.

      12.   The Respondent relies  on  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
      evidence and questions his credibility.  However it has been  accepted
      that he is  an  Iranian  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  who  has  a  detailed
      knowledge of the KDPI.

      13.   Overall I find the Appellant's evidence to be  convincing.   His
      account of events is detailed and has not  been  embellished  which  I
      consider goes to his credibility.

       14.    On  the  issue  of  credibility  I   have   given   particular
      consideration to the reasons for refusal:

            i)   The Respondent submitted that  the  Appellant  was  not  of
                 interest to the Iranian authorities.  His  joining  of  the
                 party is questioned.  The Appellant has  explained  in  his
                 statement the risk in discussing political affiliation.  He
                 has not claimed to be a member of KDPI but a supporter.  He
                 was aware of his cousin's involvement with  the  party  and
                 wanted   to   'make   a   difference'   himself.    It   is
                 understandable that he approached someone he  knew.   I  do
                 not consider his lack of knowledge of his cousin's role  in
                 the party to be inconsistent when  considered  against  the
                 context of fear and mistrust.  The Appellant had  not  been
                 involved with the party for very long and this  information
                 may have been forthcoming from his cousin at a later  date.



            ii)  The Appellant demonstrated  a  detailed  knowledge  of  the
                 KDPI and  the  political  situation.   He  states  that  he
                 assisted in distributing leaflets supplied by his cousin in
                 support of the KDPI.  The Respondent has disputed that  the
                 Appellant  would  have  come  to  the  attention   of   the
                 authorities as he stated in interview (Q73 & 74) that  his
                 face was covered.  In fact the interview  records  that  he
                 did not have his face covered but  they  were  distributing
                 the leaflets at night in order not to be seen.

            iii) The Respondent  considered  the  Appellant  speculative  in
                 concluding that the authorities were interested in him.   I
                 disagree.  The Appellant had  been  actively  and  publicly
                 supporting  the  KDPI  with  his  cousin,  albeit   for   a
                 relatively short period.  On discovering  that  his  cousin
                 had been arrested and  his  home  raided  with  his  father
                 taken, I consider it to be a reasonable conclusion to reach
                 that the authorities were aware of his activities.

            iv)  In respect of the Appellant's flight from  Iran  he  denied
                 having had his fingerprints taken in  Greece.   This  is  a
                 countervailing factor which he has sought to explain.

            v)    The  Respondent  found  his  claim  to  have  exited  Iran
                 illegally in October unsubstantiated.  A  major  factor  is
                 the  evidence   of   his   having   been   in   Greece   in
                 September 2015.  On the issue of dates the  Appellant  has
                 submitted that the interpreter misunderstood the conversion
                 from the Persian to the English calendar.  I note that  the
                 refusal letter refers (para 16)  to  the  interview  being
                 conducted in Sorani however  at  Q15  the  interviewer  had
                 recorded [interpreter tells me that the applicant is  using
                 Farsi words].  I therefore accept that there may have  been
                 a degree of misunderstanding between the Appellant and  the
                 interpreter as the language used does not  appear  to  have
                 been consistent throughout.

      15.   The Appellant has provided an  acceptable  explanation  for  the
      inconsistencies.  Overall I  find  the  Appellant  to  be  a  credible
      witness.  His account of events is consistent in terms of detail.

      16.   In the light  of  the  above  I  find  that  the  Appellant  was
      politically active as claimed and that he exited Iran illegally.

      17.   In relation to the fear  of  persecution  I  am  guided  by  the
      background information in  particular  the  CIG  of  July 2016  which
      suggests:

            '3.1.12 those involved in Kurdish political groups are  however,
           at risk of arbitrary arrest, prolonged  detention  and  physical
           abuse from the Iranian  authorities.   Even  those  who  express
           peaceful dissent or who speak out about Kurdish  rights  can  be
           seen as a general threat and face a real risk of persecution'.

      In the light of this I am persuaded  to  the  low  standard  of  proof
      applicable that the  Appellant  is  an  Iranian  national  of  Kurdish
      ethnicity who has a well-founded fear of persecution on return due  to
      his imputed political opinion."

4.    The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal,  seeking  to
challenge  the Judge's  credibility  assessment  but,  in  particular,  the
reasoning  appearing  at  paragraph 14(v)  of  the  decision  concerning  a
"misunderstanding" between the appellant and the interpreter  regarding  the
conversion of dates.  Permission was  granted  by  a  judge  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal and the salient part of that grant reads as follows:

      "The grounds assert that the judge failed to provide adequate  reasons
      for her findings on material matters, including her acceptance of  the
      appellant's assertion that the official interpreter at  interview  had
      erroneously  converted  dates  from  the  Persian  to  the   Gregorian
      calendars.  Whilst credibility is a  matter  for  the judge,  it  was
      incumbent on her to  provide  adequate  reasoning  for  accepting  the
      appellant's oral evidence asserting an erroneous conversion of  dates.
      As the dates were stated in the interview record in both  the  Persian
      and Gregorian calendars, it would not appear to have been unreasonable
      to expect the appellant's oral assertion to  have  been  supported  by
      independent expert evidence on the  alleged  erroneous  conversion  of
      dates, particularly in light of the  appellant's  previous  denial  of
      having been in Greece at the time of the relevant alleged past  events
      in Iran.  In the absence of any such  corroborative  evidence,  it  is
      arguable  that  the  apparent  acceptance  of  the  appellant's   bare
      assertion was inadequate per se."

5.    Permission having been granted there was an oral hearing before me  so
that it could be decided whether the Judge had erred in  law  and,  if  so,
whether that meant his decision ought to be set aside.   Representation  was
as stated above and I am grateful to each representative.

6.    Mr Mills, for the Secretary  of  State,  handed  in  some  conversion
calendars.  He  used  those  calendars  to  seek  to  demonstrate  that  the
claimant's particular explanation regarding interpreter error, as  contained
in his witness statement, could not be correct.  In  a  nutshell,  that  was
because whilst the claimant was saying he had indicated, in interview,  that
his departure date had been 8 September 2015, it was recorded specifically
that he had said that the departure date  had  been  in  a  month  known  as
"Mehr" and 8 September does  not  fall  within  that  month.   The Judge's
reasoning on the point had  been  inadequate.   He  could  have  easily  had
recourse to conversion calendars and checked the matter  for  himself.   The
lack of a presenting officer did not  mean  he  could  simply  uncritically
accept  the  claimant's  case.   Mr Howard,  essentially,  contended  that
the Judge had reached findings open to him  and  which  he  had  adequately
explained, such that there was no error of law.

7.    I have concluded that the Judge did  not  err  in  law.   In  general
terms, what he has to say  in  his  decision  shows  that  he  gave  careful
consideration  to  the  various  matters  of  dispute  and  to   credibility
generally.  His task was to decide the appeal on the basis of  the  material
before him and that  is  what  he  did.   If  the  Secretary  of  State  had
considered that provision of a conversion calendar perhaps accompanied by  a
written argument based upon it was important, such could have been  sent  to
the Judge prior to the hearing.   It  cannot  realistically  be  said  that,
having heard the oral evidence and having documentary evidence in  front  of
him including the record of  interview,  the Judge  was  simply  not  in  a
position to make a decision such that he was required to go outside of  what
was before him in order to check, for  example,  whether  8 September 2015
fell within the month of Mehr or not.

8.    Further, I do not accept the submission, if  that  is  what  is  being
contended, that the Judge had a general duty to  cast  around  for  further
evidence  which   might   assist   him   simply   because   there   was   no
Presenting Officer present.  I certainly accept Mr Mills submission that it
was not open to the Judge to accept the claimant's evidence simply  because
of the  absence  of  a  Presenting Officer.   However,  that  is  not  what
the Judge did.  What he did was consider the evidence before him  and  then
to arrive at a reasoned conclusion.  He did not penalise  the  Secretary  of
State for the failure to field a representative.

9.     In  simple  terms,  whilst   I   appreciate   that   Mr Mills   has
characteristically  put  much  thought  into  the  argument   he   advances,
the Judge had a job to do and did it.  In so doing he did not  err  in  law
even if, on one view at least, his  findings  as  to  credibility  might  be
thought a little generous.

10.   In the circumstances I  have  concluded  that  the  decision  did  not
involve the making of an error of law and that it shall,  therefore,  stand.


11.   I have not made any anonymity direction.  I was not invited to do  so,
I can see no obvious justification for my doing so  and  no  such  direction
had been sought before nor had given by the Judge.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  Its decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:                           Date: 16 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed:                      Date:    16 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

