

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01241/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th November 2017                 |       On 16th November 2017         |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     AS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Akin-Samuels of Church Street Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  AS.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings



   1. AS was notified on 31st July 2015 that the SSHD had decided to make  a
      deportation order against him under s5(1) Immigration Act 1971 because
      his presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good.  AS  made
      submissions  which  were  treated  by  the  SSHD  as   a   claim   for
      international protection/human rights claim. That claim was refused by
      the SSHD in a decision dated  8  September  2015  (re-served  on  26th
      October 2015). The appellant appealed. His appeal was heard by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge  Metzer  and,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7
      September 2017, allowed on asylum and Article 3 human rights grounds.


   2. The SSHD sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  following
      grounds:


               ....FTTJ Metzer has made irrational findings  that  [AS]  is
               entitled to international protection on asylum  grounds  and
               benefits from protection under Article 3.
               There is no evidence submitted by [AS] that he has ever been
               subjected to any threat of serious harm by the Rat Bat gang,
               additionally there is no evidence  that  [AS's]  father  was
               killed by the same gang. The only possible evidence  is  the
               alleged posters from four to five years ago. It is submitted
               that  if  such  posters  existed  that  evidence  of   their
               existence could have been provided by [AS] and is reasonable
               to expect that any  such  evidence  to  be  put  before  the
               tribunal[sic].
               In any event these  posters  if  existed  only  referred  to
               [AS's] Grandmother and Uncle and were not directed at [AS].
               In a similar way if as the FTTJ accepts  that  [his]  cousin
               was  killed  by  the  Rat  Bat  gang  paragraph  16  of  the
               determination despite [AS] confirming at paragraph 8 of  the
               determination that he could not say  directly  his  cousin's
               death was a result of Rat Bat gang.  It  is  submitted  that
               evidence of the cousin's death would be available  from  the
               Jamaican authorities and/or newspaper  articles  and  it  is
               reasonable to expect the appellant to provide this  evidence
               to the tribunal.
               The FTTJ refers to this an exceptional case in which  [AS's]
               mother was granted humanitarian protection paragraph  24  of
               the determination, it is known that [AS's] mother appeal was
               heard on 21/02/05 at Taylor House and  subsequently  allowed
               on 04/03/2005 (no AIT references) but is recorded as allowed
               on Human Rights Grounds on the Home Office computer records.
               If [AS] is reliant on his mother's  allowed  appeal  then  a
               copy should have been provided to the tribunal  and  it  was
               reasonable to expect  this  to  be  produced,  there  is  no
               indication from the determination that it was provided.
               It is respectfully submitted that the  FTTJ  has  failed  to
               give clear reasons as to why [he] is at risk  from  the  Rat
               Bag gang, [he] has confirmed in cross examination [that  he]
               has never been subject to any direct  threat  of  harm  from
               this gang (see paragraph 6 of the  determination).  This  is
               despite being resident in the United Kingdom since  November
               2001 aged 6, and aged twenty  two  at  the  hearing,  it  is
               therefore submitted that there is no evidence for  the  FTTJ
               to  base  his  conclusions  that  [he]   is   in   need   of
               international protection.




   3. Mr Deller did not abandon his grounds of appeal but stated that he did
      not wish to amplify the grounds and relied upon  the  grounds  as  set
      out.


   4. Judge Metzer set out in detail the serious  crimes  of  which  AS  was
      convicted. He  set  out  in  detail  the  evidence  before  him,  both
      documentary and oral including the attempted kidnap of his mother when
      he was about five years old, that his grandmother reported details  to
      the Metropolitan police, that he had lived  outside  London  with  his
      grandmother in a safe house until 2008, that his grandmother had  been
      threatened since the killing of  his  father.  His  mother's  evidence
      included that a prisoner from Belmarsh had been  deported  to  Jamaica
      and that she had heard from her sister that information had  got  back
      to Jamaica that AS was due to be deported. Judge Metzer refers to  AS'
      mother being granted humanitarian  protection  in  2005.  Humanitarian
      protection includes protection under the Human Rights  Act.  That  the
      Home office chose to record that on their system as an appeal  allowed
      on human rights grounds is not contradictory; it does not appear  that
      this was said to the judge in any event. The SSHD was aware and refers
      to AS' immigration status in the reasons for refusal letter and had it
      been disputed that his mother had been  granted  protection  this  was
      evidence which the SSHD could have relied upon. A decision dating back
      to 2005 which had not been challenged by the SSHD  cannot  justifiably
      be disputed over 10 years later.


   5. The judge considered the evidence as  a  whole  not  merely  piece  by
      piece. He made findings that were open to him on  that  evidence.  His
      acceptance of the evidence that the gang continued to have an interest
      in AS father's family were findings that were open to him.  The  judge
      gave clear reasons for his findings; he considered the evidence  as  a
      whole including AS' evidence that he could not directly  confirm  that
      his cousin's death was by the gang. But the findings were open to him;
      they are neither perverse nor irrational.


   6. The grounds do not seek to challenge the findings as to sufficiency of
      protection or internal relocation.


         7. I am satisfied that there is no error  of  law  such  that  the
            decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside  the  decision;  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
stands.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    In the light of the potential harm that may be caused to AS and/or  his
    family I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


                                    Date 14th November 2017
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
