
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01321/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 August 2019                    |On 30 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     MF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, where he was born in 1990.   He  is
    of Kurdish ethnicity, and appeals the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hands, who for reasons given in her decision dated 22 March 2019,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against refusal of his asylum claim on
    31 January 2019 for reasons given on the same  date.   The  appellant's
    case is that he left Iraq in August 2015 and reached the United Kingdom
    on 9 November 2015 (and claimed asylum the same day) after a period  of
    time  in  Bulgaria  where  he  was  detained.   By  way  of  additional
    background,  the  appellant  was  convicted  on  4  May  2018  for  the
    possession of a false Belgium passport for which he  was  sentenced  to
    six months' imprisonment.


 2. The details of the appellant's claim (and the position of the Secretary
    of State) are captured by paragraph [10] of  the  judge's  decision  as
    follows:


         "10. The Appellant is seeking asylum for a Convention reason  based
             on his fear of returning to  Iraq  because  of  his  religion,
             being of the Kaka'i faith.  The Respondent  accept  he  had  a
             genuine subjective fear  in  his  home  area.   The  Appellant
             claims he was unable to relocate prior  to  leaving  Iraq  and
             would therefore be unable to relocate in  the  IKR  should  he
             return as his faith would  be  questioned  and  become  known,
             hence leading to a real risk of serious harm.  He  comes  from
             the Kirkuk area.  He cannot  return  there  because  it  is  a
             contested area and he cannot return to Baghdad.  He  does  not
             speak Arabic, he does not hold a CSID, he  has  no  family  or
             support network in Baghdad or the IKR  and  obtaining  a  CSID
             would place him at risk because of the basis of Article  15(c)
             of the Qualification Directive."


 3. The judge observed that the Secretary of State had  accepted  that  the
    appellant was a national of Iraq (from  Kirkuk),  that  he  is  of  the
    Kaka'i faith and of Kurdish ethnicity.  The judge  also  noted  matters
    accepted by the Secretary of State which she explained as  follows,  in
    paragraph [12]:


         "12. While it was accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant  is
             of the Kaka'i religion and his  account  of  the  problems  he
             faced in his home area because of the invasion of ISIS, it was
             not accepted that the problems he faced  in  Kirkuk  or  Erbil
             amounted  to  persecution   as   they   were   found   to   be
             discriminatory only.  His religion  was  not  known  until  he
             chose to reveal it and he  was  not  physically  harmed  as  a
             result.  The Appellant's account before me  remains  the  same
             and I find,  therefore,  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
             establish the Appellant suffered persecution  because  of  his
             religion prior to his departure from  Iraq.   The  Appellant's
             problems arose from the general situation  when  ISIS  invaded
             his  village  and  the  surrounding  area  resulting  in   his
             displacement."


 4.  Thereafter  the  judge  concluded  that  the  most  recent  background
    information confirmed that ISIS had been driven from Iraq to the extent
    that either the IKR government or the Iraqi government  controlled  all
    areas of the country.  Accordingly the judge found that there was not a
    reasonable likelihood the appellant would suffer persecution from  ISIS
    or any other terrorist group.


 5. After noting the submissions made and directing herself in relation  to
    the country guidance in AAH and AA (the  citations  for  which  are  AA
    (Article 15(c)(Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) as amended by the Court of
    Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and AAH (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212  (IAC)),  the  judge  noted  in
    paragraph [18] the appellant's circumstances and that he had been  able
    to find work in Erbil without a CSID.  She found the appellant did  not
    have a deep knowledge of his religion nor did he have a deep belief  in
    it.  He had indicated in his asylum interview that he  was  considering
    conversion to Christianity and did not actively participated within his
    religion since arrival in the United Kingdom.  Not bearing the signs of
    a religion as described in the country information, the judge  reasoned
    that the only way a person would find out about that religion would  be
    if the appellant chose to reveal it.  Specifically in relation  to  the
    CSID, the judge observed at [22]:


         "22. The Appellant claims he has no knowledge of the whereabouts of
             his family and he has made no attempt to find out  about  them
             either through the Red Cross or other agencies.  There  is  no
             evidence that he has approached  the  Iraqi  Embassy  to  seek
             assistance in obtaining a CISD [sic] from the  information  he
             does have available in connection with  his  place  of  birth,
             date of birth and his family name.  He advised that apart from
             his mother and sister with whom he lived,  the  Appellant  had
             wider family  members,  including  uncles  in  a  neighbouring
             village.  He  makes  no  reference  to  any  effect  the  ISIS
             invasion had on them so it is just as likely they are in their
             original homes as they  are  not.   While  I  acknowledge  the
             Appellant has a very low burden of proof placed upon  him,  in
             my judgement, it is not sufficient for him  to  sit  back  and
             boldly state he has no knowledge of  his  family  or  that  he
             cannot obtain the necessary documentation.  He has a  duty  to
             establish that these facts are more than likely to be true and
             he has not discharged that duty."


 6. After  reiterating  that  ISIS  had  all  but  disappeared,  the  judge
    continued at [24] to [26] :


         "24. The Appellant, as a person of Kurdish ethnicity who originates
             from Kirkuk, will be able to return to the IKR where there are
             several large cities, including Sulaymaniyah, Erbil and Duhok,
             where he could live.  His agricultural  skills  and  labouring
             ability and his education in the United  Kingdom  will  assist
             him in finding employment to support  himself  and  thereafter
             accommodation.


         25.  I must consider if the level of armed conflict is such  as  to
             give rise to indiscriminate violence amounting to such serious
             harm  to   civilians,   irrespective   of   their   individual
             characteristics, so as to engage Article 15(c).  The Appellant
             will not be at risk at the point  of  return  as  he  will  be
             returned directly to Erbil in the IKR where he has  an  avenue
             open to him to obtain his CSID.  Once in Erbil, as  he  is  of
             Kurdish ethnicity, he will be able gain permission  to  reside
             there initially until he can either contact his family who are
             just as likely to be in the village where he left them as  not
             and obtain a CSID.  Thereafter, he  will  be  able  to  obtain
             accommodation and employment, be that with his  family  or  on
             his own.


         26.  From the evidence and submissions before me,  I  do  not  find
             that there is a real risk of serious harm to this Appellant in
             terms  of  the  humanitarian  protection  provisions  or  that
             Article 15(c) is engaged."


 7. Finally, the judge considered that no claim  was  made  out  under  the
    Human Rights Convention with specific reference to Articles 2 and 3.


 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Grant  but  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara  on  a  renewed
    application in which it is contended, as to the  appellant's  religion,
    that it was arguably not open to the tribunal to conclude  without  any
    further reason that the only way a returnee's religion would  be  known
    would be if they chose to reveal it having regard to  country  guidance
    regarding the screening of new  entrants  or  information  known  about
    individuals at local level.


 9. The second ground relates to the correctness of the judge's finding  in
    relation to the ability of the appellant to obtain employment.   It  is
    argued that country guidance was ignored when this aspect was assessed.


10. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara observed:


         "2.  It is arguable that in finding that the  appellant's  religion
             (it is accepted that he is from the Kaka'i minority) would not
             become known unless he chose to reveal it  that  the  Tribunal
             failed to take into consideration that need for the  appellant
             to register his presence with the local Mukhtar as well as the
             screening which would take place on a local level by  security
             and the Mukhtar in his home area.  The remaining grounds  also
             have merit."


 1. Mr Diwnycz acknowledged the absence  of  a  rule  24  response  by  the
    Secretary of State and further indicated at the outset of  the  hearing
    that he would not be resisting the  appellant's  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Ms Brakaj emphasised  that  the  basis  of  the  appellant's
    challenge related to the incorrect application  by  the  judge  of  the
    Supreme Court decision in HJ (Iran) v SSHD and  HT  (Cameroon)  v  SSHD
    [2010] UKSC 31 on the basis that the appellant could not be expected to
    hide his faith  when  exercising  internal  relocation.   The  evidence
    indicated that his faith had led to discrimination in relation  to  his
    employment in the IKR.  Mr Diwnycz accepted that the appellant  had  in
    fact initially sought to conceal his religion and that  its  disclosure
    had  led  to  the  employment  difficulties.   He  accepted  that   the
    consideration by the judge of internal relocation had been  inadequate.




 2. In my judgment I consider that Mr Diwnycz was correct to concede  error
    by the judge; the principles established in  HJ  (Iran)  are  of  equal
    applicability in a consideration  of  the  reasonableness  of  internal
    relocation consideration where risk is found elsewhere.  I consider the
    error material and  set  the  decision  aside.   None  of  the  judge's
    findings stands and,  in  the  light  of  the  extent  of  fact-finding
    required, remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  its  further
    consideration before a differently constituted Tribunal.


 3. The Upper Tribunal is shortly to  publish  a  decision  giving  country
    guidance on the Article 15(c) risk previously established  in  relation
    to the appellant's home area.  It would seem therefore appropriate  for
    the appeal to be listed before the First-tier Tribunal once the country
    guidance decision is available.



Signed                                  Date 22 August 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
