
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01963/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Teams             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 June 2021                      |On 23 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     DIF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Islam
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born in 1993. He appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on  20  February  2020  dismissing  his  claim  for  international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a  decision  promulgated  on  8
    February 2021, dismissed his appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge accepted that the appellant would be at real risk of harm  in
    his home area of  Iraq,  Tuz  Khurmato.  However,  he  found  that  the
    appellant could available himself of the option of internal  flight  to
    the Independent Kurdish Region (IKR).

 3. First, the appellant challenges the decision on  the  ground  that  the
    credibility assessment is flawed by the  judge's  overemphasis  of  the
    fact that the appellant passed through several safe countries in Europe
    en route for the United Kingdom. The  appellant  asserts  that  he  had
    lacked the autonomy during the journey to be able to make a  claim  for
    asylum because he was 'instructed by his brother in  law  who  arranged
    and paid for the agents'.

 4. The problem with this challenge is that the appellant's explanation for
    not claiming asylum earlier has already been addressed by the judge  at
    [36]. The judge gave reasons for finding that the appellant's  evidence
    'to be lacking in coherence' and rejected expressly the claim that  the
    agents had exercised such tight control over  the  appellant  (who  had
    been fingerprinted in Italy and Holland) so as 'to preclude an  earlier
    claim [for asylum]'. The first ground of appeal, therefore, amounts  to
    nothing more than disagreement with a soundly reasoned finding  of  the
    judge.

 5. The second ground is founded on a misreading of the refusal  letter  of
    the Secretary of State. The appellant  claims  that  the  Secretary  of
    State accepted that he was no longer in touch with his family  in  Iraq
    and that the judge went behind that concession by finding at [40]  that
    the application had failed  to  prove  that  he  had  lost  touch  with
    relatives. The refusal letter, at [67], unequivocally states  that  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant was no  longer  in
    touch with his family. The ground also misreads the judge's decision at
    [40/41] by identifying a contradiction where none exists. The appellant
    submits that the judge found inconsistently that the appellant had  not
    lost touch with his family and that 'he would ... have [no]  family  or
    social contacts within the IKR to  assist  him  in  adjusting  to  life
    there.' The judge has distinguished the appellant's home  area  of  Tuz
    Khurmato (which is not the IKR) and the IKR; there is not inconsistency
    in finding that the appellant has no family in the IKR  but  does  have
    family elsewhere in Iraq.

 6. Thirdly, the appellant asserts  that  the  judge's  findings  regarding
    internal flight are unsound. The grounds and the oral submissions of Mr
    Islam, who appeared for the appellant at the  initial  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal, were made on the understanding that the appellant would
    have to re-document himself in Iraq  or  whilst  still  in  the  United
    Kingdom and all the problems which that process would create.  However,
    as I pointed out to Mr Islam, it is clear from the  decision  that  the
    judge considered that the appellant still has possession  of  his  CSID
    card or is able to access it. Indeed, at [40], the judge 'did not  find
    the appellant credible about losing contact  with  his  family  or  his
    identification documents.' [my emphasis]. I consider that  the  judge's
    findings  of  fact  and  his  rejection  of  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's evidence are sound in law, including his findings regarding
    identity documents. The assertion on the grounds [3] that the fact  the
    appellant  had  attended  the  Iraqi  Consulate  in  Manchester   twice
    indicates that he does  not  have  identity  documents  is  essentially
    nothing more than a disagreement with the judge's finding. The  grounds
    say nothing about the ability of the  appellant  to  live  in  the  IKR
    having  relocated  there.  Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  judge  has
    adequately addressed  the  matter  of  internal  flight  and  that  his
    findings are sound in law. The appeal is dismissed.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


         Signed                              Date 11 June 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
