
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01418/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2019                     |On 26 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, Counsel, on behalf of Elder Rahimi
Solicitors


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Bowler ('the judge'), promulgated on 17 April 2019, dismissing  the
         appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  his
         asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights applications.

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan. He appealed against  the
         decision of the respondent to refuse  him  asylum  based  upon  his
         claimed well-founded fear of persecution as a result of threats and
         imputed political opinion; and in terms of there being  substantial
         grounds for believing he  would  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
         serious harm on return from the UK  under  paragraph  339C  of  the
         Immigration Rules; and  under  Articles  2,  3  and  15(c)  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights.

      3. The judge made the following findings (which I do not understand to
         be in dispute): the appellant arrived in the  UK  [on  29  December
         2016] when he was 17 years of age; he  was  born  and  grew  up  in
         Afghanistan; he was one of several  children  in  his  family;  the
         appellant's father had a role within the former Afghan  President's
         staff; the appellant's father fled Afghanistan in the mid  to  late
         1990's and was granted refugee status in the UK.

      4. The  appellant's  father  sadly  passed  away  shortly  before  the
         appellant's arrival.

      5. The judge heard the  appeal  on  14  March  2019,  dismissing  each
         element of the appellant's claim.

      6. An anonymity direction was made by Judge Bowler and I  extend  that
         direction for the purposes of these Upper Tribunal proceedings.

      7. On 13 June 2019,  the  appellant's  representatives  renewed  their
         application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.  They
         did so on three grounds:

          1. error in evaluation of evidence considering risk on return;

          2. error of fact resulting in error of law;

          3.  failure  to  assess  the  appellant's  claim  in  the  round;
             procedural unfairness.

      8. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum stated:

          1. It was arguable (ground 2) that the First-tier Judge failed to
             take account of relevant evidence when stating that neither  A
             nor B had left Afghanistan.

          2.  It was also arguable (ground 3)  that  the  First-tier  Judge
             failed to consider the  appellant's  evidence  in  his  asylum
             interview relating to B's work  as  an  interpreter  with  the
             Americans.

          3.  Although ground 1 is less meritorious (it  is  essentially  a
             disagreement with the First-tier judge's factual findings), it
             is appropriate to grant permission on all grounds.

      9. It is against this background that the appeal was listed before me.

         1.   Failing to take account of relevant evidence when stating that
         neither A nor B had left Afghanistan

     10. In short, this ground fixes upon what  is  said  to  be  a  factual
         error. At paragraph 46 of the determination the judge states:

             "46.  The  appellant  claims  in  his  February  2017  witness
             statement at page E-13 that  his  mother  has  told  him  that
             Taliban members have looked for him since he left Afghanistan.
             There was no claim  that  he  was  previously  sought  by  the
             Taliban and there is little reason why they  should  now  seek
             him after he has left the country.  There  are  other  obvious
             family members such as A and B for the Taliban to act against.
             He  has  not  described  either  A  or  B   as   having   left
             Afghanistan."

     11. It is the final sentence that is the force of the objection. It  is
         submitted that the judge's statement that the  appellant  'had  not
         described either A or B as having left Afghanistan', was wrong  and
         material to the judge's assessment of risk on return.

     12. By way of background, and for the purposes of this decision, 'A' is
         the appellant's brother, and 'B' is  the  appellant's  cousin.  The
         appellant's case was that both A and B had been threatened  by  the
         Taliban as a result of their employment.

     13. It is apparent from the appellant's latest witness statement, dated
         26 February 2019, that he now understands the situation  to  be  as
         follows:

             '24. I don't know for sure, but I think that my brother A  may
                  be in Iran. When I was in France, I received  a  telephone
                  call from my maternal cousin, C. During this  conversation
                  C told me that A is currently in hiding  in  Iran  and  he
                  doesn't know what his plans are. This is the last  news  I
                  have heard about A.'

     14. Further, the appellant stated at questions 90 and 91 of his  asylum
         interview in 2017 that he had found out while in  France  that  his
         brother had called C and was in Iran, but he did not know if he had
         remained there or travelled on to Turkey.

     15. The further difficulty is  that  the  judge  appears  to  link  her
         observation that the appellant had not described either A or  B  as
         having left Afghanistan, to the statement  that  'There  are  other
         obvious family members such as A and  B  for  the  Taliban  to  act
         against'. This suggests that she believed A and  B  were  still  in
         Afghanistan.

     16. It is arguable therefore that the judge has made a  factual  error,
         or at least has not considered all of the evidence in the round and
         the balancing exercise required, in coming to her  conclusion  that
         the appellant had not described A or B as having left Afghanistan.

     17. I frame it in such a way and with a degree of caution because it is
         necessary to consider  the  complete  picture.  The  question  that
         arises is, if there has been a factual error, whether such an error
         constitutes a material error of law. I am satisfied  that  it  does
         not.

     18. First, the judge was aware of the appellant's account in  terms  of
         his brother. In a letter, dated 5 September 2016 (which  the  judge
         acknowledges  must  be  treated  with  considerable  caution)   the
         appellant states that after his sister was killed 'my brother  left
         the city and settled in Kabul where he  still  lives'.  In  a  more
         recent statement,  the  appellant  says  the  assertion  about  his
         brother  living  in  Kabul  was  incorrect.  Importantly,  this  is
         something the judge acknowledges (para 49). She was therefore aware
         of the change in account. She was also aware  (para  43)  that  the
         appellant's case was that A 'moved  to  Kabul  before  leaving  the
         country'. To that  extent,  the  judges  comment  at  paragraph  46
         appears ambiguous.

     19. This is particularly so, as second, in his statement at page E-9 to
         E-13 of  the  respondent's  bundle,  dated  30  January  2017,  the
         appellant  does  not  describe  either  A  or  B  as  having   left
         Afghanistan. His statement is silent in terms of their whereabouts,
         other than a passing reference to his brother deciding to leave the
         family home. If paragraph 46 is read solely as a reference  to  his
         original statement, then on one view it is correct.

     20. Third, in relation to B, as far as I can  ascertain  the  appellant
         does not provide any definitive information or  explanation  as  to
         where B may now be located; and I cannot see in the  submissions  I
         have received any reference to his situation. The whereabouts of  B
         did not feature in the asylum interview.  The criticism levelled at
         the judge therefore cannot be levied in relation to B. The  judge's
         statement stands good to that extent.

     21. Factual  findings,  plausibility  and  credibility  are  inevitably
         interrelated when it comes to assessing risk on  return.  I  cannot
         say that this one sentence causes any material error  to  arise  in
         terms of the overall  reading  of  this  decision.  The  judge  was
         correctly focused on this appellant and the risk on  return  posed.
         She was aware that the  appellant  claimed  his  brother  had  left
         Afghanistan, but she was satisfied that the appellant had not  been
         threatened and was not at  risk  from  the  Taliban  or  any  other
         insurgent groups.

     22. I return to this below, when I come to look at the  appeal  grounds
         collectively.

         2.   Failure to consider the appellant's  evidence  in  his  asylum
         interview  relating  to  B's  work  as  an  interpreter  with   the
         Americans.

     23. This second ground focusses upon the appellant's explanation  about
         B's work as an interpreter for NATO/the Americans.

     24. The judge states as follows:

             "35. The appellant's cousin, B, worked at [the]  airport.  The
             appellant understands that B  worked  with  Americans  at  the
             airport, but he was not aware of any details of Bs work at the
             time of his asylum interview.  The  most  that  the  appellant
             could say in his asylum interview was that B went to work in a
             car with blacked out windows, which given that  the  appellant
             says such cars are generally prohibited, is a surprising claim
             given that it would have drawn considerable attention to B.

             36.  Later in his witness statement of 26 February  2019,  the
             appellant says that B works as an interpreter for NATO, but he
             has not explained how he knows this. Given that he is  legally
             represented,  I  would  have  expected  this  to   have   been
             explained."

     25. In short, the judge was not  satisfied,  even  applying  the  lower
         standard of proof, that the appellant's brother and  cousin  worked
         for NATO at the airport. She found that  the  appellant  must  have
         lived close to B and, given the close community the  appellant  had
         described, there were plausibility issues raised by his claim  that
         his brother and B were going to work for NATO at the  airport  when
         neither the appellant nor his mother had at the time been aware  of
         this; (or, for that  matter,  the  Taliban,  who  it  appears  were
         unaware of any link between the appellant's brother and his  cousin
         when they approached him in July 2015).

     26. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the judge failed to
         appreciate the appellant had stated in his asylum interview that  B
         worked with the Americans as an interpreter at  [the]  airport.  At
         questions 73 and 74 of the asylum  interview,  the  appellant  does
         state that B works with the Americans as an interpreter  'or  maybe
         other jobs for them'. 'I don't know  personally  I  have  not  been
         there. He has been working there for a long time, he is a  grown-up
         boy. Probably doing it for four years or more'.

     27. The question of whether B, or for  that  matter  A,  worked  as  an
         interpreter at the airport was entirely a matter for the  judge  to
         consider. The point, if one can put it that highly,  was  that  the
         appellant had identified early on that  his  cousin  worked  as  an
         interpreter, and therefore this was not a recent disclosure by  the
         appellant.

     28. The judge, it appears to me, in  circumstances  where  the  account
         appeared vague, was entitled to have  reservations  about  how  the
         appellant became aware that B worked as  an  interpreter.  She  has
         stated that he does not say how he  knows  this,  beyond  the  bare
         assertion in his most  recent  witness  statement  that  B  was  an
         interpreter for foreign soldiers in Afghanistan: 'He interprets for
         NATO. In Afghanistan if you work with foreign soldiers you  are  an
         enemy to the Taliban and so is your family'.

     29. The judge was entitled to assess the credibility of  this  account.
         She had the benefit of hearing from  the  appellant  directly.  She
         finds that the appellant had embellished his case in some respects.
         She makes the point that leaving home in a  special  car  may  have
         drawn  considerable  attention  to  B,  and  for  that  matter  the
         appellant's brother. She finds this curious bearing  in  mind  they
         were all living in close proximity, that it was claimed B had  been
         doing this for 4 years, and yet it never  came  to  light  what  he
         actually did until the letter from the Taliban in  September  2015.
         It is apparent that the judge was concerned about the  plausibility
         of the appellant's account, together with other inconsistencies.

     30. The second difficulty for the appellant is that the judge  goes  on
         to state that even if B and A were working for NATO at the airport,
         which she clearly doubts, she still finds there to be little  basis
         for the appellant's claim to be at risk upon return.

     31. The judge finds that the appellant was not subject to threats, that
         any general threat to members of the family had been  shown  to  be
         baseless and that no harm had come to any other family member.  She
         finds the letter produced at the time of his departure from  France
         (referred to as 'the Calais letter')  was  remarkably  accurate  in
         some respects, and while the letter does  record  reasons  for  the
         appellant leaving Afghanistan, it does not mention threats from the
         Taliban when describing the situation in Afghanistan.

     32. It appears to me that these  are  all  conclusions  the  judge  was
         entitled to reach for the reasons  she  gives.  The  judge  is  not
         required to give  reasons  for  her  reasons.  The  judge  had  the
         advantage of hearing from the appellant and  I  would  be  slow  to
         interfere with findings of fact unless there was good reason to  do
         so. I am not persuaded  in  the  instant  matter  that  those  good
         reasons exist.  (I  observe,  but  no  more,  that  when  asked  in
         interview whether or not the Taliban were interested in harming his
         family because of B's occupation, the appellant  replied:  'No  not
         because of B's job but because of the fact that  my  father  worked
         for [the President] and my brother himself  worked.  Probably  they
         think that  my  father  here  in  London  works  with  the  British
         government, that is why'.)

     33. The appellant's representative  further  advances  that  the  judge
         makes  no  allowance  whatsoever  for  the  appellant's   age   and
         vulnerability. I disagree. It is apparent from the  outset  of  the
         determination that the judge has in mind the  appellant's  age  and
         the distressing events leading up  to  the  appellant's  claim  for
         asylum. She made reasonable adjustments and sensitively handled the
         appeal in terms of evidence. The judge has  appropriately  followed
         Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of  2010:  Child,  vulnerable
         adult and sensitive appellant guidance and the principles ensconced
         in AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,
         [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.

     34. The judge was fully aware that the appellant was a  child  when  he
         arrived in the UK and she states in terms that  she  'assesses  and
         evaluates his evidence with his level of maturity in mind'. She was
         also aware of his health  issues  and  recognises  the  appellant's
         vulnerability  throughout  the  determination.  Having   read   the
         decision, in my view there is nothing in this point.

         3.   Error in evaluation of evidence considering risk on return

     35. I remind myself that permission to appeal to  this  Upper  Tribunal
         may only be granted in relation to an arguable error  of  law,  and
         not simply in relation to a disagreement over findings of fact.

     36. The  appellant's  representative  asserts  that  in  assessing  the
         appellant's credibility, the judge raises  plausibility  issues  in
         relation to the actions, or inactions, of the  Taliban  in  certain
         scenarios and thus falls into error by basing  her  conclusions  on
         what the reasonable persecutor would do and places undue weight  on
         the plausibility of the actions of others.

     37. I disagree. The judge is not basing her  conclusions  on  what  the
         reasonable  persecutor  would  do,  rather  she   is   basing   her
         conclusions on the evidence that  was  presented  to  her.  She  is
         entitled to take a view about that evidence. It was open to her  to
         find that the appellant was not at risk because there had  been  no
         past persecution and it was  not  accepted  that  his  brother  and
         cousin  were  interpreters  for  the  American  forces.  While  the
         representative may disagree with the reasons that she gives,  I  do
         not find them to be in error of law.

     38. For example, the representative is  correct  to  suggest  that  the
         reasoning the judge gives  included  that  the  appellant  was  not
         subject to threats. That was his evidence. The judge has  correctly
         identified that the  appellant  stated  he  cannot  return  to  his
         province because members of the Taliban who threatened his  brother
         may also threaten him. I do not read anything into the  underlining
         of the word 'may' other than the judge  was  emphasising  that  the
         appellant was not making a definitive statement. The judge goes  on
         to develop other reasons why she does not consider the appellant to
         have been threatened or to be at risk from the  Taliban.  That  was
         the test she was considering, and this was but  one  ingredient  in
         the overall case.

     39. Nor can I say that the judge has  in  some  way  strayed  from  the
         question that the court was dealing with. She deals with the  risk.
         She deals with it adequately. She gives her reasons. The fact  that
         another  judge  may  have  taken  a  different  view  or  that  the
         representative may disagree with those reasons is not a ground  for
         overturning this decision unless more can be shown.  I  reject  the
         suggestion that the judge has not taken into  account  the  country
         background evidence. Within the body of her decision  she  includes
         some of the  country  policy  and  information  notes  and  country
         guidance she found to be relevant.  The  judge  was  aware  of  the
         background evidence.

     40. The judge, applying the appropriate  standard,  was  not  satisfied
         that the appellant was a family member of an interpreter, nor  that
         the appellant's family worked with foreign troops. To  that  extent
         the objective evidence that the appellant is said to  rely  on  has
         little application.

         Conclusion

     41. I am less than persuaded that  any  of  these  points  have  merit.
         Looking at all three grounds cumulatively, I cannot see  that  they
         reveal a material error of law. I am not  prepared  to  assume  the
         judge made a material error just because every factual  finding  is
         not fully set out.

     42. In  my  view,  the  judge  has  made  adequate  findings  of  fact,
         adequately applied the law, and adequately provided her reasons.

     43. In the circumstances, the decision must stand.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  in  Hatton  Cross,  London
promulgated on 17 April 2019 under reference PA/01418/2019 is upheld.

The anonymity direction made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  preserved  in
this appeal.


Signed   [pic]    Date 24 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams

