
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01387/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 21 October 2016                 |On 03 January 2017                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               SHAFIQUOLLA [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford (counsel) instructed by J D Spicer
                    Zeb, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.   This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Maxwell promulgated on 9 September 2016, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.   The Appellant's date of  birth  is  disputed,  but  is  recorded  as  8
October 1991. He is a national of Afghanistan.

4.   On 15 September2015 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

5.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Maxwell ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6.   Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 29  September  2016  Judge  Grant-
Hutchison gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.  It is arguable that the  Judge  has  misdirected  himself  (a)  by
    failing to give any reasons in relation to the expert report of Dr Atul
    Khanna (b) by finding that Dr Halari's  report  was  prepared  "without
    the benefit of the appellant's medical  notes"  and  that  his  medical
    records have also "not been disclosed to either the respondent or  this
    tribunal" when Dr Halari had evidence from the appellant's Doctor  that
    the appellant had PTSD and that such medical notes as there were in the
    appellant's possession had been submitted as  part  of  the  appellants
    bundle; (c) in relying on a photograph  taken  prior  to  2010  of  the
    appellant to evaluate the appellant's age without taking  into  account
    all the evidence. As a result, this could make a material difference to
    the credibility of the appellant  and  a  material  difference  to  the
    outcome."

7.   This case called before me in the Upper Tribunal on  28  October  2016.
After hearing submissions, the hearing was continued, effectively  on  joint
motion, with the following directions.

    "1.  The appellant is to consider lodging a statement of evidence  from
    Ms Sanders providing her recollection of the production  of  an  expert
    report from Dr Khanna at the hearing on 29th  February  2016,  and  the
    evidence and submissions relating to that report at the hearing  on  18
    August 2016.

    2.   If the appellant decides to lodge such a statement of evidence  it
    must be intimated to the respondent and lodged with the Upper  Tribunal
    within 21 days of service of these directions.

    3.   If the  appellant  decides  not  to  lodge  such  a  statement  of
    evidence, he must advise the Upper Tribunal and the respondent that  he
    will not be relying on such a statement of evidence within 21  days  of
    service of these directions.

    4.   Thereafter this case should  be  relisted  for  an  error  of  law
    hearing with a time estimate of one hour."



The Hearing

8.   (a) Ms Sanders provided a statement of evidence. Out of  courtesy,  she
was present and was willing to give evidence, but parties'  agents  declared
at the outset that neither side had  any  questions  for  her.  The  witness
statements provided both by  Ms  Sanders  and  her  instructing  agents  are
inconclusive. Ms Sanders sets out her memory of production of a report  from
Dr Khanna, but expresses a realistic  reluctance  to  place  unquestioningly
reliance on that memory.  Ms Sander's instructing solicitor candidly  states
that Dr Khanna's report was neither filed nor served

(b)  Counsel for the appellant told me  that  he  was  keen  to  proceed  by
making submissions in relation to the second and fifth  grounds  of  appeal.
He formally adopted the grounds of appeal in their  entirety,  but  told  me
that the focus in this  case  would  be  on  the  Judge's  treatment  of  Dr
Halari's report between [30] and [34] of the decision.

(c)  Mr Gaisford reminded me that there is a letter from West  Hertfordshire
hospitals (in the appellant's bundle,  lodged  with  the  First-tier)  which
confirms the appellant was diagnosed with  post-traumatic  stress  disorder.
He told me that even though that clear diagnosis was before  the  Judge,  no
reference was made to the letter contained the diagnosis  in  the  decision,
and, at [32] the Judge is critical of Dr Halari for recording that there  is
an existing diagnosis of  PTSD.  In  the  light  of  the  letter  from  West
Hertfordshire hospitals recording that diagnosis, I was told  that  the  was
no foundation for the Judge's criticism

(d)  I was told that in the first sentence of [32]  the  Judge  acknowledges
that Dr Halari is an expert, but the Judge then goes  on  to  attach  little
weight to a report containing her expert opinion. Counsel told me  that  the
Judge gave inadequate reasons for failing to attach  weight  to  the  expert
report. I was told that the decision contains errors of fact, and  that  the
combination of the Judge's refusal to  place  weight  on  an  expert  report
which complied with the Istanbul protocol together with the  Judge's  errors
of fact amount of a material error of law.  Counsel  asked  me  to  set  the
decision aside and to remit this case  to  the  First-tier  tribunal  to  be
determined of new.

9.   Mr Nath, for the respondent, focused on [32] to [36]  of  the  decision
and told me that the decision does not contain errors of  law,  material  or
otherwise. He told me that the  Judge  carefully  considered  the  available
medical evidence and then, after considering every  source  of  evidence  in
the round, found that, for the reasons set out at [35] and  [36],  he  could
not rely on the conclusions of Dr Halari. He asked me to dismiss the  appeal
and allow the decision to stand.

10.  Both parties representatives agreed that I should take as  my  starting
point the Judge's acknowledgement in the first sentence of [32] that

    "Dr Halari is an expert in her field ..."

That I should  then  consider  the  terms  of  her  report,  and  thereafter
consider whether the final sentence of [43 (iii)] is a conclusion which  the
Judge could reasonably reach.

Analysis

11.  Dr Halari's is  now  reproduced  between  pages  158  and  200  of  the
appellants bundle of documents, prepared  for  the  hearing  on  28  October
2016. Dr Halari provides details of her  qualifications  and  experience  in
appendix 1 to the report. There is no challenge to the Judge's finding  that
Dr Halari is an expert in her field. Dr  Halari  sets  out  the  information
that she  had  access  to,  together  with  the  detailed  instructions  she
received, before clarifying the investigation of  the  facts  that  she  has
carried out and identifying the facts that she has assumed. Dr  Halari  then
sets out in chronological order  the  background  history  provided  by  the
appellant.

12.  At paragraph 30 of her report, Dr Halari correctly sets  out  that  the
appellant has a diagnosis of post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and  provides
details  of  his  oral  medication,  all  of  which  is  confirmed  by   the
documentary evidence produced by the appellant's solicitors.

13.  Dr  Halari  then  records  and  considers  the  account  given  by  the
appellant, both of his asylum claim and  the  circumstances  that  he  finds
himself in, before embarking  on  a  psychological  examination.  There,  Dr
Halari provides detailed clinical examination of the appellant  relying  not
just on what she was told by the appellant, but  also  her  observations  of
the appellant. Dr Halari then refers to the Impact  of  Events  Scale  (IES)
and Creamer, Bell and Fallia (2003)  before  considering  mood,  memory  and
cognitive assessment.

14.  From paragraph 111 of her report Dr Halari  provides  has  opinion.  In
the first sentence of paragraph 130 of her report, she says

    "In my opinion feigning of symptoms is unlikely."

In the first sentence of paragraph 140 of her report (and again  at  152  to
160) she delivers an unambiguous opinion that the appellant is  at  risk  of
suicide.

15.  Dr Halari summarises her conclusions between paragraphs 175 and 177  of
her report. The final sentence of paragraph 175 says

    "There is no evidence of malingering"

16.  At [43(iii)] of his decision, the Judge gives very little weight to  Dr
Halari's report because he believed that there are  inconsistencies  in  the
account given by the appellant  about  the  state  of  his  health  and  the
chronology of his claim in his asylum interview and  in  the  interview  for
his age assessment. At [43(iv)]  the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  is
feigning his symptoms. No specific finding is made about whether or not  the
appellant suffers from PTSD.

17.  In SM (Iran) v SSHD (2010) EWCA Civ 371  the  Immigration  Judge  found
that the Appellant's evidence was not  credible,  but  made  no  finding  in
respect of her claim to have PTSD.  The Court of Appeal said that whilst  it
may be difficult to postulate that all the unsatisfactory  elements  of  the
Appellant's evidence might be explained by a  PTSD  diagnosis,  it  was  not
possible to know what the Tribunal's approach to  the  evidence  might  have
been had it  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  PTSD.   The  claimant  was
entitled to a clear decision on whether she had PTSD and  what  effect  that
disorder had on her evidence.

18.  If the finding at [43(iii) &  (iv)]  amounts  to  a  finding  that  the
appellant does not suffer from PTSD, the Judge gives inadequate reasons  for
reaching that conclusion. In any event the Judge  gives  inadequate  reasons
for finding that the appellant's performance at  the  conclusion  of  asylum
interview and  in  the  interview  to  assess  his  age  provide  sufficient
material for effectively  rejecting  the  detailed  and  carefully  reasoned
psychological assessment from an expert in the field.

19.  In Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ 362 the Court  of  Appeal
said that whilst  the  factuality  of  a  claimant's  account  might  be  so
controverted by the Tribunal's own findings as to undermine the  psychiatric
evidence, care was required where  the  factual  basis  of  the  psychiatric
findings was sought to be undermined by suggesting that  the  claimants  had
been exaggerating their symptoms.  That was in the first instance  a  matter
for the experts themselves, a fundamental aspect of whose expertise was  the
evaluation of the patients' accounts  of  their  symptoms.  Accordingly  the
Tribunal could modify or disregard that evaluation only if it had  good  and
objective reasoning for discounting it.

20.  In R (on the application of AM), Rix LJ said

    "If an independent expert's findings, expert opinion, and honest belief
    (no one suggested that her belief was other  than  honest)  are  to  be
    refused the status of independent evidence because, as must  inevitably
    happen, to some extent the expert  starts  with  an  account  from  her
    client and patient, then practically all meaning would  be  taken  from
    the clearly important policy that, in the absence of  very  exceptional
    circumstances suggesting otherwise,  independent  evidence  of  torture
    makes the  victim  unsuitable  for  detention.  That  conclusion  is  a
    fortiori where the independent expert is applying  the  internationally
    recognised  Istanbul  Protocol  designed  for  the  reporting  on   and
    assessment of signs of torture. A requirement of "evidence" is not  the
    same as a requirement of  "proof",  conclusive  or  otherwise.  Whether
    evidence amounts to proof, on any particular standards (and the  burden
    and standard of proof in asylum cases are not  high)  is  a  matter  of
    weight and assessment."

21.  In this case there was expert evidence that the appellant suffers  from
PTSD  and  is  tormented  by  suicidal  ideation.  The  expert's  report  is
consistent  with  other  medical  evidence  produced.  In  considering   the
appellant's answers about his state of health in his asylum  interview,  the
Judge did not take account of  the  potential  effects  of  the  appellant's
mental illness detailed in the expert's report. In essence,  the  Judge  has
assessed the appellant's credibility separately from  the  expert's  report,
and, despite acknowledging that the author  of  the  report  is  an  expert,
decided that he would not rely on the expert's opinion.

22.  I therefore find that the decision is tainted by a  material  error  of
law. The Judge's decision must be side aside. None of the  Judge's  findings
can stand.  I consider whether I can substitute my own  decision,  but  find
that the extent of fact finding required  means  that  a  fresh  hearing  is
necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

23.  Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b) the nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

24.  In this case I  have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

25.  I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Taylor  House
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge JJ Maxwell.

CONCLUSION

Decision

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by  material  errors
of law.

27.  I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 9 September  2016.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 23
December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
