
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/01768/2016
                                                               HU/03533/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th November 2016                |On 30th December 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                  Bebe [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Seelhoff, a solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant, who is aged 76 having been born  on
    1 January 1944. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  She appeals
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (FTT)  to  refuse  her
    asylum appeal  and  not  to  allow  her  application  for  humanitarian
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal did, however, allow her  appeal  on
    grounds of Article 8 and under the Immigration Rules.  As  Mr  Seelhoff
    has explained, there is no cross-appeal by the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department and the decision under  Article  8/the  Immigration
    Rules will stand  whatever  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  against  the
    decision on asylum /humanitarian protection grounds.

Background and overview

2.   The background to this case is that the  appellant's  son,  Hewad  [A],
    was granted asylum because it was recognised that he worked for the  US
    military as an interpreter.  It seems that at the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing on 3 August 2016  her  other  son,  who  is
    Mohammed Nabi [A], also  gave  evidence.   Hewad  [A]  had  been  given
    refugee status.  Furthermore, a concession had been made in the refusal
    letter that he did qualify for refugee status as it was  accepted  that
    he had worked for the US military as  an  interpreter.   There  was  no
    application before the First-tier Tribunal to withdraw that  concession
    and that is accepted by Ms Brocklesby-Weller.   In  the  light  of  the
    concession that had been made, it seems to this Tribunal  that  it  was
    open to the Immigration Judge to reject the claim by Hewad [A] that  he
    was an interpreter for  the  US  military  and  therefore  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection and/ or asylum in the UK.  Hewad [A]  has  been
    in the UK since 2012 and the appellant has been in the  UK  since  2008
    (see  chronology  at  the  front  of  the  appellant's   bundle).   The
    Immigration Judge ought to have started from the position that not only
    was Hewad [A] a person who had worked in the US military  but  that  he
    was not a person whose evidence the Immigration Judge ought  to  accept
    rather than reject (as he did in paragraph 79 of  his  decision).  Both
    Hewad and Nabi, his brother, who also gave evidence to the  Immigration
    Judge, were lawfully residing in the UK,  the  former  because  of  the
    grant of refugee status and the latter by virtue  of  being  a  British
    citizen.

Basis for the present appeal

3.   Permission to appeal the decision of Judge Buckland, promulgated on  15
    August 2016, following the hearing on 3 August, was given in this  case
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robertson on 3 October 2016.  Judge
    Robertson identified the concession that I have already referred to and
    pointed out that,  in  the  absence  of  a  clear  withdrawal  of  that
    concession, there was an arguable error of law in the decision  of  the
    FTT.  Judge Robertson, pointed out that in absence of the withdrawal of
    the concession by the respondent's representative at  the  hearing  the
    appellant's representative before the FTT the tribunal had  been  bound
    to accept the respondent's concession.  In  fact,  the  respondent  had
    allowed the appeal to proceed and had not applied for  an  adjournment,
    but had proceeded as though the  concession  had  not  been  made.  The
    Immigration Judge appears to have been unclear as to why the  appellant
    was in fact entitled to asylum or humanitarian  protection  in  the  UK
    given this misunderstanding of the background facts.  In the absence of
    an application for an  adjournment  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    Immigration Judge should have assumed the facts were accepted. In fact,
    what happened was that there was, it seems, a great  deal  of  evidence
    given at the  hearing  in  relation  to  the  authenticity  of  certain
    documents and the accuracy of the information  which  had  been  given.
    This went to the issue of whether  the  appellant's  son  had  in  fact
    worked for  the  US  military.  This  evidence  should  not  have  been
    controversial in the light of the concession.

Conclusion - whether there was an error of law

4.   I have concluded having heard oral argument by both  sides  that  there
    was a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    such  that  that  decision  in  relation  to  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection claims will need to be set  aside.   The  Immigration  Judge
    reached conclusions that were not open to him due, partly, to the  fact
    that Mr Das Gupta, who appeared for the respondent in the FTT,  treated
    several factual issues  as  being  controversial  when  they  had  been
    conceded. In particular, the status and credibility of the  appellant's
    son was treated as being in issue, when it ought not to have  been.  It
    was open to the respondent to apply to withdraw the concession but  the
    representative, Mr Das Gupta, had not sought to do so. Mrs  Brocklesby-
    Weller appeared to accept  that  because  of  the  Immigration  Judge's
    failure to recognise the limitations on the decision he had to make his
    decision to reject the  appellant's  claim  on  all  bases  other  than
    article 8 of the ECHR could not be allowed to stand. I  therefore  set-
    aside the Immigration  Judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds and to  dismiss  the  humanitarian  protection
    claim. There is no cross- appeal by the respondent against the decision
    to allow the appeal on the grounds that the appellant  qualified  under
    the Immigration Rules (with reference to her private life) or  that  in
    any event the appellant qualified by application of article  8  of  the
    ECHR directly. Both parties agreed that  it  was  appropriate  for  the
    Upper Tribunal to go  on  to  re-make  the  decision  and  revisit  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal to allow her asylum
    or  humanitarian  protection  claims.  Tied  up  with  those  was   the
    possibility that the respondent  should  have  allowed  her  to  remain
    because she would face inhuman  or  degrading  treatment,  contrary  to
    article 3 of the ECHR, if, aged 76, she were returned to Afghanistan.

5.   I will now re-make that decision having reconsidered the evidence  that
    was presented before the First-tier Tribunal, of which I  have  a  full
    note, taking full account  of  the  submissions  made  before  the  UT.
    First, I will summarise the submissions  made  before  the  UT  on  the
    substantive merits before I turn to that evidence.

Merits of the asylum and humanitarian protection claims

6.   It was argued on behalf of the  appellant  that,  given  her  age,  she
    would be  vulnerable  if  returned  to  Afghanistan,  a  country  which
    generates a large number of asylum seekers.  Although the appellant had
    only been in the UK continuously since 2008 her visits to the  UK  pre-
    date that. She would  find  it  very  difficult  to  settle  back  into
    Afghanistan.  Her son having been recognised as a refugee in 2014 had a
    close bond  with  his  mother  who  lived  with  him.  The  asylum  and
    humanitarian claims cross over into the  article  8  claim.  Her  claim
    should be approached  on  the  basis  that  if  she  were  returned  to
    Afghanistan she would be known to be a  member  of  the  family  of  an
    interpreter for the  US  military.  It  was  also  submitted  that  the
    appellant suffered from Alzheimer's disease and this would  affect  her
    ability to re-locate in Afghanistan. However, it was accepted  that  in
    practice the appellant would not be returning  to  Afghanistan  as  her
    appeal under the Rules/article 8 had been  allowed  and  there  was  no
    cross-appeal.

7.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller, maintained that the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    son had worked for the US military did not  automatically  qualify  the
    appellant for refugee status or humanitarian protection in the UK.  She
    maintained, but not particularly forcefully, that the appellant was not
    at risk on return. She stated that overall it was reasonable to  expect
    the appellant to return  to  Afghanistan,  although  in  practice  this
    seemed unlikely.  She  particularly  relied  on  paragraph  30  of  the
    respondent's  decision  which  identifies  the  lack  of  risk  to  the
    appellant in her local area.  There was only a  need  to  consider  the
    possibility of internal relocation if the appellant was found to be  at
    risk in her local area.

8.   Having  carefully  considered  the  arguments  for  both  sides  it  is
    necessary to consider whether the  appellant  qualifies  as  a  refugee
    /person in need of international protection before looking  at  whether
    there is an internal relocation alternative available to the  appellant
    to seeking international protection in the UK.

9.   As the respondent pointed out in her refusal, the  appellant  does  not
    have any profile and I find that the appellant has to go  further  than
    saying that she is a member of the family of a member  of  US  military
    personnel.  The appellant has not been in Afghanistan  since  2008  and
    between 2006 and 2008 resided in the UK. There is no evidence she would
    be recognised by the Taliban or  other  insurgent  groups  within  that
    country. Her son has been in the UK since  2012.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant felt safe to go to Kabul in 2008 suggests that  she  did  not
    have any fear of the Taliban at that time.  It  seems  that  there  are
    family members who can support the appellant if she  went  to  live  in
    Kabul and the appellant's age or poor state of health is not  itself  a
    reason why she would be targeted in Afghanistan because  of  her  son's
    past work for the US military. The appellant has not  established  that
    there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that she would be identified
    as a member of a particular social group and be subject to  persecution
    if she were returned to Afghanistan. There is insufficient evidence  to
    suggest that the whole of Afghanistan is subject to such indiscriminate
    violence so  as  to  place  the  country  within  article  15C  of  the
    Qualification Directive, although there may be some  areas  that  cross
    that threshold. There would appear to be no risk of serious harm to the
    appellant. Even if there were such a risk in the appellant's home area,
    there are safe parts that she could go to, including a  different  part
    of Kabul where she would not be recognised.   It  is  likely  that  the
    appellant would be given financial support available from  her  family,
    and could relocate if she feared being recognised in her home  area  of
    Kabul.


Notice of Decision

The appeal against the decision of the FTT  by  the  appellant  is  allowed.
That decision is set-aside. The Upper Tribunal  re-makes  that  decision  as
follows:

The respondent's decision to refuse  the  appellant's  asylum  claim/  human
rights claim on grounds other than article 8,  and  humanitarian  protection
claim in the UK is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 30/12/2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 30/12/2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
