
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01285/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 December 2016                  |On 19 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     b d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P J Lewis instructed by Theva Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity  direction  made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in its decision promulgated on 15 July 2016.

Background

 2. BD (hereafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born in
    1983.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  29  March  2010  as  the
    dependent of his wife who had leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  His
    leave was valid until 31 October 2010.  Thereafter, he overstayed.

 3. On 24 March 2015, the claimant claimed asylum.  He claimed that he  was
    at risk on return to Sri Lanka because of his association with a  Tamil
    who was involved with the LTTE.  The claimant did not assert he had any
    involvement personally with the LTTE and he is an ethnic Sinhalese.  He
    claimed that, nevertheless, since coming to the UK in 2010  his  family
    had been visited by the Sri Lankan authorities who were  expressing  an
    interest in him.  He claimed that, as a consequence, he was at risk  of
    persecution for a  Convention  reason  on  return.   In  addition,  the
    claimant claimed that he was at risk of suicide if he returned  to  Sri
    Lanka and so his return would breach Art 3 of the ECHR.

 4. On 4 September 2015, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claimant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Arts 3 and 8 of the
    ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The claimant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 February 2016, Judge Freer dismissed  the  claimant's
    appeal based upon asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.  However,
    he allowed the claimant's appeal under Art 3 of the ECHR on  the  basis
    that there was a real risk that he would commit suicide if returned  to
    Sri Lanka.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of State then sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the judge's decision to allow the appeal under  Art  3
    of the  ECHR.   On  15  March  2016,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Frankish) granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 7. The appeal initially came before me on 5 July 2016.

 8. Following argument at the  hearing  on  5  July  2016,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 15 July 2016, I concluded that the Secretary of  State's
    appeal should be allowed on the basis that  the  judge  had  materially
    erred in law in allowing the claimant's appeal under Art 3  based  upon
    impact on his mental health if returned to Sri Lanka.  The decision  in
    respect of Art 3 would need to be re-made.

 9. At that hearing, Mr Lewis who (then and now) represented the  appellant
    sought to also challenge on  behalf  of  the  appellant  Judge  Freer's
    decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.  No application had been made by the appellant for  permission
    to appeal Judge Freer's decision to dismiss his appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds. In the absence of an  application  for
    permission to appeal which had  been  granted,  I  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not challenge the judge's adverse  decision  on  asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds.

10. As a consequence, I directed that the appeal should be relisted  before
    me in order to remake the decision under Art 3.

11. Following my decision, the appellant lodged an out-of-time  application
    for permission to appeal against Judge Freer's decision to dismiss  the
    appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection  grounds.   Sitting  as  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, I dealt with that application on paper.   In
    a decision dated 17 November 2016, I extended time for that application
    and, on the merits, granted the appellant permission to appeal.

12. Thereafter, I directed that at the relisted hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal scheduled for 13  December  2016,  the  Upper  Tribunal  would
    consider the appellant's grounds challenging Judge Freer's decision  on
    the asylum claim.

13. At that hearing, Mr Richards accepted that Judge  Freer's  decision  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds involved an  error  of
    law and could not stand.  Both Mr Richards and Mr Lewis invited  me  to
    now remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  the  appeal
    could be reheard as a  whole.   Mr  Lewis  accepted  that  it  was  not
    possible to 'cherry pick' any of the judge's  findings  and  that  that
    hearing should be de novo.

Decision and Disposal

14. In the light of Mr Richard's concession, which  was  entirely  properly
    made on the basis of the appellant's grounds, I set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appellant's appeal on  asylum
    grounds as it involved the making of an error of law.

15. As a consequence, the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  must  be
    remade in respect of all the appellant's grounds of appeal  upon  which
    he relied before the FtT, namely asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights grounds.

16. As the hearing before me was, in fact, a continuation of the  error  of
    law hearing on 5 July 2016, it remains open to me to decide whether the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal or retained in the
    Upper Tribunal so that the decision can be remade here.

17. In the light of the parties' submissions, it is appropriate  that  this
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo  rehearing
    before a judge other than Judge Freer.


                                 Signed

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
