
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01330/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 14 April 2021                 |On 28 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     Y G
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. E. Rutherford, Counsel instructed on behalf of
the appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr. M. Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant, who claims to be a  national   of  Eritrea,  appeals
         with permission against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         (Judge  Athwal)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")   who
         dismissed her protection and human  rights  appeal  in  a  decision
         promulgated on the 7 September 2020.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 14 April 2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business which has been consented to and not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  The  advocates  attended  remotely
         via video as did the appellant so that she could listen and observe
         the hearing. There were no issues regarding sound, and no technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

Background:

      4. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle.



      5. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Eritrea born in  1995.  She
         entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 26  November  2018  and
         claimed asylum on the same  day,  on  the  basis  that  she  feared
         persecution as a result of imputed political opinion.

      6. The factual basis of her claim is that she  had  lived  in  Eritrea
         until her mother died at a time when she was four or five years  of
         age. She had no contact with the father who left her mother  before
         the appellant was born.

      7.  Her  maternal  aunt  assumed  parental  responsibility  after  her
         mother's death and took her  to  Sudan  in  2000  when  they  lived
         together until her aunt died in 2008.  The  appellant  remained  in
         Sudan and initially stayed with a friend of her aunts.

      8.  In 2011 she met a man (AA) who offered to enrol her into a  school
         and provide paid employment. She went with him and he raped her and
         forced her to live with him. She gave birth to his child in  August
         2013 and she continued to live with him for 5  to  6  years  during
         which time she was mistreated.

      9. In 2017 AA paid the appellant to leave his house with his  daughter
         because he did not want the authorities to discover that he had  an
         illegitimate child.

     10. The appellant returned to the home of her aunt's friend (S). S told
         her that she could not  remain  in  Sudan  because  she  was  there
         illegally but that she would take care of the appellant's daughter.
         S made arrangements for the appellant to leave Sudan. She  left  on
         27 March 2018 on a forged passport and travel  to  Turkey,  Greece,
         and Belgium before arriving in the UK on 26 November 2018.

     11. The appellant stated that she feared returned  to  Eritrea  because
         she would be subject to national service and arrested  because  she
         left the country illegally. She could not return to  Sudan  she  is
         not a national that country.

     12. The respondent refused her claim in  a  decision  letter  dated  28
         January 2020.

     13. In the decision, the respondent  undertook  an  assessment  of  the
         appellant's  claimed  nationality.  In  doing  so,  the  respondent
         assessed it alongside her current age and the claimed age of  5  on
         departure from Eritrea. The following matters were set out:

          1) it was noted that the screening  interview  was  conducted  in
             Arabic and Tigrinya however the substantive AI  was  conducted
             in  Amharic.  When  questioned  about  the  reasons  for   the
             interviews being conducted in different languages, she  stated
             "because I can express myself  better  in  Amharic"  (AR  55).
             However in the screening interview the appellant  stated  that
             her main language and dialect was Tigrinya. As she had  stated
             Tigrinya was her main language, it was reasonable to expect to
             express herself best in  this  language  and  across  all  the
             communications consistently. This internal inconsistency as to
             her main spoken language damaged her credibility.

          2) Furthermore, the screening  interview  in  Tigrinya  alongside
             Arabic was a brief interview which  required  basic  unlimited
             answers only. The appellant opted to conduct substantive AI in
             Amharic  which  is  a  longer  and  in-depth  interview  which
             required detailed responses.

          3) The respondent considered that the appellant had not  provided
             a reasonable explanation as how she learnt to speak Amharic at
             a native level when considering her own admission she lived in
             Eritrea and Sudan where Amharic is not a language  spoken.  As
             this was a core aspect of a claim, it is reasonable for her to
             explain why the language she is  able  to  speak  with  native
             fluency is one which is most commonly spoken Ethiopia. Failure
             to do so damaged her credibility.

          4) The  respondent  placed  weight  upon  the  language  analysis
             interview which took place on 18 December 2019. The  appellant
             claimed to come from Enda Gergis and  be  a  national  Eritrea
             however in the language analysis interview she claimed to have
             come from Asmara in Eritrea. This inconsistency which  related
             to a basic background question of her hometown highly  damaged
             her credibility.

          5) The LAR summarised her fluency in Amharic at  a  native  level
             (2.1) and further  concluded,  with  a  very  high  degree  of
             certainty,  that  a  spoken  language  of  Amharic   displayed
             phonological, grammatical,  and  lexical  features  consistent
             with the expected language use  amongst  speakers  of  Amharic
             with a background in or around Addis Ababa in  Ethiopia  (1.1,
             1.3, 2.2 - 2.4).

          6) When the findings were provided  to  the  appellant  with  the
             opportunity to clarify  or  provide  representations  for  the
             inconsistency, no response was provided.

          7) the respondent considered that even if it were  accepted  that
             she had acquired the ability to speak Amharic from her  aunt's
             friend  and  her  children  (AI  51;  paragraph  34)  it   was
             considered that her ability to speak Amharic would  not  carry
             features which are consistent with a native or fluent level of
             speech.

          8) The respondent concluded that  the  language  analysis  report
             "strongly  supported  the  conclusion  that   her   linguistic
             abilities were consistent with those in  a  specific  part  of
             Ethiopia, which is considered to  be  externally  inconsistent
             with your claimed nationality of Eritrea."

          9) The appellant denied  visiting  or  living  in  Ethiopia  when
             questioned  about  where  she  learnt  Amharic,  the  official
             language of Ethiopia, and in which neither countries that  she
             claimed to have lived in uses, she stated that  in  Sudan  her
             aunt's friend and her children spoke Amharic and this was  the
             source of her  learning  the  language.  However  it  was  not
             considered plausible for her to acquire native  fluency  to  a
             level where, by her own account she can express herself better
             than her first language by spending time with only one  family
             who spoke the language.

         10) Th respondent took into account that in certain regions within
             Eritrea,  the  elder  generation  can  speak  Amharic  by  the
             consequence of the  Ethiopian  occupation  in  1961  to  1991.
             However, the appellant stated that her parents spoke  Tigrinya
             and therefore this further does not bear an explanation as  to
             fluency  in  Amharic  in  her  individual  circumstances.  The
             inconsistencies relating to her  spoken  languages  damage  to
             credibility.

         11) In the substantive AI, she was  tested  on  her  knowledge  of
             basic words and phrases in Tigrinya. She correctly  cited  the
             words bread, potato, and breakfast.  However  were  unable  to
             cite "happy birthday" accurately.

         12) In the round it was considered that although she was  able  to
             accurately  cite  basic  words  but  not  a  basic  phrase  in
             Tigrinya, and in light of the other evidence  in  relation  to
             her nationality, little weight was attached to  her  correctly
             identified words to support a nationality claim.

         13) In  the  substantive  interview  she  was  questioned  on  her
             knowledge  and  awareness  of  Enda  Gergis  and  Eritrea  and
             consideration was given to her age at the time she claimed  to
             have left Eritrea (aged five).

         14) When questioned about the surrounding villages to Enda  Gergis
             she  identified  "Adi  Qualla"  while  objective   information
             confirms the existence of  this  town,  objective  information
             could not confirm if this was the  surrounding  town  of  Enda
             Ceorgis. Further objective evidence could not confirm with her
             other response of "Stinater" was another surrounding  village.
             However the appellant was unable to cite any  landmarks,  main
             roads, or markets in or near the village. She stated  she  was
             unable to recall information in relation to villages she  left
             Eritrea when she was young. Notwithstanding this,  she  stated
             that her aunt spoke to her about the culture  and  history  of
             Eritrea and in particular about the  food,  sea,  rivers,  and
             mountains  (AI   25).  The  substantive  interview   therefore
             provided the appellant with  the  opportunity  to  recall  the
             information she claimed to  possess  and  when  questioned  on
             these rivers and mountain she stated "I do  not  remember"  to
             both subject matters. The internal inconsistency  about  being
             unable to recall any information about a  village  in  Eritrea
             damaged the credibility of her claim.

         15) The appellant was also questioned on the awareness of  Eritrea
             cuisine in the interview and she provided some responses which
             were  considered  externally  consistent  with  the  objective
             evidence which confirmed that foods comprise the national  and
             traditional foods of Eritrea. However it was  noted  that  the
             cuisine in Eritrea and Ethiopia were very similar in that  the
             dishes identified were widely popular dishes and Ethiopian  as
             well and  recognises  national  decision  of  both  countries.
             Therefore it is considered that  she  had  not  satisfactorily
             provided cuisine which is exclusive to Eritrea.  Thus  it  did
             not provide strong evidence for being from Eritrea.

         16) When asked about the traditional coffee ceremony performed  in
             Eritrea, the description was reasonably accurate with external
             evidence. However again  the  external  evidence  confirm  the
             coffee ceremony in Ethiopia is  very  similar  to  the  coffee
             ceremony Eritrea. This did  not  provide  strong  evidence  of
             being from Eritrea.

         17) In light of the above, the respondent attached  little  weight
             to her knowledge of the cuisine and coffee ceremony in Eritrea
             to support her claim nationality.

         18) The appellant was unable to explain the  route  that  she  and
             aunt took in order to exit Eritrea, but she did state that she
             passed cassava (Kassala) in Sudan which is a town  in  eastern
             Sudan but in the absence of any further details, little weight
             was attached to her account of her route to Sudan.

         19)  In  the  substantive  interview  she  was   asked   questions
             concerning general information of  Eritrea  she  was  able  to
             identify  the  general  country  information   including   the
             national  emblem,  description  of  the  flag,   the   current
             president, and the national holidays (paragraphs 48-49 of  the
             decision letter )  the  currency  and  denominations  used  in
             Eritrea. She was able to describe with reasonable accuracy the
             regions in Eritrea and the police uniform.

         20) However she was unable to name any mobile network providers in
             Eritrea, any TV channels and Eritrea however the age when  she
             claimed to have left Eritrea had been noted.

         21) The respondent concluded that whilst she  could  cite  with  a
             reasonable degree of accuracy the  general  information  about
             Eritrea,  she  was  unable  to  recall  any  of  the  specific
             background information in relation to villages and  landmarks.
             When asked how she learned the general country information  as
             she was of a  young  age  when  leaving  Eritrea,  she  stated
             "because my aunt told me" (62). However it is  not  reasonable
             to expect  her  aunt  to  strictly  speak  about  the  general
             information about Eritrea such as the regions of the  country,
             and not the customs and locality she lived in  for  30  to  35
             years (question 66).

         22) It was noted that the appellant stated her aunt told her about
             some rivers and mountains in Eritrea but she was  unable  then
             to name any  of  them.  Furthermore  the  general  information
             accurately answered  were  available  in  the  public  domain,
             therefore the weight attached was less.

         23) The appellant stated that the reason for exiting  Eritrea  was
             because around age 30 to 35 at the  time  of  the  X  she  was
             separated from her husband and feared national  service.  When
             set against the objective evidence, it was not clear  how  the
             appellant's aunt avoided national service until the age of  30
             - 35 and it was unclear what specifically prompted her aunt to
             leave Eritrea at that age is  the  fear  of  national  service
             would have persisted prior to her exit. (This was not  put  to
             her in the asylum interview).

         24) Following her departure Eritrea, she claimed to have lived  in
             Sudan from 2000 to 2018. She correctly identified the currency
             used but did not accurately cite  the  denominations  for  the
             banknotes. The description given was inaccurate  and  was  not
             consistent with the background evidence cited at paragraph  55
             of the decision letter.

         25) When asked about locality questions she was unable to name any
             of the hospitals, local schools, colleges or  universities  or
             major roads in or around Bash Dar nor  the  national  holidays
             celebrated.

         26) She was provided with the opportunity to name some  mountains,
             rivers or landmarks in or  near  her  village  but  she  said,
             "there are no mountains and rivers", there is nothing".

         27) The respondent considered that in her own account she  claimed
             to have lived in Sudan for 18 years and it was  reasonable  to
             expect to provide a sufficiently detailed account of the  area
             or where she lived over the significant period  of  time.  She
             claimed she was living with her aunt and friend AA during  her
             residence and it was reasonable for to require some  knowledge
             and awareness of her surroundings when travelling.

         28) The appellant was also unable to confirm the  address  of  her
             aunt's friend she claimed  to  have  left  her  daughter  with
             stating "I just know my area we live in Bash dar".

         29) As to her status, she said that her aunt had held  a  form  of
             temporary legal status in Sudan which she renewed  every  five
             months. However the appellant did not hold any  legal  status.
             It is considered that as her aunt apply  for   and  secured  a
             form of legal status in Sudan, it was reasonable to expect her
             aunt to also  apply  for  a  form  of  legal  status  for  the
             appellant given the light of the lengthy  duration  she  lived
             there.

         30)  In  light  of  the  above,  the  respondent  considered   the
             appellant's lack of ability to recall information about Sudan,
             despite living in the  country  for  18  years  including  her
             earlier mature years significantly damaged the credibility  of
             her overall account and claim.

         31) In conclusion, taking into account all the  evidence  and  the
             age on departure and current age, it was not accepted that the
             appellant was  from  Eritrea,  the  language  analysis  report
             strongly stated that a linguistic  background  was  Ethiopian.
             The appellant was unable to  provide  a  credible  account  of
             living  in  Eritrea,  and  in  Sudan  and  her  knowledge  and
             awareness Eritrea was confined to  general  information  about
             the country which was available in the public domain. She  was
             unable to recall or cite  any  specific  information  about  a
             village in its locality. Therefore her claim to be national of
             Eritrea was rejected in its entirety and it was believed  that
             she was a national of Ethiopia.

     14. The respondent considered that her claim to fear  national  service
         was related to her claim to be a national of Eritrea which had been
         rejected. Therefore it was not accepted that she would  be  subject
         to conscription to national service.

     15. In addition, in determining  the  claim,  consideration  was  given
         Section 8 of the 2004 Act noting that before arrival she  travelled
         to Belgium which is considered a safe country and that  she  failed
         to take advantage of a reasonable opportunity to make a human right
         to assign claim in a safe country.

     16. At paragraphs 72 - 82 the respondent set out reasons as to why  the
         appellant could return to Ethiopia in safety.

     17. The remainder of the decision letter considered her Article 8 claim
         at paragraphs [89 - 115].

     18. The appellant appealed that decision to the FtT (Judge  Athwal)  on
         the 21 August 2021. In a decision promulgated on 7  September  2020
         the judge dismissed her appeal. The issue before the  FtTJ  related
         to the appellant's claimed nationality.

     19. At paragraphs [38]-42] the judge set out her factual  findings  and
         analysis  of  the  evidence  and  set  out  in  some   detail   the
         contradictory and inconsistent  evidence  given  by  the  appellant
         concerning the circumstances that she  claimed  occurred  in  Sudan
         which had led her to leaving that country, including harm that  she
         said had occurred to her, her lack of  knowledge  of  that  country
         despite having lived there since she was five  years  of  age,  the
         inconsistency in her evidence as to what family she had in  Eritrea
         and inconsistent  evidence  concerning  the  nature  of  her  first
         language. The judge had in addition  evidence  in  the  form  of  a
         language assessment report from Sprakab ("LAR")  and  the  language
         analysis was that the appellant spoke Amharic  on  a  native  level
         which displayed features  consistent  with  expected  language  use
         among speakers Amharic with a background  in  Ethiopia.  The  judge
         also had an expert report from a country expert and lecturer in law
         which sought to provide a criticism of the  linguistic  report  and
         analysis and having undertaken an  interview  with  her  considered
         that the appellant's claim to be an Eritrean national was plausible
         (see paragraph 32 of that report).

     20. In the judge's analysis, she considered that the linguistic  report
         (LAR) should be given more weight  than  that  of  the  appellant's
         expert report and at [39] gave reasons for reaching that conclusion
         and that the expert's conclusion that the LAR was "questionable and
         misleading" and that this was using  his  personal  experience  and
         that this was outside his remit as an expert witness and thus   the
         FtTJ attached little weight to his evidence.

     21. The judge considered the  evidence  "in  the  round"  and  directed
         herself that fact the appellant had not been truthful  about  other
         events did not mean that she had lied  about  her  nationality  but
         having carefully considered the evidence  "and  in  particular  her
         lack of knowledge about Sudan, her contradictory accounts about key
         events, her changing explanation about what her first language  and
         the LAR, even on the lower standard of proof, I  am  not  satisfied
         that the appellant is an Eritrean national." The  judge  found  the
         appellant to be a national of Ethiopia.

     22. Permission to appeal was sought and permission was refused by Upper
         Tribunal Judge Martin but on renewal was granted by UTJ Blundell on
         5 November 2020 for the following reasons:

             "the grounds of appeal are discursive and frequently expressed
             in the language of disagreement rather than legal  error.  UTJ
             Martin, who refused the application for permission to  appeal,
             concluded that the grounds were indeed  nothing  more  than  a
             disagreement. I respectfully take the contrary view  and  have
             concluded that the grounds are just arguable.

             It is arguable, in particular, that the  judge's  analysis  at
             [39] represented a legally inadequate basis for rejecting  the
             report of the expert.

             Even if he strayed outside his  remit  in  commenting  on  the
             linguistic analysis conducted by Sprakab, the fact is that  he
             also  interviewed  the  appellant  himself  and  expressed  an
             opinion about the appellant's nationality based upon what  she
             said in that interview. It might properly be said that Dr Allo
             was well placed to do so. The judge did not mention or analyse
             what he said in that regard, which arguably remained  relevant
             even if he had overstretched himself in other respects.

             Permission is according granted on the first  numbered  ground
             of appeal. The second  from  ground  of  appeal  is  obviously
             wrong, as the judge said, and was also stated by  UTJ  Martin,
             there is no risk of the appellant been returned Eritrea for as
             long as it is concluded that she is not from that country."



The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     23. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 5 November 2020, inter alia, indicating  that  it
         was provisionally of the view that the error of law issue could  be
         determined without a face-to-face hearing and that this could  take
         place via Skype. Both parties have indicated that they were content
         for the hearing to proceed by this method. Therefore, the  Tribunal
         listed the hearing to enable oral submissions to be given  by  each
         of the parties.

     24.  I  am  grateful  for  their  assistance  and  their   clear   oral
         submissions.

The submissions:

     25. Ms Rutherford, of Counsel, appeared on behalf of the appellant  and
         relied upon the written grounds of appeal.

     26. The written grounds submit that the FtTJ erred in law at  paragraph
         [39] by rejecting the expert report of solely on the basis that  he
         was not a linguistic expert despite his detailed country report  on
         his personal experiences.

     27. It is submitted that at paragraph 22  of  the  report  he  provided
         substantive details as  to  why  he  concluded  that  the  language
         analysis in the sprakab report was misleading and questionable  and
         concluded that the Amharic dialect spoken in Addis  Ababa  was  the
         dialect spoken by the majority of apparent speakers in and  outside
         Ethiopian.

     28. The expert also set out at paragraphs  [23  -  26]  of  the  report
         further information which had been disregarded by the judge  solely
         on the basis that he was not a linguistic expert.

     29. At paragraph 26 of the report, he stated  the  appellant  spoke  to
         Tigrinya when she was still living in Eritrea and later on she  was
         speaking Amharic as she was living with a friend of  her  aunt  and
         her family spoke Amharic following the death of a mother and  aunt.
         The judge rejected the findings of the expert without giving it due
         consideration in particular other relevant paragraphs that were  at
         paragraph 28-32 of the report.

     30. The conclusions of the expert at paragraphs 77 to 82 were  rejected
         again on the basis that he was not a language linguistic expert.

     31. Thus it was submitted that the judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
         appellant was an Ethiopian national solely on the  basis  that  she
         was able to express herself well in Amharic, a language  she  spoke
         with the people she grew up with when living in Sudan.

     32. It is further submitted in the written grounds that  there  was  no
         material evidence to find the appellant to be an Ethiopian national
         and  that  the  judge  did  not  give  the   appellant's   evidence
         "sufficient weight" and this amounted to an error of law. The judge
         should have accepted the  explanations  which  the  appellant  gave
         regarding her nationality.

     33. In her oral submissions, Ms  Rutherford  submitted  that  the  FtTJ
         dealt with the expert report at paragraph 39  in  brief  terms  and
         rejected  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  in   Eritrean
         national. She submitted that the judge did so based on the language
         report.

     34. Ms Rutherford accepted that the expert had "overstretched  himself"
         but looking at the report as a whole she submitted there were other
         aspects as to why he came to the conclusion that she was an Eritrea
         national.

     35. Ms Rutherford submitted that the expert had had a conversation with
         the appellant and gave evidence as to her language ability and  why
         she would speak Amharic as her first language. She  also  submitted
         that at paragraph 21 - 30 the expert put that in a country context.

     36. Looking at paragraph [31]  she  submitted  that  the  expert  asked
         questions to test her knowledge of  Eritrea  and  her  culture  and
         connections and commented on her inability  to  identify  roads  et
         cetera did so in a cultural context.

     37. Ms Rutherford submitted there was  more  to  the  report  that  the
         language. Furthermore he was from Ethiopia. The judge rejected  the
         report by giving inadequate reasons and needed to  consider  it  in
         the context and that this was other evidence that the appellant was
         from Eritrea rather than an Ethiopian national.

     38. Thus the judge ignored the  significance  of  the  report  and  the
         conclusion that she was a citizen of Ethiopia rather  than  Eritrea
         was not one that was sufficiently reasoned.

     39. There was a Rule 24 response issued on  behalf  of  the  respondent
         dated 1 December 2020.

     40. The submissions made in the written grounds can  be  summarised  as
         follows:

          1) as noted by the UTJ, the grounds of appeal are "discursive and
             frequent expressed in the language of disagreement rather than
             legal error".

          2) The judge properly considered all of the evidence in the round
             (paragraph 38 and 42, before making adequately recent findings
             of fact on the appellant's nationality (38 - 42).

          3) In reaching his finding that the appellant had not established
             that she was in Eritrea national (42),  the  judge  considered
             the  appellant's  account  and  made  a  number   of   adverse
             credibility findings  at  paragraphs  38  -  40.  The  grounds
             challenge paragraph 39 but not paragraphs 38 or 40.  There  is
             no  challenge  to  the  judge's  factual  findings  that   the
             appellant had changed her account on several material  issues,
             with the result that he did not find  her  to  be  a  credible
             witness (paragraph 38).

          4) The judge made allowance for the  appellant's  claim  to  have
             left Eritrea when she was five years old and that she did  not
             know many geographical details about Eritrea  (paragraph  41).
             The judge did not find that the  appellant  was  an  Ethiopian
             national solely on the basis that she chose to be  interviewed
             in Amharic and not being interviewed in Tigrinya. The  judge's
             consideration of the appellant's nationality is at  paragraphs
             [38 - 42].

          5) The  judge  was  aware  that  at  a  screening  interview  the
             appellant  claimed  that  her  first  language  was   Tigrinya
             (paragraph 40)

          6) The judge was aware of the appellant's claim to have learnt to
             speak Amharic from her aunt and her aunt's friend  during  the
             formative year.

          7) As to the report of the expert, he accepted in his report that
             he was not a linguist and did not have any technical  training
             in linguistic analysis (paragraph 2125 of the report). However
             he went on to engage in linguistic analysis (22 - 24 and 26  -
             27 of his report.

          8) It is also of note that the section of the report  on  Amharic
             dialects (paragraph  21-22)  is  not  supported  by  footnoted
             sources, in contrast to other sections of the report.  Whereas
             the LAR , the result of cooperation between an analyst and two
             linguists,  as  stated  in  the  methodology,   assessed   the
             appellant's link with the background to be  Ethiopian  with  a
             "very high" degree of certainty and to  be  "unlikely"  to  be
             Eritrean or Sudanese.

          9) Thus it was open to the judge to give more weight to  the  LAR
             than the other report on the  key  issue  of  the  appellant's
             linguistic background [paragraph 39)

         10) The judge was aware of the expert's opinion that the  LAR  was
             "questionable and misleading" (see 39).

         11)  The  expert's  finding  at  [32]  of  the  report  that   the
             appellant's claim to be in Eritrea national is based  entirely
             on linguistic issues.

         12) In making a contrary finding on the  appellant's  nationality,
             the judge took into account a lack of knowledge  about  Sudan,
             changing evidence on a number of material issues and also  the
             language analysis report.

         13) There was no error of law and the decision should be upheld.

     41. In his oral submissions Mr Diwnycz submitted that  he  relied  upon
         the written response summarised above. He  further  submitted  that
         this was a case where the expert had  overstretched  himself,  that
         the expert was not a linguist and could not give evidence about her
         language ability. He did  not  have  the  technical  expertise.  He
         invited the Tribunal to uphold the decision of the FtTJ.

Decision on error of law:

     42. This is a limited granted permission with permission  granted  only
         in relation to ground one. The thrust of the  grounds  advanced  on
         behalf of the appellant is that the FtTJ erred in law by  rejecting
         the expert report provided on behalf  of  the  appellant  and  that
         whilst he was not a linguistic expert at paragraph 22  he  provided
         substantive details as to why he concluded  the  language  analysis
         report was "misleading and questionable".

     43. The point pressed by Ms Rutherford  in  her  submissions  was  that
         there were other aspects in the report as to  why  he  reached  the
         conclusion that she  was  an  Eritrean  national  and  that  having
         undertaken an interview with her, he was able to consider her claim
         in the country context  between  paragraphs  21  and  30  and  also
         commented upon the knowledge that she had demonstrated and  further
         commented about her  inability  to  identify  or  provide  relevant
         knowledge in the light of her age. Thus the submission advanced  on
         behalf of the appellant is that there was more to the  report  than
         the issue of language.

     44. I have given careful consideration to those  submissions  and  have
         considered them in the light of  the  report  of  the  expert,  the
         language analysis report and the evidence that was before the  FtTJ
         alongside the factual findings that were made.

     45. Having done so I am satisfied that the grounds have  no  merit  and
         that the analysis of the report at [39], when seen in the light  of
         the contents of the report and the factual findings that were  made
         in  this  case  demonstrate  that  the  judge  reached  an  overall
         conclusion that was firmly based on the evidence and  in  doing  so
         gave  adequate  reasons  for  reaching  those  conclusions  and  in
         particular that the appellant was not a national of Eritrea.

     46. I shall set out my reasons for reaching that conclusion.

     47. There is, nor can there be, any dispute  that  the  author  of  the
         report is not a linguistic expert.

     48. In MN and KY, the Supreme Court acknowledged that weight  could  be
         given  to  expert  linguistic  analysis  produced  by  the  Sprakab
         organisation. However, central to that view was that  the  evidence
         considered by the Upper Tribunal  was  "sufficient  to  demonstrate
         acceptable expertise and method"  (see  [51]  per  Lord  Carnwath).
         Here, the expertise of  the  analysts  is  to  be  found  in  their
         qualifications and experience.

     49. As recognised by both the Supreme Court and the  Court  of  Appeal,
         the  term  "appropriate  expert  qualification",  related  to   the
         question of whether  it  had  been  shown  that  the  analysts  had
         appropriate expertise to express an opinion on the particular issue
         in question.

     50. The type of expertise or level of expertise demonstrated  and  that
         which is  set out in the linguistic analysis report  ("LAR")  dated
         26 December 2019, is not expressly  challenged  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant.

     51. The report is a language analysis of an assessment of the speaker's
         language use based on linguistic features. The language analysis is
         done in cooperation between one or several  linguists  and  one  or
         several analysts and the quality of the analysis is  reviewed  both
         internally and externally. In this case there was language analysis
         of both regional and local linguistic features and was carried  out
         by two linguists.

     52. What is made plain from the language analysis  is  that  it  cannot
         reach conclusions concerning the actual domicile or citizenship  of
         the speaker. Language use, citizenship and national borders do  not
         necessarily have to coincide. This is the  case,  for  example,  in
         border areas where the same language and ethnic groups are found on
         both sides of the border. Another example is speakers  born  and/or
         raised in a language community  in  a  certain  country,  but  with
         origins from another country.

     53. The analysis of the  report  set  out  that  by  reference  to  the
         linguistic level (which  refers  to  what  level  the  speaker  has
         mastered the language in question) was stated to be Amharic to  the
         "native level".  This  denotes  a  speaker  who  has  mastered  the
         language to a level equivalent to the mother tongue speakers.  This
         is different from "fluent level" which denotes a speaker  that  has
         mastered the language without difficulties, however not  the  level
         of the mother tongue speaker. As to the phonology and prosody, this
         concerns  features  such  as  pronunciation  and  intonation   that
         characterises speaker's language usage and/or the language usage in
         a specific area and/or among a  specific  group  of  speakers,  the
         conclusion   reached   that   the   speakers   language   displayed
         phonological features consistent with expected language  use  among
         speakers of Amharic with a background in and around Addis Ababa  in
         Ethiopia.  When  considering  morphology  and   syntax   (such   as
         inflections and word order that  characterises  speaker's  language
         use) it was recorded that  the  speaker's  language  use  displayed
         grammatical features consistent with expected  language  use  among
         speakers of Amharic with a background in  Ethiopia.  Finally,  when
         considering lexical (such features as common words  and  expression
         that characterises speaker's language  usage  and/or  the  language
         usage in a specific area,  it  was  concluded  that  the  speaker's
         language use displayed lexical  features  consisted  with  expected
         language use  among  speakers  of  Amharic  with  a  background  in
         Ethiopia.

     54. When looking at the result reached, the assessment of the speaker's
         linguistic background was concluded to be assessed as Ethiopian and
         the result had been reached with a "very high degree of  certainty"
         to be  Ethiopia.  The  speakers  stated  linguistic  background  of
         Eritrea and Sudan was assessed to be "unlikely".

     55. The summary of findings is set out at 1.3 as follows:

             "the speaker spoke  Amharic  on  a  native  level  during  the
             interview. The speaker stated to have been born in  Asmara  in
             Eritrea and have lived in Sudan  from  the  age  of  five.  In
             Eritrea Amharic is not typically spoken. In some areas Amharic
             is spoken  among  the  elderly.  The  speaker's  language  use
             displayed features consistent with expected language use among
             speakers of Amharic with a background in Ethiopia. "

     56. The report that was provided in support the  appellant's  case  was
         from Dr Allo,  who  is  a  senior  lecturer  and  director  of  the
         international law program. His expertise is set out in  his  report
         at paragraphs 1 - 5 which  includes  research  in  areas  of  human
         rights law, having published academic writings and  having  had  14
         years of research  experience  in  the  Horn  of  Africa  including
         Ethiopia, Eritrea, Somalia, and South  Sudan.  He  also  taught  at
         Addis Ababa University between 2006 and 2010. However  whilst  that
         expertise is not in dispute, Dr Allo is not an expert in linguistic
         analysis. In fairness to him, he accepts this at paragraphs 21  and
         25 in which  he  states  that  he  has  no  technical  training  in
         linguistic  analysis.  Nonetheless  when  undertaking   a   careful
         consideration of the report he seeks to provide evidence  which  is
         properly viewed as an analysis of  language  despite  the  lack  of
         expertise in support of the claim that the LAR is "questionable and
         misleading". He bases his expertise to reach such a  conclusion  on
         the basis that he is someone who speaks Amharic at a  native  level
         and has lived in Ethiopia for nearly 3 decades and  also  conducted
         research there.

     57. Whilst no one takes issue with  that  personal  background,  in  my
         judgement that is not qualify him as a "linguistic expert"  in  the
         sense that he has the proper expertise in the same way as described
         in the LAR which I have summarised above.

     58. Notwithstanding that lack of expertise in the  area,  he  seeks  to
         provide  a  criticism  of  the  LAR  on  the  basis  that   it   is
         "questionable and misleading" because "in the context of  Ethiopia,
         the Amharic dialect spoken in around Addis  Ababa  is  also  spoken
         across the country, particularly in urban areas, by native  Amharic
         speakers. He then gives an example at paragraph  21  about  dialect
         spoken. Furthermore, at [22] he identifies that the  report  refers
         to a native accent by people who speak Amharic at  a  native  level
         but the suggestion that there was a distinct kind of dialect spoken
         in and around Addis Ababa is  "deeply  misleading  and  the  SSHD's
         conclusion that the linguistic abilities consistent with that in  a
         specific part of Ethiopia and that that was inconsistent  with  his
         claimed nationality of  Eritrea is "highly problematic. "The report
         then goes on to offer a critique of the LAR  and  its  phonological
         features.

     59. At paragraph [27], and after having spoken to the appellant on  the
         telephone he states that the appellant's spoken Amharic dialect  is
         not as described by the report  (similar  to  that  spoken  in  and
         around Addis Ababa), instead her spoken  Amharic  "has  an  accent,
         very similar to that spoken by Ethiopians whose first  language  is
         Tigrinyan".

     60. There are three points that arise from those conclusions.  Firstly,
         as I have set out above  whilst  being  aware  that  he  is  not  a
         linguist nor having any training in linguistic analysis, the author
         of report in essence seeks to provide a linguistic analysis and  is
         therefore stepping outside  his  experience.  Secondly,  whilst  he
         refers to the spoken Amharic to be similar to that  spoken  in  and
         around  Addis  Ababa,  the  LAR  did  not  identify  that  as   the
         overwhelming conclusion but the  summary  was  that  the  speaker's
         language use displayed features consistent with  expected  language
         use among speakers of Amharic with a background in Ethiopia and  at
         a "native level"( at 1.3 summary of findings). Thirdly,  he  offers
         no further explanation or material in  support  of  the  conclusion
         that the appellant had spoken Amharic similar  to  that  spoken  by
         Ethiopians whose first language is Tigrinyan.

     61. Against that background,  the  FtTJ's  assessment  that  she  could
         attach little weight to that evidence is  an  assessment  that  was
         wholly open to the FtTJ to make. Her analysis that he had  extended
         beyond his remit as an expert witness was entirely correct  as  set
         out in my reasoning above.

     62. Ms Rutherford in her  submissions  conceded  that  the  description
         given of the author of report having "overreached  himself"  was  a
         proper description but  sought  to  argue  that  there  were  other
         aspects of his report which should have been given  weight  by  the
         judge and the failure to do so undermined the  conclusions  reached
         that she was not a national of Eritrea.

     63. The other aspects of the report that she referred to was that which
         the expert set out at paragraphs 26 - 31. The expert  had  arranged
         an interview with  the  appellant  and  the  purpose  of  this  was
         described as follows "to determine whether the  conclusion  reached
         in the report and relied upon by the Home Office is consistent with
         my  knowledge  of  the  country."  The  expert  then  set  out  the
         conversation that he had with the appellant at paragraphs 26 -  28.
         As I have stated at [27] whilst he stated her spoken Amharic had an
         accent similar to that spoken by Ethiopians whose first language is
         Tigrinyan, no further elucidation of that point was provided in the
         report nor any supporting methodology or evidence.

     64. In my judgement the contents of the report  wholly  fails  to  take
         account  of  the  adverse  points  relevant  to   the   appellant's
         credibility which is set out in  the  decision  letter  which  were
         later to be also assessed in the overall evidence by the FtTJ.

     65. He did not identify that the appellant's account  to  him  was  not
         consistent. He records her as saying she spoke Tigrinyan as a child
         and recorded that she had stated in her witness statement that  she
         had "lost practice in that language". However the  decision  letter
         set out, and as a judge ultimately found,  the  appellant  has  not
         been consistent about what is her first  or  predominant  language.
         Despite claiming in her screening interview that Tigrinyan was  her
         first language, before the  FtTJ  she  resiled  from  that  account
         stating "she did not say that Tigrinya was her main language,  that
         was just written down on the record because there  was  a  Tigrinya
         interpreter present " (set out at paragraph 40;  the  judge  giving
         reasons why she disbelieve the appellant on this issue).

     66. Neither the Secretary of State  nor  the  FtTJ  disputed  that  the
         appellant had little knowledge  about  Eritrea  and  that  she  had
         stated that she had left the country when she was five  years  old.
         If the appellant's account were true as the expert stated, it would
         be plausible to expect her to speak Amharic. However the difficulty
         with the expert report  is  that  he  did  not  make  any  critical
         assessment of her actual account  or  make  any  reference  to  the
         adverse points that were plainly raised in the decision letter.

     67. Also the expert makes the point at [31] when asked questions  about
         Eritrea she was able to provide correct answers but noted that  she
         could not identify landmarks, main roads, and markets because "this
         will be rare for children to do so which they  last  saw  aged  5".
         Again that is not unreasonable. However  what  is  missing  is  the
         context in which those answers were given and which  is  not  taken
         into account and was clearly set out in the  evidence  and  in  the
         decision letter.

     68. The point made about this knowledge of Eritrea is that it  was  the
         appellant's own evidence that her  aunt  had  told  her  about  the
         culture, food, and history of Eritrea and in particular  identified
         "food, sea and mountains" (I refer to her interview). Thus  in  the
         interview she was given the opportunity to recall  the  information
         she claimed to possess from the conversations with  her  aunt  with
         whom she had lived with for a substantial period of  time.  Despite
         identifying  her  knowledge  on   those   particular   areas   when
         questioned, she claimed not to remember.

     69. Furthermore whilst she was able to cite general  information  about
         Eritrea  (the  national  emblem,  description  of  flags,   current
         president  and  holidays,  regions   and   police   uniforms)   the
         explanation given by her for being able to  do  so  and  have  that
         general country information was "because my aunt told me" but  that
         was strongly contrasted  with  the  evidence  demonstrated  by  her
         answers of her account that her aunt did not tell about the customs
         in the locality she lived in in Eritrea having lived  there  for  a
         substantial period of 30 to 35 years.

     70. At [32] the expert concludes that whilst  the  view  taken  by  the
         respondent that the appellant is not Eritrean  is  "understandable,
         particularly on the basis of the LAR, I find the appellant's  claim
         to be an Eritrean national plausible", there is  no  assessment  of
         how her account fits in to the context of the  factual  claim,  its
         consistency and the adverse points raised in the  decision  letter.
         For example, the appellant claims to have been born in Enda  Gergis
         whereas  reference  was  made  in  the  LAR  by  her   to   Asmara.
         Furthermore,  there  was  significant  adverse  credibility  points
         raised about the appellant's account of  living  in  Sudan  in  the
         decision letter, for example that despite living in  Sudan  between
         2000 - 2018 she  could  not  provide  any  answers  concerning  the
         question of her  locality;  unable  to  identify  the  currency  or
         describe it properly, which  given  the  length  of  residence  was
         reasonable to expect her to  provide.  Furthermore  when  asked  to
         confirm the address she lived at in Sudan and where  she  had  left
         her daughter, she was unable to do so.

     71. Thus whilst the expert sought to explain her  inability  to  answer
         some questions about Eritrea as being plausible, it is  plain  from
         the decision letter and the contents of the report that  there  was
         no consideration of the other implausibility's  from  her  account.
         All of which were relevant considerations when reaching an issue on
         the plausibility of her account to be an Eritrean national.

     72. Therefore, I am satisfied that the contents of  the  expert  report
         were concerned with linguistic analysis and as the  FtTJ  correctly
         noted the conclusions reached by him on the LAR could not  properly
         be given on the basis on which it was offered  given  his  lack  of
         expertise in that area. Whilst he had experience of living  in  the
         country as a native Amharic speaker, that is not the same as  being
         a linguistic expert. Furthermore as I have identified there was  no
         explanation or evidence in support given to underpin the conclusion
         at [27] that her spoken Amharic had an accent very similar to  that
         spoken by Ethiopians whose first language is Tigrinya, which was  a
         point the appellant resiled from in her oral evidence.

     73. Lastly, whilst Mr Rutherford sought to argue that there were  other
         aspects of the report which was supportive of her  claim  to  be  a
         national of Eritrea,  as  I  have  set  out  above,  those  factors
         identified when scrutinised failed to take into account evidence of
         an adverse nature which had been set out in the decision letter and
         had not been assessed or considered.

     74. The judge, however, did have the opportunity to  consider  all  the
         evidence and was best placed to consider the overall  evidence  and
         to reach conclusions upon the appellant's nationality. There were a
         number of adverse findings on the evidence which went to  the  core
         of her account as a truthful and credible witness.

     75. The FtTJ considered the credibility of her account of being subject
         to harm in Sudan finding that she had been inconsistent  concerning
         the factual circumstances of what had happened there.  She  gave  a
         different factual account before the judge  (at  [38](i))  with  an
         explanation given that she was  "not  thinking  clearly"  but  then
         changed that  account  to  say  that  in  fact  she  had  told  her
         representatives about it (although it was not  in  her  statement).
         The Judge properly concluded that she  had  provided  contradictory
         accounts and that she had given no credible explanation as  to  why
         she had changed her account and the only conclusion to  be  reached
         was that she was not telling the truth about that.

     76. As to the time that she spent in Sudan, the  judge  concluded  that
         she demonstrated little knowledge of that  country  despite  having
         lived there since the age of five. Her explanation that she was not
         able to move freely and that she had led an isolated life  and  one
         that was sheltered was considered in the light of her evidence in a
         witness statement where she had stated that she had  a  friend  who
         had provided work for her to clean people's homes. When asked about
         that contradictory evidence she stated that again the statement was
         wrong and that she never said she had a friend or that she had ever
         cleaned homes. Again the judge recorded that she had confirmed that
         the witness statement was true when she had made it and before  the
         judge and again this undermined her credibility. The example  given
         in the decision letter was that when asked the address of her  aunt
         and the location where she had left her daughter, she was unable to
         give any response. The judge also considered the  account  relating
         to the person identified as S at subparagraph (iii)  and  at  (iv).
         The judge also identified a further inconsistency in her case;  the
         appellant was asked whether she had any family in  Eritrea  and  in
         interview she stated she had uncles and aunts on her mother's side.
         Whereas in her statement she recorded that she  had  no  family  in
         Eritrea. When that was clarified her oral evidence in response  was
         that she had never said she had relatives. However the judge  found
         that she had had sufficient time  to  check  the  records  and  had
         failed to highlight mistakes prior to the  hearing.  Other  adverse
         credibility points are set out at  paragraphs  [40  -  41].  In  my
         judgement, those were  findings  that  were  firmly  based  on  the
         evidence and went to the core of her account.

     77. What is made plain from the language analysis  is  that  it  cannot
         reach conclusions concerning the actual domicile or citizenship  of
         the speaker. Language use, citizenship and national borders do  not
         necessarily have to coincide. This is the  case,  for  example,  in
         border areas where the same language and ethnic groups are found on
         both sides of the border. Another example is speakers  born  and/or
         raised in a language community  in  a  certain  country,  but  with
         origins from another country. Therefore  whatever  the  appellant's
         expert stated about  language  this  could  not  be  considered  in
         isolation from the evidence.

     78. At [42] the judge concluded after standing back and considering all
         the evidence in the round, including the report, and further taking
         into account the fact that while  she  had  been  untruthful  about
         other events did  not  mean  she  had  been  untruthful  about  her
         nationality then stated "I have carefully considered  the  evidence
         and in particular her lack of knowledge about Sudan,  contradictory
         accounts about key events, changing explanation about what  a  main
         languages in the LAR. Even on the lower standard of proof, I am not
         satisfied that the appellant is an Eritrea national,  I  find  that
         she is an Ethiopian national."

     79.  I find that there is nothing in the judge's findings  to  indicate
         that she erred in her assessment of the evidence of the expert.

     80.  Having  given  careful  consideration  to  the  report   and   the
         submissions advanced on behalf of the appellant, I have reached the
         conclusion that the FtTJ properly considered all of  the  evidence,
         including the report of the expert but was entitled to find on  the
         overall evidence that the appellant was not a national of Eritrea.

     81. Consequently I am not satisfied that the judge erred in  law  in  a
         consideration of the expert report.

     82. For those reasons, I am satisfied that it has not been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision shall stand.



Notice of Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the  decision  of  the  FtT  shall  be
stand. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated    15 April 2021





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

