
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA011702015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On 9 June 2017                           |On 23 June 2017               |




                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    M O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr D McCormick instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent: Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity order made  by  the  first-
tier tribunal.




2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Cope  promulgated  on  07/10/2016,  which   dismissed   the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1997 and insists that he is a  national  of
Sudan.  On  09/09/2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Cope ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and, on 31/03/2017,  Upper  tribunal
Judge Perkins gave permission to appeal stating inter alia


   2. I give permission on each ground although I am not presently impressed
   with the complaint that the Judge made observations about the appellant's
   skin tone. Given that the appellant said that he was at risk  because  he
   would be perceived as a "black" Libyan it is not obviously wrong for  the
   Judge to note the appellant's skin tone  and  consider  his  observations
   with the rest of the evidence before making a finding,  although  it  may
   (be) that is not what the Judge did.


   3. I am more concerned that the adverse  credibility  findings  might  be
   unsound because the Judge misunderstood some of the evidence  as  alleged
   and/or because of interpreting problems.


   4. Interpretation is not an art and there is usually  room  to  say  that
   things could be done differently. However there is here evidence that the
   interpretation of  the  appellant's  evidence  about  his  education  was
   mistranslated in a way that impacted on the adverse credibility findings.


   5. It is arguable that there was a material error.

The hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Mr McCormick moved the grounds of appeal. He  told
me that the appellant's ethnicity is a crucial  aspect  in  this  case.  The
appellant claims that he is  Sudanese.  The  respondent  believes  that  the
appellant is Libyan. The appellant's alternative case is that he  cannot  be
safely returned to Libya because there he will be perceived to be  a  "Black
Libyan". Mr McCormick dwelt on [124] to [127] of the  Judge's  decision.  He
seized on the Judge's use of the word "invidious" in [124] of the  decision,
and provided me with dictionary definitions and synonyms for that  word.  He
then went on to say that the Judge was wrong, at [125] of  the  decision  to
compare the appellant's skin colour to the skin colour of  the  interpreter.
He told me that  [125]  creates  a  perception  of  bias  to  the  impartial
observer.  When  pressed,  Mr  McCormick  made  it  clear  that  he  is  not
suggesting that there was anything wrong with the  Judge's  conduct.  He  is
not suggesting that the Judge made comments that any rational  person  would
think were racist or offensive. What he does  say  is  that  the  comparison
between the skin of the appellant and the skin of  the  interpreter  is  the
wrong test to apply in determining whether or not the appellant  would  have
the appearance of a Black Libyan. Mr MacCormack relied on  paragraphs  7,  8
and 9 of Elayi (Fair Hearing - Appearance : India): UTIAC 15 Nov 2016


(b) Mr McCormick moved the second ground of appeal. A  bundle  was  prepared
for the appellant for the hearing before me. Document 111 of that bundle  is
a witness statement from a certified interpreter who is  employed  by  those
instructing Mr McCormick. He complains about the quality  of  interpretation
by the court interpreter. Mr McCormick told  me  that,  during  the  hearing
before the First-tier, he received an email from his instructing  solicitors
telling him that the court interpreter made  errors  in  interpretation.  He
moved to adjourn. His application to adjourn is dealt  with  by  the  First-
tier Judge between [6] and [11] of the decision. Mr MacCormack  referred  me
to Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC), and told  me  that
the Judge was incorrect to refuse his application to adjourn. He took me  to
[13] of the decision, and complained that the Judge did  not  take  adequate
account of the complaints of an Arab speaking interpreter  employed  by  his
instructing solicitors.

(c) Mr McCormick turned to the third ground of appeal. He reminded  me  that
part of the evidence before the First-tier was a Report from  Peter  Verney.
He summarised the terms of the report and the conclusions  of  the  report's
author. He told me that the Judge gives  inadequate  reasons  for  rejecting
the  expert  report.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge  displayed  clear   and
unjustified disregard for the evidence of a recognised expert.

(d) Mr McCormick moved to the fourth ground of appeal. He took  me  to  [72]
of the decision and told me that the  Judge  placed  too  much  reliance  on
fingerprint  evidence  and  misinterpreted  the  evidence  relating  to  the
appellant's knowledge of his journey across continental Europe. He  told  me
that the misinterpretation of evidence  affected  the  Judge's  approach  to
credibility.

(e) Mr McCormick urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

6. (a) Mr Whitwell relied on the rule 24 note for the  respondent.  He  told
me that what is argued that the appellant amounts to  nothing  more  than  a
disagreement with the conclusions of the First-tier tribunal Judge. He  told
me that the decision is not infected by errors, material  or  otherwise.  He
told me that the decision  is  a  carefully  reasoned  decision,  containing
findings of fact drawn from the evidence placed before the  Judge.  He  told
me that the  Judge  took  correct  guidance  from  relevant  caselaw  before
reaching  conclusions  which  were  well  within  the  range  of  reasonable
conclusions available to the judge.

(b) Mr Whitwell took me to [126] of the decision and told  me  that,  there,
the Judge makes it  clear  that  he  does  not  base  his  decision  on  the
appellant's appearance. He told me that there is no  substance  in  what  is
argued as the first ground of appeal for the appellant. The Judge  makes  an
observation which records nothing more than the obvious, and  then  sets  it
to the side to make a decision based on the evidence placed before him.

(c) Mr Whitwell turned to the second ground of appeal. He took  me  to  [11]
of the  decision  and  told  me  that,  despite  what  is  said  there,  the
respondent's position (at least for the purposes of this appeal) is that  an
application to adjourn was made. He told me that the Judge adequately  dealt
with the application to adjourn, and then referred  me  to  [13]  where  the
Judge clearly states that the only area of confusion related  to  a  passage
of evidence about the appellant's education,  and  not  to  the  substantive
issues upon which the appeal turns. He told me  that  the  Judge  manifestly
considered the question of fairness to the appellant  before  deciding  that
there is no need  to  adjourn.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge  was  clearly
satisfied  that  there  were  no  errors   in   either   interpretation   or
comprehension and that the interests of the appellant were not prejudiced.

(d) Mr Whitwell told me that from [78] of the decision the Judge  considered
the expert evidence in this case.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge  sets  out
perfectly adequate reasons, between [78]  and  [90]  of  the  decision,  for
deciding what weight to give to the expert report provided by Mr Verney.  He
reminded me that the question of weight to give to evidence  is  a  question
for the First-tier Tribunal Judge. He told  me  that  the  third  ground  of
appeal amounts to  nothing  more  than  an  expression  of  the  appellant's
disgruntlement with the reasonable conclusions  reached  by  the  First-tier
Judge.

(e) Mr Whitwell addressed the fourth ground of appeal. He took  me  to  [73]
of the decision. He told me that the  Judge  has  not  placed  unquestioning
reliance on either the fingerprint evidence or the  appellant's  account  of
his journey to the UK. Instead the Judge takes a holistic  approach  to  all
the  evidence  before  him  and  found  that  the  appellant's  account   of
bewilderment  about  his  journey  is  contradicted  by  other  sources   of
evidence.

(f) Mr Whitwell told me that the  Judge's  fact-finding  process  is  beyond
criticism, that the Judge took correct  guidance  in  law,  and  then  reach
conclusions which were well  within  the  range  of  reasonable  conclusions
available to the Judge. Mr Whitwell told  me  that  the  grounds  of  appeal
amount to nothing more than a desperate disagreement with the facts  as  the
Judge found them to be. He told me that the decision does  not  contain  any
material errors of law and asked me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the
decision to stand.

Analysis

7. The first ground of appeal is  that  the  Judge  strays  beyond  judicial
knowledge in assessing the appellant's nationality.  Mr  McCormick  told  me
that it is a  crucial  aspect  of  the  appellant's  claim  is  that  he  is
Sudanese. In the  alternative,  the  appellant  argues  that  he  cannot  be
returned to Libya because  he  will  be  perceived  as  a  non-Arab,  black,
Libyan. He took me to [124] to [126] of the decision and told me that  there
the Judge comments on the appellant's skin colour, & compares  the  tone  of
the appellant's skin to the skin tone of the court interpreter. He  told  me
that the Judge should not have used his own observations of  the  colour  of
the  appellant  skin  as  part  of  his  determination  of  the  appellant's
nationality and ethnicity.


8. Mr McCormick relied on Elayi (Fair Hearing - Appearance :  India):  UTIAC
15 Nov 2016   and  told  me  that  an  impartial  observer  would  draw  the
impression that the Judge acted unfairly. He told me  the  Judge  based  his
decision on the appellant's appearance.


9. In B  (Kosovo)  2003  UKIAT  00013  the  Tribunal  said  that,  whilst  a
witness's demeanour is said to be a very unreliable  guide  to  credibility,
his personal appearance may in some cases form  a  legitimate  part  of  the
assessment of the risk (if any) that he faces.  The examples given were  the
scarring of Tamils returning to Sri Lanka and, in that  case,  the  non-Roma
like appearance of a Gorani returning to Kosovo.

10. There is no merit at all in the first ground of appeal.  Mr  McCormick's
suggestion is that a Judge only acts fairly  if  he  ignores  what  he  sees
right in front of him. That is simply wrong.  In  this  case  the  Judge  is
beyond criticism because, not only does he set out what  he  could  see,  he
says why the appellant's evidence is not consistent  with  his  observations
and then carefully sets his observation  aside  to  make  findings  of  fact
drawn from the evidence placed before him. At [126] the Judge says


      "I make it clear that I have not based my decision upon this factor."


11.  At  [129]  the  Judge  clearly  states  that  he  cannot  rely  on  the
appellant's  evidence  because  of  contradictions  and  omissions  in   the
appellant's evidence. At [130] the Judge sets out his  reasons  for  finding
that the appellant's account is  implausible.  Between  [127]  &  [138]  the
Judge provides detailed reasons for finding that the appellant is neither  a
credible nor a reliable witness. The  comment  about  the  appellant's  skin
tone at [124] is nothing more than an observation. It is obvious  that  that
observation does not form part of the Judge's assessment of credibility.  It
is obvious that that observation is nothing more than a passing  comment  in
a detailed and flawless examination of  every  source  of  evidence.  It  is
equally obvious that it is not because of the difference  in  skin  tone  of
two men sitting together  in  front  of  him  that  the  Judge  rejects  the
appellant's account. It is the poor quality of the appellant's own  evidence
which counts against him.


12. The second ground of appeal relates to the refusal of an application  to
adjourn. Mr Whitwell conceded that an application to adjourn was made by  Mr
McCormick in the course of the hearing. The application to adjourn was  made
because Mr McCormick was told by his instructing solicitor's that their  own
qualified Arabic community interpreter believed that the  court  interpreter
had made some errors in interpretation.

13. The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3)(h) empowers the Tribunal  to  adjourn
a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives under the  Rules  which
the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when exercising any  power  under
the Rules. The overriding objective is deal with cases  fairly  and  justly.
This is defined as including

       (a) dealing with the case in ways  which  are  proportionate  to  the
      importance of the case, the complexity of the issues, the  anticipated
      costs and the resources of  the  parties  and  of  the  Tribunal;  (b)
      avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking  flexibility   in   the
      proceedings; (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that the  parties
      are able to participate  fully  in  the  proceedings;  (d)  using  any
      special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay  so
      far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues.

14. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it  was  held
that if a Tribunal  refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds,  it  is  important
to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether  the
FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied is that  of  fairness:
was there any deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

15. On page 111 of the appellant's bundle  for  this  hearing,  there  is  a
witness  statement  from  Mr  Aidross,  the  Arabic  community   interpreter
employed by the solicitors instructing Mr McCormick. His criticisms  of  the
court interpreter are contained between paragraphs 7 and 10 of  his  witness
statement. He says that the appellant's name was not translated fully;  that
there  was  confusion  when  questions  were  asked  about  the  appellant's
education;  he  alleges  that  the  interpreter  did  not   translate   full
sentences, and says that the  interpreter  frequently  spoke  in  the  third
person rather first person.

16. The Judge deals with the application to adjourn between [7] and [14]  of
the decision. At [10] he records that no specific  challenge  was  taken  to
any passage of evidence & that he was not provided with  any  detail  of  Mr
Airdross' qualifications and proficiency. At [13]  the  Judge  records  that
there were no obvious difficulties  in  translation  or  comprehension,  but
there had been some confusion over the words  and  expressions  "drama"  and
"theatre studies"

17. What the Judge records in  the  decision  is  consistent  with  what  Mr
Aidross says in his witness statement. Both the record  of  proceedings  and
the Judge's decision disclosed that a great deal of evidence was led  before
the  First-tier.  The  only  complaints  relate  to  questions   about   the
appellant's education and his full name, and the use  of  the  third  person
rather than the first person. No challenge is directed to  the  evidence  in
relation to the substance of the appellant's protection claim.

18. I have more information than the First-tier Judge  because  I  have  the
witness statement of Mr Aidross. Even  though  I  have  the  benefit  of  Mr
Aidross' witness statement, I still have no information  at  all  about  his
qualifications and experience. I do not know whether  Arabic  is  his  first
language or his second language. I do not know where  he  learned  to  speak
Arabic; I do not know what dialect he speaks; I still do  not  know  whether
that dialect differs from the dialect spoken by the appellant and the  court
interpreter. All that I have is a complaint that a  few  words,  which  were
peripheral  to  the  appellant's  claim,   would   have   been   interpreted
differently by Mr Aidross.

19. The quality of interpretation is important. The  record  of  proceedings
and the decision of the First-tier Judge indicate that the First-tier  Judge
was alive to the need to ensure accuracy of  interpretation;  and  that  the
First-tier Judge was provided with the appellant's  evidence  and  that  the
was no error in the  translation  of  that  evidence.  It  is  realistically
possible that two native Arab speakers  will  translate  the  meaning  of  a
sentence accurately by using different English words which convey  the  same
meaning. The allegation that there was  an  error  in  interpretation  which
materially affected the outcome of this case is not made out.

20. In any event, it is apparent that there was no unfairness in the  First-
tier Judge's decision to refuse the application to adjourn. Between [6]  and
[15] of the  decision  the  First-tier  Judge  gives  adequate  reasons  for
refusing the application to adjourn.

21. The third ground of appeal relates to the way in  which  the  First-tier
Judge dealt with the  expert  evidence  of  Peter  Verney.  The  appellant's
position summarised at paragraph  17  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  Mr
McCormick writes

      It is the submission of the appellant that the  IJ  has  had  a  clear
      disregard for the evidence of Mr Verney.

22. In MF (Albania) v SSHD 2014 EWCA Civ 902  (a blood feud case) the  Court
of Appeal decided that it was for the tribunal, not the  expert,  to  decide
whether an applicant would be at risk on return. It was neither  appropriate
nor helpful for an expert to express a view on  specific  factual  questions
bearing on the situation of a particular applicant such as whether he  could
safely relocate or whether he could obtain support  from  other  members  of
the family,  if  that  view  was  based  on  nothing  more  than  a  general
understanding of local conditions.

23. In AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT 673 (IAC) it  was
held  that  a  failure  to  comply  with  the  Senior  President's  Practice
Direction may affect the weight to be given to expert evidence. Any  opinion
offered that is unsupported  by  a  demonstration  of  the  objectivity  and
comprehensive review of material facts required  of  an  expert  witness  is
likely to be afforded little  weight  by  the  Tribunal.  In  particular,  a
witness who does not  engage  with  material  facts  or  issues  that  might
detract from the view being expressed risks being regarded  as  an  informed
advocate for the case of one of the parties to the proceedings  rather  than
an independent expert witness.

24. At [40] of the decision, the  Judge  sets  out  an  introduction  to  Mr
Verney's report. Between [76] and [90]  the  Judge  carries  out  a  careful
consideration of the contents of the report. A fair reading of [76] to  [90]
would leave the impartial, objective, reader in no doubt  at  all  that  the
Judge has carefully considered Mr Verney's report. There  is  neither  merit
nor substance in Mr McCormick's assertion that the  Judge  has  "has  had  a
clear disregard" for Mr Verney's written evidence. It  is  abundantly  clear
that the Judge has correctly assessed Mr Verney's evidence. The Judge  could
only have demonstrated disregard for the evidence if it had not  been  taken
into account. 15 paragraphs of the  decision  are  devoted  to  Mr  Verney's
report.

25. What is really argued is that the appellant wishes that the  Judge  had
given more weight to Mr Verney's report. The question of the weight  to  be
given to evidence is a matter for the First-tier Judge. In Green (Article 8
- new rules) [2013] UKUT 254 (IAC) the Tribunal said that

      Giving weight to a factor one way or another is for the fact  finding
      Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely  give  rise  to  an
      error of law.

26. The Judge gives more than adequate reasons for  deciding  not  to  place
any great weight on Mr Verney's  report.  The  third  ground  of  appeal  is
nothing more the expression of the  appellant's  wish  that  the  Judge  had
reached a different  decision.  The  decision  that  the  Judge  reached  is
carefully reasoned and is well within  the  range  of  decisions  reasonably
available to the Judge.

27. The  final  ground  of  appeal  relates  to  the  Judge's  treatment  of
fingerprint evidence. The focus for this ground of appeal lies between  [70]
and [75] of the  decision.  In  the  grounds  of  appeal,  counsel  for  the
appellant focuses on [72], and in particular the final sentence of [72].

28. It is wrong to try to view [72] (or any one of  the  172  paragraphs  of
this  decision)  in  isolation.  A  complete   reading   of   the   decision
demonstrates that between 70  and  75  the  Judge  carefully  analyses  each
strand of evidence before reaching his conclusion.  It  is  clear  that  the
Judge's conclusion is not based on what the appellant may have been told  by
his travelling companion. The thrust of what the  Judge  says  is  that  the
appellant chose not to mention that he had been  fingerprinted  in  European
and Scandinavian countries until the Eurodac result was disclosed.

29. The real complaint in grounds four relates to the weight that the  Judge
attaches to various parts of the evidence. As I have already indicated,  the
question of weight is a question for the First-tier Judge.


30.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

31. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

CONCLUSION

32. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

33. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date  20 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




