
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01577/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th June 2019 given extempore    |On 23rd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                 Olamide [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Popoola, Solicitor, R & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  24th  June  1981,  who
    appealed to the  First  Tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse her  asylum  claim  to  give  directions  for  her
    removal to Nigeria.

2.   Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on 20th  March,
    2019.

3.   The appellant claims that she has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    in Nigeria because of her membership of a particular social group,  and
    that the state of Nigeria is unwilling or unable to  protect  her.   In
    the alternative she claims that her claim falls to be considered on the
    basis that  she  is  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  under  the
    Immigration Rules insofar as they apply Council Directive 2004/83/EC on
    minimum standards for the  qualification  and  status  of  third  party
    nationals or stateless persons as refugees  or  persons  who  otherwise
    need internal protection and the content  of  the  protection  granted.
    Further, she claims that her removal would be a breach  of  her  rights
    under Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention for the Protection of
    Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

4.   The Tribunal Judge found that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  on
    return to Nigeria and that her daughter would not face any real risk of
    inhumane or degrading treatment in Nigeria.  It was  claimed  that  the
    appellant's daughter would be made to undergo female genital mutilation
    and it was claimed that the appellant had undergone FGM.  The judge did
    not believe the appellant's account and dismissed the appeal.

5.   The grounds of  permission  to  appeal  asserted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal:

         "failed to consider a medical letter from a GP that confirmed  that
         FGM was performed on the appellant".

6.   Today, Ms Popoola told me that the letter  in  question  was  a  letter
    from  the  appellant's  GP  referred  to  in   paragraph   9   of   the
    determination.  She claimed that the judge had failed to consider  that
    letter despite the fact that in paragraph 9 the letter is  referred  to
    and the judge says that she has read and fully considered the documents
    listed.

7.   I pointed out to Ms  Popoola  that  the  letter  from  the  GP  nowhere
    confirms that the appellant has been the subject of FGM.  It refers  to
    the appellant complaining to her GP that she has been  the  subject  of
    FGM but, does not confirm that the GP has examined her and been able to
    confirm that FGM has been performed on her.

8.   Ms Popoola agreed that the grounds were misleading.

9.   I did not need to trouble Mr Diwnycz.   The  grounds  have  simply  not
    been made out.  The judge very clearly did  consider  the  evidence  in
    question but the evidence did not provide any proof that the  appellant
    had been the subject of FGM, it only repeated the claim  that  she  had
    made to the judge that she had been the subject  of  it.   The  judge's
    determination is upheld since it does not contain any error of law.

10.  Everyone conducting litigation before this or  any  other  Tribunal  is
    under a strict duty to take very great care not to  mislead.   And  the
    duty on solicitors, as officers of the court, is no different.  Because
    of a careless mistake (if I thought that it was deliberate I would have
    had no hesitation in reporting the matter to the Solicitors  Regulatory
    Authority) several hundred pounds of tax payer's money has been wasted.



No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley       22 August 2019
