
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01367/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2018                          |On 21st February 2018         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                  ahmed [h]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey of Counsel, instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Spencer promulgated on 23  December  2016,  in  which  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision to refuse his asylum claim dated 27 January
    2016 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Ethiopia, born on [ ] 1984  who  claimed
    asylum in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  his  imputed  political
    opinion.  The Respondent refused the application on 27 January 2016  on
    the basis that it was not accepted that the  Appellant  was  an  active
    supporter of OLF, nor that  he  had  been  detained  by  the  Ethiopian
    authorities for supporting the OLF and in conclusion that he would  not
    be at risk on return to Ethiopia.

 3. The Appellant did not attend the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 14 December 2016.  At the hearing,  Judge  Spencer  found  that  the
    notice of hearing had been sent to the Appellant's old address (his new
    address having been notified to the First-tier Tribunal at the  CMR  on
    28 September 2016).  Counsel for the Appellant was given an opportunity
    to take instructions and  was  informed  that  the  Appellant  had  had
    regular contact with his solicitors prior to the hearing and that  they
    had sent the notice of hearing to his new  address.   Counsel  for  the
    Appellant sought an adjournment on the basis that it  was  not  in  the
    best interests of the Appellant for  the  hearing  to  proceed  in  his
    unexplained absence but that was refused in light  of  the  information
    available to Judge Spencer, that the Appellant was aware of the hearing
    but there was no explanation for  his  non-attendance  and  nothing  to
    suggest that he  would  attend  a  future  hearing.   Counsel  for  the
    Appellant withdrew from the case at this point and made no  submissions
    in the appeal.

 4. Judge Spencer dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  23
    December 2016 primarily on the basis that the Appellant was  not  found
    to be credible in his claims and had not established that he  would  be
    at risk on return to Ethiopia.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on four grounds, first, that there was  an  error
    of fact because the Appellant's  solicitors  had  sent  the  notice  of
    hearing to his old address and therefore the Appellant had not actually
    been notified of the time and place of the hearing.  Secondly, that the
    First-tier Tribunal should in any event have  granted  the  application
    for an adjournment of the hearing to enable the appeal to be dealt with
    fairly and justly in accordance  with  rules  4(3)(h)  and  21  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 (the "Procedure Rules").  Thirdly,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law by  applying  the  test  under  rule  28  of  the
    Procedure Rules applying the  interests  of  justice  rather  than  the
    overriding objective to deal with cases fairly  and  justly.   Finally,
    that the First-tier Tribunal denied the Appellant a fair hearing, which
    in this case where credibility was in issue, required him  being  given
    the opportunity to be heard in person.

 6. Permission to appeal was  initially  refused  by  both  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, but successfully challenged on application
    for Judicial Review.  Permission to appeal was subsequently granted  on
    7 December 2017 by Judge Ockelton.

 7. At the hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer confirmed  that  she
    was not in a position to dispute the Appellant's evidence  about  where
    notice of the hearing was sent by his solicitors or as to their conduct
    and errors in the submissions made to the First-tier Tribunal  in  this
    regard.  It was submitted that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision made by Judge Spencer on the basis of information available to
    him, but it was agreed that there was a procedural irregularity  and/or
    error of fact  which  was  sufficient  to  justify  setting  aside  the
    decision and remitting it to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing.  The Appellant  should  have  the  opportunity  to  give  oral
    evidence given the issues of credibility in the appeal.

Findings and reasons

 1. I find no fault  or  error  of  law  in  the  way  that  Judge  Spencer
    approached the application for an adjournment or the decision  he  made
    on it which was in accordance with the Procedure Rules and open to  him
    on the basis of information available to him at the hearing.

 2. I do however find, as accepted by the Respondent, that there has been a
    procedural irregularity in that the notice of hearing was sent  to  the
    Appellant's old address by both the First-tier  Tribunal  and  his  own
    solicitors (and I accept the evidence from them on this point, contrary
    to the instructions/information given to Counsel  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing).  This in turn leads to there being a mistake of fact in  that
    the Appellant had not  actually  been  notified  of  the  hearing.   In
    particular in an asylum appeal  where  credibility  is  in  issue,  the
    Appellant should be notified of the hearing date and thereby  be  given
    an opportunity to attend and give oral evidence at that  hearing  as  a
    matter of fairness.  The procedural and  professional  errors  in  this
    case, which were not the fault of the Appellant prevented this.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of a material error of law.  As such I set aside the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal and direct the appeal be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a de novo hearing before a different Judge.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed        [pic]    Date         16th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

