

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01707/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 June 2019                      |On 19 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     mri
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Eruwa, Saint Martin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Seelhoff, promulgated on  1  April  2019,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity  direction,  continuing
    that made in the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:-

         "In an otherwise careful and focused decision, it is arguable  that
         the judge failed to ensure  that  the  Appellant  received  a  fair
         hearing by refusing to allow the Appellant  an  opportunity  to  be
         assisted by an interpreter.  It  is  arguable  that  the  Appellant
         would have  felt  more  comfortable  and  confident  in  his  first
         language  and  that  could  have  been  achieved  by  a  period  of
         reasonable adjournment."

 4. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.

Error of Law Decision

 5. I have  carefully  considered  whether  the  Judge  acted  unfairly  in
    proceeding without an interpreter.


 6. In the grounds of appeal at [4] it states: "Irrespective of  the  prior
    request for an interpreter....".  I asked Mr. Eruwa to what request  he
    was referring, given the findings  of  the  Judge  that  there  was  no
    previous request, and given that the grounds of appeal did  not  allege
    that the Judge had erred in stating that there was no previous request.
     At [21] the Judge states:-

         "The tribunal had not been advised that  the  Appellant  needed  an
         interpreter and I noted that none was  requested  in  the  original
         appeal form, nor was one requested in the direction form  filed  by
         the solicitors a fortnight prior to the hearing."

 7. The Judge goes on to state that Counsel "accepted that  the  solicitors
    had not considered [it] necessary" to request an interpreter.

 8. I carefully considered the file.  I find that the Judge is correct when
    he states that there had been no previous request for  an  interpreter.
    Mr. Eruwa was not able to point me to any document which indicated that
    a request had been made.  The grounds of appeal are at best  misleading
    in alleging that a prior request had been made.

 9. Mr. Eruwa stated that  there  had  been  a  "general  request"  for  an
    adjournment.  This is correct but, when the Appellant's representatives
    applied for an adjournment, they  attached  to  the  letter  the  reply
    notice dated 6 March 2019 where they indicated that no interpreter  was
    needed.  The adjournment application did not have anything to  do  with
    an interpreter, and further, on  the  same  date  as  applying  for  an
    adjournment,  the  representatives  informed  the  Tribunal   that   no
    interpreter was needed.  I find that there is no error in  the  Judge's
    statement that the Appellant had not requested an interpreter prior  to
    the hearing.

10. I have carefully considered  whether  the  Judge  properly  and  fairly
    considered the Appellant's request for an adjournment made on the basis
    that he needed an interpreter.  At [21] he states:-

         "I noted that according to the Appellant's immigration  history  he
         had been admitted for three years on his initial student Visa which
         indicated he had been  admitted  to  study  at  degree  level.   In
         response to a question from  me  the  Appellant  confirmed  he  had
         completed a postgraduate qualification in the UK."

11. At [22] he states:

         "I indicated  that  the  tribunal  would  see  and  if  they  could
         accommodate an interpreter on the day of the hearing  but  when  it
         later became apparent that  we  could  not  get  an  interpreter  I
         indicated that I was not willing  to  adjourn  the  matter  for  an
         interpreter to attend.  The reason for that was that it  was  clear
         that the Appellant did speak English to a good level and had chosen
         not to ask for an interpreter having been given  two  opportunities
         to do so earlier in the proceedings.  I  indicated  at  that  stage
         that we would keep the issue under review in the course of evidence
         and that if it became apparent at any stage in the  course  of  the
         hearing that the Appellant was struggling with the language and the
         matter could be adjourned at that point."

12. The Judge gave clear and cogent reasons at [22] as to why  he  did  not
    consider it necessary to adjourn for an interpreter.   Importantly,  it
    was clear the Appellant spoke English to a good level.  Further he  had
    chosen not to ask for an interpreter  on  two  previous  opportunities.
    The Judge properly indicated  that  he  would  keep  the  matter  under
    review.


13. At [23] he states:-

         "I note that at no point in the hearing did the Appellant appear to
         struggle with the language and that  at  the  end  of  the  hearing
         counsel did not raise any concerns  about  the  fact  that  we  had
         proceeded without an interpreter.  Accordingly I was satisfied that
         no unfairness flowed from this in the course of the hearing."

14. Mr. Eruwa submitted that the Appellant had been "severely affected"  as
    a result of being without an interpreter, that he had not been able  to
    follow the  proceedings,  that  he  had  struggled  to  understand  the
    questions asked, and had not been able properly to articulate  himself.
    I find that these are bare assertions and have no basis.


15. I have no evidence before me from Counsel  to  support  the  assertions
    made by Mr. Eruwa.  I have no statement from the Appellant.  Given  the
    submissions  made  by  Mr.  Eruwa  that  the  Appellant  was  "severely
    affected", I  would  expect  to  see  some  evidence  from  Counsel  to
    corroborate this, but I have none.

16. Mr. Eruwa also submitted that  Counsel  "felt  obligated  to  proceed".
    Again, there is no statement from Counsel to corroborate the  assertion
    that he felt that he could not raise the issue of the  interpreter  any
    further.  It is clear that the Judge  indicated  that  the  matter  was
    under review, and Counsel  and/or  the  Appellant  himself  could  have
    indicated during the course of proceedings that the lack of interpreter
    was causing a problem.  Neither made any such indication.  It is  clear
    that Counsel did not consider that the Appellant was struggling, or  he
    would have raised concerns.  Counsel did not make  submissions  to  the
    effect that the hearing had not been fair  owing  to  the  lack  of  an
    interpreter.  The Judge was entitled to take into  account  that  there
    were no such submissions made by Counsel, nor any attempt  to  bring  a
    halt to the proceedings on the basis of a lack of understanding.


17. I find that the Judge properly considered whether or not an interpreter
    was necessary.  He  satisfied  himself  that  the  Appellant's  English
    language skills were good enough to proceed without one.  There were no
    objections raised during the  course  of  the  hearing.   There  is  no
    statement before me now either from the Appellant or  from  Counsel  to
    corroborate the claims that the Appellant was "severely affected" as  a
    result of being without an interpreter.

18. Further, and significantly, the Appellant has not pointed  to  anything
    in the decision which shows that he was put at a  disadvantage  by  the
    lack of an interpreter.  The grounds of appeal  do  not  refer  to  any
    particular findings where the Appellant was misunderstood, or where  he
    misunderstood the question that he  was  being  asked,  such  that  the
    answer as recorded is not that which he gave.

19. Taking into account all of the above, I find that the Judge did not act
    unfairly in not adjourning.  There is no error of law in the Judge  not
    adjourning for an interpreter.

20. At [24] the Judge refers to the application made for an adjournment  on
    the basis that further and  better  evidence  could  be  obtained  from
    Bangladesh.  The Judge states:-

         "The counsel also applied for an adjournment at the  start  of  the
         hearing in  order  to  obtain  further  and  better  evidence  from
         Bangladesh.  When I asked what evidence they were seeking to obtain
         he suggested that they wanted to get a confirmation letter from the
         doctor who had treated the Appellant after he was attacked in 2009.
          It was explained that the original letter had been lost  when  the
         family had moved house.  The Home Office did not consider that this
         letter would add significantly to the case and I agreed with  them.
         It does not seem to me to be reasonably likely that a doctor  would
         retain written records for ten years and it really is an  ancillary
         issue in the case given that the Appellant's family have been  able
         to send extensive  allegedly  original  documents  from  Bangladesh
         already."

21. The Judge gave reasons for not allowing an adjournment.   Although  the
    grounds of appeal at [5] refer to "all the  necessary  documents",  and
    the Judge records that the application was made on the basis  that  the
    Appellant wished to get "further and better evidence", it is clear from
    [24] that, when probed by the Judge, it was only one letter  which  the
    Appellant sought to obtain, a letter which the Appellant did  not  know
    whether it existed or not.  The Judge considered the relevance of  such
    a letter, and decided, having discussed it with the Respondent, that it
    was not necessary and therefore not in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    adjourn the hearing.  Although the grounds before me refer to "all  the
    necessary documents", there are no details of what documents these are,
    or what material difference they would have made.

22. I find there is no error in the Judge's decision not to adjourn on  the
    basis of production of a ten year old letter which may or may not  have
    existed.

23. The grant of permission focused on the  failure  to  adjourn.   At  the
    hearing before me,  Mr.  Eruwa  also  focused  on  this,  and  made  no
    reference to the other grounds of appeal.  The grounds from [6] to [10]
    refer not to the Judge's findings, but to the Judge's  account  of  the
    hearing, the evidence and the submissions, which he set out  from  [21]
    to [40].  The findings start at [41].  The  grounds  do  not  make  any
    reference to paragraphs [41] onwards and identify no errors of  law  in
    the Judge's findings.

24. I have considered the Judge's findings.  He deals with the issues which
    have been set out in the grounds.  At [42] he considers the photographs
    and finds that they are of little evidential value as there is  nothing
    which identifies the location, nothing to support the claim this was  a
    consequence of an attack on the home, and nothing to confirm  the  date
    or place.  He finds at [43] that, although the photographs were said to
    be have been sent to the Appellant by e-mail, the e-mail itself had not
    been provided.  There is no error  of  law  in  his  treatment  of  the
    photographs, and the grounds do not allege that he has erred.

25. The Judge addressed the issue  of  the  lawsuit  and  the  court  order
    documents at [46] to [48].  The grounds have not submitted  that  there
    is any error in these paragraphs.  The Judge  considered  the  evidence
    and made findings which were open to him.  He deals with the attacks at
    [50].  Again, it is not submitted that  there  is  any  error  in  this
    paragraph.  The Judge considered the evidence and made findings on  the
    basis of that evidence.

26. I have addressed above the issue of the documents.   When  probed,  the
    Appellant only identified one  document  which  he  wished  to  try  to
    obtain.  The grounds before me repeatedly  refer  to  "documents",  but
    without  particularising,  and  without  any  submission  as  to  their
    materiality.  The Judge did not  act  unfairly  by  not  adjourning  to
    obtain the one document which was mentioned.  There is no error of  law
    in not adjourning so that the Appellant could obtain documents which he
    did not particularise, and of which the Judge had no knowledge.

27. In relation to Article 8, at [17] the Judge states that Counsel did not
    argue an Article 8 claim before  him  either  under,  or  outside,  the
    immigration rules.  He also notes that Counsel's skeleton argument  did
    not address Article 8.  There  is  no  error  in  failing  to  consider
    Article 8 if it was not pleaded before him.

28. The grounds from paragraph  [16]  repeat  what  is  said  earlier,  and
    further, [22] and [23] refer to "appellants", and  seem  to  have  been
    copied from another case.

29. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the grounds  are  not
    made out.  In particular I find that there was no procedural unfairness
    in the Judge not adjourning in accordance  with  the  case  of  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  The Appellant was not
    deprived of a fair hearing.



Notice of decision

30. The decision does not involve the making of a material error of law and
    I do not set it aside.


31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 15 June 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


