
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01021/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On March 5, 2019                             |On March 7, 2019              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                 SARWAT [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by CAB (Bolton)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
 1. The appellant, an Iranian national, claimed to have entered the United
    Kingdom on September 3, 2017 and having been encountered by the police
    on September 6, 2017 claimed asylum. The respondent refused his
    application on January 7, 2018 under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.


 2. The appellant appealed that decision on January 22, 2018 under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ennals on June
    22, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on June 28, 2018 he dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 4. Grounds of appeal were lodged on July 10, 2018 in which it was argued
    that the Judge had materially erred by failing to deal adequately with
    the evidence of Dr Ibbotson, failing to give adequate reasons for
    rejecting his account of the fight the appellant had with Mohammed and
    failing to address the nature of his injuries when considering risk on
    return through illegal exit.

 5. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal O'Garro on August 8, 2019 but Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
    granted permission on all grounds albeit no reasons for the grant were
    provided.

 6. No anonymity order is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Brown adopted the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  there  was  an
    interplay between first and third grounds in light of HB  (Kurds)  Iran
    CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC). He invited the Tribunal to find the Judge's
    findings about the appellant's injuries were flawed  in  light  of  the
    medical report of Dr Ibbotson. He referred the Tribunal to page  25  of
    report and pointed out the appellant had had to have extensive  surgery
    on his hand and had suffered other injuries to his left knee  and  left
    side. The expert said the injury to his hand was caused as claimed  and
    this injury alone was hardly minor as it left him disfigured and  found
    they were diagnostic of being caused by a blue coloured  anti-personnel
    mine. The appellant's case was he received treatment for  this  in  the
    KDPI. The Judge's finding about his injuries was unsustainable.

 8. Mr Brown submitted the Judge did not engage with the fact  he  received
    treatment in the KDPI and this was relevant to the assessment  of  risk
    on return. The appellant claimed he spent a significant period of  time
    in the KDPI and this had  to  be  considered  when  assessing  risk  on
    return. Applying the recent guidance in HB he submitted that the  Judge
    failed to engage with the fact that  returning  Kurds  are  subject  to
    heightened suspicion and because of his particular  characteristics  he
    would be likely to be subject to detention and questioning.

 9. Mr Tan opposed the application. He accepted the medical  report  of  Dr
    Ibbotson described a number of injuries and did not  disagree  with  Mr
    Brown's description of the injury  to  the  appellant's  hand,  but  he
    submitted the materiality of the injury had to be  viewed  against  the
    appellant's account. The appellant stated the  mine  was  put  down  by
    third party and he submitted the Judge addressed this at  paragraph  25
    of his decision. Dealing with the  HB  point  he  submitted  the  Judge
    accepted he was  a  Kurd  but  as  he  rejected  his  claim  about  his
    involvement or connection to the KDPI there  were  no  additional  risk
    factors apart from a disfigured hand and that in itself did not mean  a
    connection to the KDPI. It was mere speculation to say the  authorities
    would have an interest in him because the fact  he  was  injured  by  a
    landmine did not mean he would be subjected to heightened  questioning.
    As regards illegal exit this was properly dealt with at paragraph 27 of
    the decision.

10. I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

11. The appellant is an Iranian Kurd who suffered an injury to his hand and
    other parts of body when he  accidentally  detonated  a  landmine.  The
    medical report of Dr Ibbotson confirmed he  suffered  a  deformity  and
    shortening of the thumb and left index  finger  as  a  result  of  none
    damage and tissue loss. The doctor confirmed  that  the  appellant  had
    received extensive surgical treatment for this injury. The doctor noted
    small flecks of blue discolouration on the hand and concluded that this
    injury together with the scarring  to  his  face  and  left  knee  were
    diagnostic of the type of  injury  that  would  be  caused  by  a  blue
    coloured anti-personnel mine.

12. Mr Brown submits, and permission to appeal was granted on  this  basis,
    that the Judge's assessment of the injuries was inadequate.

13. The Judge considered the medical evidence  from  paragraph  16  of  his
    decision. He noted an important starting point was the  medical  report
    of Dr Ibbotson but found that the doctor did not express a view in line
    with the Istanbul Protocol for the purposes of causation.  The  finding
    at paragraph 16 is not strictly speaking  correct  because  whilst  the
    doctor provided an opinion about individual injuries between  paragraph
    13(a) and (f), he concluded his assessment of how those  injuries  were
    caused at 13(g) when he stated, "the nature  and  distribution  of  the
    scars are diagnostic of the injuries that would be  caused  by  a  blue
    coloured anti-personnel mine". The Judge's finding at paragraph  17  of
    his decision is therefore flawed.

14. Mr Tan appeared to acknowledge this point but argued the materiality of
    the injury suggesting  it  was  speculation  how  the  authorities  may
    perceive he received the injury.

15. The difficulty I have with that approach is that the  Judge  approaches
    the remaining aspects of the claim from a flawed starting  point.  When
    you add into the mix that the appellant claimed he was  living  in  the
    KDPI, he is a Kurd, possibly left illegally and  will  return  with  an
    obvious injury (which the Judge accepts was caused by a blast  of  some
    form) I accept Mr Brown's submission that the  assessment  of  risk  on
    return was also flawed.

16. If the starting point was the appellant did suffer his injury  and  had
    spent 12 months plus in the KDPI then  following  the  guidance  in  HB
    there would be additional risk factors to  consider  and  unfortunately
    this was not done by the Judge in this appeal.

17. As credibility findings will need to  be  made  afresh,  I  remit  this
    matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  under  section  12(1)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. No findings are preserved.

Notice of Decision

There is an error in law.  I set aside the original decision and  remit  the
matter back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  section  12  (1)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.


Signed                              Date     05/03/2019


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
