
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01980/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2017                           |On 30 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     yh
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Fraczyk, Counsel instructed by Leonard Cannings
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and his date of birth  is  15
    January 1999.  His application for asylum was refused by the  Secretary
    of State on 8 February 2017. The Appellant appealed and his appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pears in a decision  that
    was promulgated on 3 April 2017, following a hearing on 23 March  2017.
    The Appellant did not attend the hearing and he  was  not  represented.
    Permission was granted to the Appellant  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson on 27 September 2017.


 2. The judge concluded that a notice was sent to the Appellant  and  there
    was no explanation for his non-attendance and decided to proceed in his
    absence. The Appellant, when he  was  interviewed  in  respect  of  his
    asylum  claim  in  January  2017,  indicated  that  he  had  moved   to
    [Bournemouth].    The Appellant is a minor and was moved by  the  local
    authority. A notice of hearing was sent to the Appellant on 23 February
    2017 to the previous address. The solicitors were not on record at  the
    time the notice was issued and were not notified of the hearing date.

3.   The Appellant was not aware of the  hearing  having  not  received  the
    notice of the hearing. There has been a procedural irregularity  giving
    rise to unfairness.   Applying the guidance in FP  (Iran)  [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 13, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  Because
    of the nature of the error, the matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 27.11.17

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

