
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01060/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2017                   |On 27 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     F N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr Dhanji, counsel
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Throughout this decision I refer to the parties as  they  were  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal notwithstanding it was the Secretary of  State  who
    was first granted permission to appeal to this Tribunal. Thus  I  refer
    to the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beg ("FTTJ Beg") promulgated on 1 June  2017,  in  which
    she dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum  and
    allowed his appeal on human rights grounds, pursuant to Article 8.


 3. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ but given my findings he is
    entitled  to  anonymity  in  these  proceedings.  I  make  a  direction
    accordingly.


Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  1  March  1994.   He
    arrived clandestinely in the UK on 31 March 2008, at the age of 14  and
    claimed asylum a few days later. His asylum  claim  was  refused  on  3
    October 2008 and he was granted discretionary leave  to  remain  as  an
    unaccompanied minor, until 1 September 2011.  He  applied  for  further
    leave to remain before the expiry of that leave. This was refused on  1
    June 2012 and his appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Jhirad on 20 July 2012. His appeal rights became exhausted on 23 August
    2012.  Further submissions were made on 21 December 2012 but these were
    refused. A further application for  leave  to  remain  was  made  on  5
    February 2015; this was refused  on  26  October  2015.   He  submitted
    further submissions on 11  January  2016.  Those  were  refused  on  18
    January 2016 and it is the latter  decision  which  gave  rise  to  the
    appeal before FTTJ Beg this year.


 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal and this was granted  on  18
    September 2017 in the following terms:


         "1. The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against a decision of
         the First-Tier Tribunal (Judge) promulgated on the  1st  June  2017
         who allowed the Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse
         to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection.
         2. It is arguable that the Judge made an error of law by not taking
         into account the "public interest considerations" set out in  s117B
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
         3. The grounds and the decision do disclose an  arguable  error  of
         law."


 6. The appellant also sought permission to appeal against the dismissal of
    his appeal on protection grounds. That application was made out of time
    and a reason was given for  the  delay.  A  witness  statement  by  the
    appellant was provided in support to explain the  delay.     First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page decided, on 8  November  2017,  not  to  admit  the
    application because it had been lodged out of time, although the  Judge
    expressed the decision in the following terms: "... I am not  satisfied
    that there are grounds to  merit  an  extension  of  the  fourteen  day
    statutory time limit. This application has been made substantially  out
    of time and consequently permission to appeal must be refused."


The hearing

 7. Before the start of the hearing before me, the appellant's counsel,  Mr
    Dhanji, produced a copy of the appellant's  application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal to extend time. A copy had been provided to Ms Ahmad. He  made
    oral submissions in support of the application for permission to appeal
    to the Upper  Tribunal  out  of  time.  Mr  Dhanji  accepted  that  the
    application to the First-tier Tribunal had been made  13  days  out  of
    time and that this was "a long period of delay";  he  referred  to  the
    appellant's explanation in his witness statement: he had  been  fasting
    during Ramadan and had been unwell and unable to  travel  to  meet  his
    solicitors after the promulgation of the FTTJ's decision.  He  referred
    to the three-stage test in SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387.   He
    accepted this was not a delay of two or three  days  but  this  was  an
    appeal on protection grounds; the impact on the appellant, if  he  were
    unable to pursue the appeal, would be  considerable,  with  potentially
    very serious consequences.  He had no information as  to  when  counsel
    had been instructed to draft  the  grounds  of  appeal,  following  the
    receipt of instructions from the appellant but the appellant should not
    be punished for any delay by his representatives.


 8. Ms Ahmad, for the respondent, opposed the application. She  agreed  the
    principles in SS (Congo) applied. She submitted that a delay of 13 days
    was significant. She did not  accept  that  the  reason  given  by  the
    appellant for the delay was a good one: he could  have  instructed  his
    solicitors by telephone with regard to an appeal. There was no  medical
    evidence to support his claim to have been unwell while  fasting.  That
    said, she accepted that the consequences for  the  appellant  of  being
    unable to appeal were serious.

 9. I decided to extend time for the following reasons.  An application had
    been made to extend time and reasons had been given for the delay.  The
    First-tier Tribunal judge had failed  to  follow  the  authorities,  SS
    (Congo) at [93] - [95] and R (Onuwu) v FTT (IAC) [2016] UKUT 185 (IAC),
    in that he had not considered the consequences for the appellant of not
    admitting the application out of time. The respondent's submission that
    the delay constituted a serious breach: it was one  of  13  days.   The
    appellant had, however, provided a witness statement which contained an
    explanation: he had not been sufficiently well  during  Ramadan,  as  a
    result of fasting, to engage meaningfully with his solicitors  such  as
    to give them formal instructions on whether to pursue an appeal. Whilst
    it was submitted by the respondent the appellant could  have  contacted
    his solicitors by telephone, I note he speaks Pashto and it is unlikely
    he  could  have  communicated  in  English  sufficiently  well  as   to
    understand the impact of the FTTJ's decision over  the  telephone:  the
    FTTJ had allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  but  not  on
    protection grounds. This was a serious breach, being one of 13 days.  I
    bear in mind there was no medical evidence.  I accept that  a  face  to
    face meeting would have been required to  explain  the  impact  of  the
    decision on the appellant's future.   The  solicitors  would  not  have
    known, at that time, whether the respondent would seek  to  appeal  the
    human rights decision but might reasonably have assumed that  would  be
    the case.  As it happens the respondent did seek such permission and it
    was granted.  Thus the consequences of the dismissal of his  protection
    claim are sufficiently serious as to warrant consideration. His  asylum
    claim could not be described as hopeless or non-existent. It was in the
    interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding objective to
    extend time.


10. Having  extended  time  as  regards  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal, I granted permission to appeal, it being arguable
    that the FTTJ had failed to give adequate consideration to the  age  of
    the appellant  (he  was  a  minor)  when  applying  the  principles  in
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 to the earlier decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.  All grounds were arguable.

11.  Mr  Dhanji  then  submitted  that  the  respondent's  application  for
    permission to appeal to this tribunal had been made out of time to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. He submitted that, if the respondent had been sent
    the FTTJ's decision on 1 June 2017, as was the case for the  appellant,
    the respondent had lodged her application out of time by one  day.   He
    referred to Rule 33(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. He accepted that  the  use
    of the phrase "provided with" in the procedure rules  was  unclear  but
    submitted  it  could  be  defined  as  "sent".  On  this   basis,   the
    respondent's application had been made out of time by one  day  and  no
    application had been made to extend time; nor had a reason  been  given
    for the delay. He noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  failed
    to address the issue of timeliness when granting permission to appeal.

12. Ms Ahmad responded that she needed to investigate this issue; from  her
    instructions the decision had been received by the respondent on 2 June
    2017 and the application had therefore been made in time. In reply,  Mr
    Dhanji said he was instructed to oppose the grant of any  extension  of
    time, if it were required, but "not to go beyond that".

13. Sitting as a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  and  applying  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014, I decided that the respondent's application had been made in time
    and that, even if it had not, it would be appropriate to  extend  time.
    In the latter situation, the grant of permission to appeal  would  have
    been conditional on time being extended.  My reasons  are  as  follows.
    Rule 33 states as follows:

         "an application  under  paragraph  (1)  must  be  provided  to  the
         Tribunal so that it is received no later than  14  days  after  the
         date on which the party making the application  was  provided  with
         written reasons for the decision."

14. The meaning of "was provided with" in the latter part of Rule 33(2)  is
    not defined. Nor is there any explanation in any Practice Direction. It
    is arguable that it should be given the meaning "sent" but this word is
    used elsewhere in Rule 33, for example at Rule 33(4) in relation to  an
    amended notice of decision which suggests the intention was  that  "was
    provided with" had a different meaning. I have considered  whether  the
    words "was provided with" might have been used to cover other modes  of
    delivery, such as ex tempore, by post, by email or  by  hand.   I  give
    weight to the fact that the term "was  provided  with"  is  in  passive
    voice. This suggests  delivery  or  receipt,  rather  than  merely  the
    sending, giving or despatch of the decision. Such an interpretation  is
    consonant with the guidance in R (on the application of  Javed)  [2014]
    EWHC  4426  where  it  was  found  that  merely  sending  a  notice  of
    curtailment of leave to the last known address was not sufficient;  the
    respondent had to "be able to prove that notice of such a decision  was
    communicated to the person concerned, in order for it to be effective."




15. If I had not found the application had been made in time I  would  have
    extended time for the following reasons. The guidance  in  SS  (Congo),
    endorsed in Onuwu at [13] is that

           "If  a  judge  concludes  that  a  breach  is  not  serious   or
           significant, then relief will usually be  granted  and  it  will
           usually be unnecessary to spend much time on the second or third
           stages; but if the judge decides that the breach is  serious  or
           significant, then the second and  third  stages  assume  greater
           importance."

    In the present case, the breach is not significant; it cannot either be
    described as serious  because  the  impact  on  the  parties  has  been
    minimal. Both parties assumed (as did the Judge granting permission  to
    appeal) that the application had been lodged in time; both parties  had
    prepared for the hearing of the  respondent's  appeal  before  me.   Mr
    Dhanji accepted the appellant had not raised the issue earlier and that
    the appellant was prepared to deal with the respondent's appeal against
    the FTTJ's human rights findings.  I bore in mind  there  had  been  no
    application to extend time and no reason had been given for the  delay,
    contrary  to  Rule  33(5)(c),  and  the  apparent  assumption  of   the
    respondent that time started to run from the date  of  receipt  of  the
    FTTJ's decision rather than the date it was sent. I also bore  in  mind
    the lack of clarity in the Procedure Rules on the issue.  There  is  no
    authority on the definition of "was provided with" in  Rule  33.   Also
    relevant is the guidance in SS (Congo) that "The important  point  made
    in Denton was that if there is a serious or significant breach  and  no
    good reason for the breach, this does not mean that the application for
    relief will automatically fail.".  In the third stage of my  assessment
    I bore in mind all the circumstances of the case to  deal  justly  with
    the issue: there was a need for litigation to be conducted  efficiently
    and at proportionate cost and for the enforcement  of  compliance  with
    rules, practice directions and court orders. In the present  case,  the
    appellant's solicitors had written to this Tribunal requesting that the
    respondent's appeal and the appellant's application for an extension of
    time were considered at the same hearing. There was  no  indication  in
    that correspondence  that  the  appellant  intended  to  challenge  the
    timeliness of the respondent's application for  permission  to  appeal;
    nor had the respondent been notified of it prior to the hearing  before
    me.  I considered adjourning the hearing to enable  the  respondent  to
    take instructions but considered this would cause inappropriate  delay,
    contrary to the overriding objective. Taking all the circumstances into
    account and,  in  particular,  that  the  breach  was  not  serious  or
    significant, time could be extended  without  injustice.   Put  another
    way, it was in the interests of justice to extend time.

16. For these reasons, I heard the parties' representatives' submissions on
    whether or not the FTTJ had made errors of  law  in  her  decisions  to
    dismiss  the  appeal  on  protection  grounds  (as  contended  by   the
    appellant) and to allow the human rights appeal (as  contended  by  the
    respondent).


Submissions - Human Rights Grounds

17. Ms Ahmad relied on the grounds of appeal. In essence it  was  submitted
    that FTTJ Beg should not have departed from the  original  findings  of
    FTTJ Jhirad in dismissing the appeal  on  all  grounds.  FTTJ  Beg  had
    ignored at [42] the respondent's submissions with regard  to  paragraph
    276ADE. She had failed to consider s117B and had not provided  reasoned
    findings on  proportionality  pursuant  to  Article  8.  She  had  thus
    misdirected herself in law. In addition she had failed to give adequate
    reasons having allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds:  the  appellant
    had not demonstrated strong emotional ties with his uncle  in  the  UK.
    The findings  on  this  issue  were  contradictory  given  the  adverse
    credibility findings. The FTTJ had failed to reconcile the evidence  as
    to the existence of family in Afghanistan. It was speculation  to  find
    the appellant would have difficulties re-settling  in  Afghanistan;  in
    any event this could not amount to very significant obstacles. Nor  had
    the FTTJ given appropriate weight to the appellant's application for an
    Afghan passport. The FTTJ ignored the findings of FTTJ Jhirad as to the
    feasibility of return. Ms Ahmad accepted the FTTJ had not been provided
    with the respondent's guidance on the application of  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE in the Rules but the principles were relevant and  she
    had not adhered to them. The guidance in Miah (section 117B NIAA 2002 -
    children) [2016] UKUT 131 (IAC) had not been followed (although it  was
    accepted FTTJ Beg had not been referred to it).


18. For the appellant, Mr Dhanji submitted  the  FTTJ  did  not  materially
    misdirect herself in law; nor did she fail to give adequate  reasoning.
    This was not an appeal being pursued on the basis of  perversity.   The
    FTTJ had asked herself at [41] and [42] the correct questions  pursuant
    to the Immigration Rules: would the  appellant  face  very  significant
    obstacles to integration in Afghanistan. She properly directed  herself
    and went on to explain why she found there  were  such  obstacles.  She
    highlighted that the appellant had left Afghanistan at the age  of  13;
    he  was  now  23.  She  concluded  that  the  passage  of   time,   his
    westernisation and his lack of work experience in Afghanistan  and  his
    lack of immediate family would  cause  him  to  face  very  significant
    obstacles. There was no conflict in the fact finding  that  his  mother
    and brother live in Pakistan. It was accepted that the  conclusion  was
    not one which other judges  might  have  reached  but  it  was  reached
    properly and applying the  law  correctly.  The  decision  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) contained no error of law. There  had  been  no
    requirement to go outside the Rules.




Discussion - human rights grounds

19. This appeal is pursued by the respondent on two grounds: that there has
    been a material misdirection in law and that FTTJ Beg  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for her findings.


20. It is submitted for the  respondent  that  FTTJ  Beg  should  not  have
    departed from FTTJ Jhirad's findings (Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  00702);
    she  should  have  dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights   grounds.
    Paragraphs 39-42 of Devaseelan indicate how a second adjudicator should
    approach the determination of another  Adjudicator  who  has  heard  an
    appeal by the same appellant. In summary (from paragraph 39):

        a. The first  adjudicator's  determination  should  always  be  the
           starting point.

        b. Facts happening since the first Adjudicator's determination  can
           always be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.

        c. Facts happening before the first Adjudicator's determination but
           having no relevance to the issues before him can always be taken
           into account by the second Adjudicator.

    As regards matters which could have been before the  first  Adjudicator
    but were not, a  summary  of  the  relevant  Tribunal  guidance  is  as
    follows:

        d. Factors personal to the Appellant that were not brought  to  the
           attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were  relevant
           to the issues before  him,  should  be  treated  by  the  second
           Adjudicator with the greatest circumspection.  The force of  the
           reasoning underlying this guideline is greatly reduced if  there
           is some very good reason why the Appellant's failure  to  adduce
           relevant evidence before the first Adjudicator should not be, as
           it were, held against him.

        e. Evidence of other facts - for example country evidence - may not
           suffer from the same concerns as to credibility, but  should  be
           treated with caution.


21. In the present case, therefore, FTTJ Beg  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account the appellant's current circumstances in  deciding  whether  he
    fulfilled the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), namely whether there
    were very significant obstacles to his integration on  return.  In  any
    event, the changes to the Immigration  Rules  in  July  2012  were  not
    considered by FTTJ Jhirad who only considered the appellant's appeal in
    the context of the Article 8 jurisprudence,  outside  the  Rules.   The
    FTTJ Beg was entitled to treat FTTJ Jhirad's decision as  the  starting
    point and to consider events after  July  2012  when  that  appeal  was
    heard.


22. I am unable  to  accept  the  submission  that  FTTJ  Beg  ignored  the
    submissions of the presenting officer. FTTJ noted  the  submissions  of
    the presenting officer and it can  be  inferred  she  took  these  into
    account. For example, the FTTJ accepted the appellant  did  not  fulfil
    the  criteria  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)   and   considered   instead
    276ADE(1)(vi).

23. The respondent asserts FTTJ Beg failed to take into account the  public
    interest factors in s117B but FTTJ Beg decided  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  and,  having  found  the  appellant  fulfilled  the
    criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) did  not  go  on  to  consider  the
    appeal outside the Rules. There was no requirement on her  to  consider
    the public interest factors: the Immigration Rules  have  been  drafted
    with those in mind.

24. The respondent's contention as  regards  the  adequacy  of  the  FTTJ's
    reasoning appear to focus on consideration of the  appeal  outside  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  pursuant  to  the  Article  8   jurisprudence.
    However, FTTJ Beg did not do so.

25. Mere adverse credibility findings regarding his asylum claim  were  not
    sufficient, without more, for an adverse  credibility  finding  on  all
    issues. While it  is  averred  the  appellant  provided  "very  limited
    evidence", FTTJ Beg heard from the appellant himself and three  further
    witnesses as to the nature and quality of the appellant's private  life
    in the UK and his circumstances on return; she cited that  evidence  at
    length at [13] -  [20].  This  is  not  limited  evidence,  albeit  the
    majority of the witness evidence related to the appellant's  appeal  on
    protection grounds.

26. Whilst this is not a perversity challenge, I note FTTJ Beg found  "none
    of the witnesses credible" at [38]. However, she made this  finding  in
    the  context  of  considering  the  appellant's  appeal  on  protection
    grounds.  It was open to her to find that the evidence of the witnesses
    as regards the appellant's private life was reliable and  this  can  be
    inferred from her subsequent paragraphs in which  she  refers  to  that
    evidence  and  relies  on  it  to  make  her  finding  as  regards  the
    appellant's ability to meet the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

27. There is no suggestion by the respondent that FTTJ Beg  has  failed  to
    record the evidence  accurately.  Nor  is  there  a  challenge  to  the
    findings of fact or that those findings are perverse.  This  appeal  is
    founded on a contention that the reasoning  is  inadequate.   I  remind
    myself that the decision was made pursuant to the Rules and not outside
    the Rules. There was therefore no need for FTTJ Beg to make findings as
    to whether the appellant's relationship with his uncle engaged  Article
    8. The sole issue to be decided was whether there were very significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into  Afghanistan.   FTTJ  Beg
    took various facts into account in so finding: the  appellant's  mother
    and brother live in Pakistan; there were no immediate  members  of  his
    family in Afghanistan to support him; he had close emotional ties  with
    his uncle, his uncle's family and cousin in the UK; they had  supported
    him since his arrival here as a minor and he was treated as a member of
    the family; he was dependent on his uncle.  In Sanambar v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1284 the Court of Appeal said that consideration of the  issue
    of obstacles to integration  requires  consideration  of  all  relevant
    factors some of which might be described as generic.  Factors  such  as
    intelligence, employability and general robustness of  character  could
    clearly be relevant to that issue.  In the present case, the  FTTJ  had
    noted the appellant's closeness to his uncle's family, with whom he had
    lived for the nine years since his arrival in the UK; the evidence  was
    that the appellant's uncle treated him as his own son.  They  continued
    to live together. That was a factor FTTJ Beg was entitled to take  into
    account in considering the obstacles to integration on return.

28. The appellant had left Afghanistan at the age of 13, as a  child.  FTTJ
    Beg noted the appellant had some family members in his home  area  (his
    maternal aunt and her family) as well as members of the Niazi  clan  in
    his home village.  The appellant's evidence was that he no longer had a
    family home there. The appellant had never worked  in  Afghanistan.  He
    spoke Pashto and English. He had spent his teenage years in the  United
    Kingdom. FTTJ Beg made a reasonable inference that  the  appellant  had
    developed "some western habits and lifestyle ... after nine  years"  in
    the UK. I do not accept the respondent's submission before me that,  at
    the age  of  13,  when  he  left  Afghanistan,  the  appellant  was  "a
    significantly advanced teen-age ...  fully  accustomed  to  his  Afghan
    heritage, roots, and culture".  The appellant was barely a teenager  at
    13, when he arrived in the UK.  He cannot be said, as is submitted  for
    the respondent, to have become fully accustomed to his Afghan heritage,
    roots and culture at that age;  he  was  a  minor  and  looked  to  his
    immediate family for guidance and supervision.  I  do  not  accept  the
    submission that it was "speculative and unreasoned to conclude ... that
    it would be "difficult to re-settle"". That finding is justified on the
    evidence.  It would undoubtedly be so.

29. In SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 (a deportation case) it  was  held
    that the concept of integration into a country was a broad one.  It was
    not confined to the mere ability to find a job or sustain  life  whilst
    living in the other country.  It would  usually  be  sufficient  for  a
    court or tribunal to direct itself in the terms Parliament  had  chosen
    to use.  The idea  of  "integration"  called  for  a  broad  evaluative
    judgment to be made as to whether the individual would be enough of  an
    insider in terms of understanding how life in the society in that other
    country was carried on and a capacity to participate in it,  so  as  to
    have a reasonable opportunity to be  accepted  there,  to  be  able  to
    operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build up within  a
    reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance  to
    the individual's private and family life.

30. The respondent has referred in her grounds of appeal to some background
    material on trans-national ties between Afghans in  the  UK  and  those
    with  kinship  relations:  The  Afghan  Muslim  Community  in  England,
    Department of Communities and Local Government Crown  Copyright  2009).
    However, there is no reference to this in the respondent's reasons  for
    refusal letter; nor was a copy  provided  to  FTTJ  Beg.  This  is  new
    background material. FTTJ Beg cannot be criticised for having failed to
    take it into account.

31. I remind myself that  this  is  not  a  challenge  on  the  grounds  of
    perversity.  While the decision of FTTJ Beg is one which might not have
    been reached by other judges in the First-tier Tribunal I am unable  to
    find that she misdirected herself in law or that her  decision  is  not
    adequately reasoned.  She gave various reasons  for  her  decision  and
    those reasons are sustainable on the evidence before her. There  is  no
    material error of law in her decision to  allow  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).


Submissions - protection grounds

32. Mr Dhanji adopted the grounds of appeal to this Tribunal. These are, in
    summary:


        a. FTTJ Beg had misdirected  herself  as  regards  Devaseelan;  she
           failed to take into account  FTTJ  Jhirad  had  not  taken  into
           account the appellant's minority in making  adverse  credibility
           findings. That decision  was  erroneous  in  law  therefore  and
           should not  have  been  taken  as  FTTJ's  starting  point.  Her
           rejection of the appellant's counsel's submission on  the  issue
           were erroneous. FTTJ Beg should have borne in mind  the  failure
           of FTTJ Jhirad to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No
           2 of 2010 regarding the treatment of vulnerable witnesses.
        b. There was a lack  of  clarity  in  the  findings  regarding  the
           documentary evidence adduced by the appellant. These  were  from
           three  sources.  The  respondent  had  failed  to  verify  these
           documents. PJ (Sri Lanka) [2015] 1 WLR 1322  applied  such  that
           the respondent could not mount a challenge.   It  appeared  FTTJ
           Beg accepted the submission that PJ (Sri Lanka) applied but made
           a contradictory finding that the documents, whilst genuine,  had
           unreliable contents.
        c. FTTJ Beg failed to give adequate reasons for finding  the  claim
           was not credible. At [28]-[38] she made various findings but did
           not explain the basis on  which  she  did  so.  The  appellant's
           credibility was the central issue.


33. Ms Ahmad, for the respondent, submitted FTTJ  Beg  had  considered  the
    evidence provided after the decision of FTTJ Jhirad at  [28]-[39].  She
    had referred to the challenge at [37]. It was submitted that  FTTJ  Beg
    gave no substantial weight to the earlier determination other  than  as
    the starting point. There was no material  error  of  law.  As  regards
    FTTJ's consideration of the appellant's documents, it was open  to  her
    to find that the documents themselves were genuine but that the content
    was not reliable.  FTTJ Beg had given reasons for failing to  find  the
    appellant credible. Her findings were open to her.


Discussion - protection

34. It had been submitted before FTTJ Beg  that  the  respondent's  initial
    decision to refuse asylum and FTTJ Jhirad's  decision  both  failed  to
    take into account the appellant's age at the time he claimed asylum and
    that "due allowance ought to be made for that" in  the  application  of
    Devaseelan. It was submitted before FTTJ Beg that the decision of  FTTJ
    Jhirad was vitiated  by  error  of  law.   However,  this  ignores  the
    appellant's attempt, without success, to appeal FTTJ Jhiran's decision.
    In Chomanga (binding effect of unappealed  decisions)  Zimbabwe  [2011]
    UKUT 00312 (IAC) the Tribunal  held  that  the  parties  are  bound  by
    unappealed findings of fact in an immigration judge's decision.


35. I have been referred to LD (Algeria) [2004] EWCA Civ 804, paragraph 40,
    where the Court of appeal refers to a necessary degree  of  flexibility
    and  desirable  consistency   of   approach,   without   imposing   any
    unacceptable restrictions on the second adjudicators' ability  to  make
    the findings which he conscientiously believes to be right.  I  do  not
    demur from that whilst noting that LD involved different parties to the
    earlier determination. The principle is nonetheless applicable.

36. In AM (Belarus) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1506 the Court  of  Appeal  also
    effectively approved the guidance given  in  Devaseelan  and  made  the
    point that a tribunal, which heard a claim closer in time to the events
    on which it was based was in a better position to make general findings
    of fact and to assess credibility than a tribunal going over  the  same
    ground years later.


37. There is no reference in  FTTJ  Jhirad's  decision  to  the  vulnerable
    witness guidance which was in force at the date of  that  decision  and
    which would have been applicable. That  said,  she  was  aware  of  the
    appellant's age and minority at all material times, not  least  because
    he was granted discretionary leave to remain as an unaccompanied minor.
    The appellant was an adult at the date of hearing.  FTTJ  Jhirad  noted
    the appellant's age at the dates of various events on which  he  relied
    in support of his claim [7].  At least some  of  the  adverse  findings
    were appropriately made irrespective of the appellant's  age,  eg  that
    the authorities had not sought to to apprehend  the  appellant  at  his
    aunt's home, 2-3 minutes walk from his  family  home,  the  failure  of
    family members to contact the appellant on the mobile  phone  given  to
    him and which he retained during his journey  to  the  UK.   These  are
    matters of plausibility unrelated to the appellant's age.  These, taken
    together with the failure of the appellant's  attempt  to  appeal  FTTJ
    Jhirad's decision,  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  principle  in
    Devaseelan applies, namely the decision of FTTJ Jhirad was  FTTJ  Beg's
    starting point.


38. The guidance in Devaseelan is that, if issues and evidence on the first
    and second appeals are materially the same, the second Tribunal  should
    treat the issues as settled by the first  decision  rather  than  being
    relitigated. I have considered the submissions of Mr Blundell,  counsel
    for the appellant in the FTT, and his submissions, adopted by Mr Dhanji
    before me on the  extent  to  which  the  guidance  in  Devaseelan  was
    applicable.  I  agree  that  there  is  room  for  flexibility  in  its
    application.  However, FTTJ Jhirad's decision was unappealable.  Whilst
    res judicata does not apply in the context of asylum  appeals  (Mubu  &
    Ors (Immigration appeals - res judicata) [2012] UKUT 00398 (IAC)),  the
    hearing before FTTJ Beg was not a forum for relitigation.  In  Mubu  it
    was held that the guidelines set out in Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  00702
    [2003] Imm AR 1 are always to be applied  to  the  determination  of  a
    factual issue, the dispute as to which has already been the subject  of
    judicial determination in an  appeal  against  an  earlier  immigration
    decision involving the same parties. This is so whether the finding  in
    the earlier determination was in favour, or against, the  Secretary  of
    State.


39. There was  therefore  no  error  of  law  in  FTTJ  Beg  rejecting  the
    submission that "the assessments undertaken by the respondent  and  the
    Jhirad Tribunal were vitiated by public law error, and  should  not  be
    taken as the starting point. The Devaseelan guidelines, as  interpreted
    in LD (Algeria) are, and must be, sufficiently flexible to  accommodate
    that submission."  The appellant had legal representation  before  FTTJ
    Jhirad. He applied  for  permission  to  appeal,  presumably  with  the
    benefit of legal representation also.  The decision of FTTJ Jhirad  was
    found not to contain any arguably material errors of law.  Against that
    backdrop, and given the authorities cited above, it was not a  material
    error of law for FTTJ to take the first decision as her starting point.

40. I turn to FTTJ Beg's consideration of the appellant's  documents.   The
    respondent had contended that these documents were not genuine. For the
    appellant it was  submitted  that  they  corroborated  the  appellant's
    account and the respondent should have  made  enquires  of  the  Afghan
    authorities to verify their authenticity. The appellant relied,  before
    FTTJ Beg, on PJ (Sri Lanka) [2015] 1 WLR 1322 to suggest the respondent
    could no longer, in the absence of verification, mount a  challenge  to
    the documents.

41. In PJ (Sri Lanka)  it  was  held  that,  whilst  the  circumstances  of
    individual  cases  might  exceptionally  necessitate  an   element   of
    investigation by national authorities, such a step would frequently  be
    unfeasible, unjustified or disproportionate due, amongst  other  things
    to logistical difficulties, cost, the  prevailing  local  situation  or
    potential risk to the claimant or his family resulting from  enquiries.
    One highly relevant factor was whether the outcome of any  enquiry  was
    likely  to  be  conclusive.  In  the  unusual  circumstances  where  an
    investigation should  have  been  undertaken,  the  consequences  would
    simply be  that  the  respondent  would  be  unable  to  challenge  the
    authenticity of the document until a  proper  enquiry  had  been  made.
    Paragraph 30 of PJ (Sri Lanka) makes it clear that  the  obligation  to
    enquire is fact specific and applies "when a simple process of  enquiry
    will conclusively resolve its authenticity and reliability


42. In MA (Bangladesh) and AM (Bangladesh) [2016] EWCA Civ 175,  the  Court
    of Appeal said the statement in PJ (Sri Lanka) that 'the  circumstances
    of particular cases  might  exceptionally  necessitate  an  element  of
    investigation' did not lay down a legal requirement that a case must be
    'exceptional' before such a duty arose. Rather the situation, in  which
    such a duty would arise, would occur only exceptionally. PJ (Sri Lanka)
    permitted  an  approach  that  was  sequential  in   nature.   National
    authorities might first consider whether a disputed document was at the
    centre of the request for  protection  before  proceeding  to  consider
    whether a simple process of  inquiry  would  conclusively  resolve  its
    authenticity and reliability. If those  conditions  were  satisfied  it
    might be necessary for a national  authority  to  make  an  enquiry  to
    verify a document, but it did not necessarily follow that such  a  duty
    would arise. Cases would be rare in which a court could  be  completely
    confident that a simple process of inquiry would  conclusively  resolve
    the issue. PJ (Sri Lanka) also required consideration  of  whether,  in
    all the circumstances of the particular case, the  Secretary  of  State
    was obliged to make enquiries into the authenticity and accuracy of the
    documents. There was uncontested evidence of MA's  conduct,  which  was
    compelling evidence that his asylum claim was not genuine. For example,
    if he had a well founded fear of persecution as alleged, it was  highly
    improbable that he would have remained in Bangladesh  for  three  years
    after going into hiding, that he would have left the country on his own
    passport and made no asylum claim in the UK until  2012  after  he  was
    found to be working illegally. In the circumstances  the  Secretary  of
    State was under no obligation to make  further  enquiries  about  Court
    documents allegedly confirming his conviction, which in any event might
    give no certainty of outcome, as to the authenticity of  the  documents
    in question.


43. In VT (Article 22 Procedures Directive  -  confidentiality)  Sri  Lanka
    [2017] UKUT 368 the Upper Tribunal held (i) There is no general duty of
    inquiry upon the examiner to authenticate documents produced in support
    of a protection claim. There  may  be  exceptional  situations  when  a
    document can be authenticated by a simple process of inquiry which will
    conclusively resolve the authenticity and reliability  of  a  document;
    (ii) There is a general duty of confidentiality during the  process  of
    examining a protection claim, including appellate and  judicial  review
    proceedings; (iii) The humanitarian principles underpinning Article  22
    of the Procedures Directive prohibit direct contact  with  the  alleged
    actor of persecution in the country of origin in a  manner  that  might
    alert them to the likelihood that a protection claim has been  made  or
    in a manner that might place applicants or their family members in  the
    country of origin at risk.  (iv)  The  humanitarian  objective  of  the
    Refugee Convention requires anyone seeking to authenticate  a  document
    produced in support of a protection claim  to  follow  a  precautionary
    approach. Whether an inquiry is necessary and  is  carried  out  in  an
    appropriate  way  will  depend  on  the  facts  of  the  case  and  the
    circumstances in the country of origin.


44. Thus the first issue is whether such an investigation should have  been
    undertaken by the respondent.  It was not submitted to FTTJ  Beg  (see,
    for example, the appellant's  counsel's  skeleton  argument)  that  the
    process  of  enquiring  into  the  authenticity  and  validity  of  the
    appellant's two documents issued  in  Afghanistan  would  have  been  a
    simple one. These documents were purportedly issued by the  headman  of
    the appellant's home village in Afghanistan and by the authorities (the
    police).  On the face of the translated documents there appear to be no
    telephone numbers or other means of contacting  the  authors  of  these
    documents.   Furthermore, FTTJ Beg would have  been  entitled  to  take
    into account, albeit she did not do so, FTTJ Jhirad's decision  on  the
    appellant's credibility.  This would not have suggested the outcome  of
    any investigation by the respondent would  give  certainty  as  to  the
    reliability  of  the  content  of  the  documents.   Furthermore,   the
    appellant claimed to be at risk of persecution by  the  authorities  in
    Afghanistan. Given the guidance in the PJ (Sri Lanka), MA  (Bangladesh)
    and VT, the respondent  cannot  be  criticised  for  having  failed  to
    attempt to authenticate the appellant's  documents.  to  have  done  so
    would have alerted the authorities in Afghanistan  to  the  appellant's
    asylum claim.   Thus there was no material error of law in  FTTJ  Beg's
    approach to assessing the reliability of the appellant's documents.

45. I turn to the third ground  of  appeal:  whether  FTTJ  Beg  had  given
    adequate reasons for her finding that the claim was not credible. I was
    referred to [28]-[38].  For the reasons  stated  above,  FTTJ  Beg  was
    entitled to treat the first decision as her  starting  point.  I  agree
    that, considered carefully, there appear to be  bare  explanations  for
    findings in these paragraphs. I deal with the specific grounds:

        a. At paragraph 28 FTTJ Beg finds the appellant's maternal  uncle's
           evidence not to be credible because "he feared the Taliban  when
           his own brother-in-law, that is the appellant's  father,  was  a
           senior commander with the Taliban". I agree that this is  not  a
           finding which sustainable. It  is  based  on  presumption.  Mere
           membership of the same family is not, without  more,  protection
           against risk.
        b. At paragraph 29, FTTJ Beg refers  to  the  appellant's  evidence
           that his father had been a senior commander  with  Hizb-e-Islami
           and the Taliban yet that neither the appellant nor his witnesses
           had been able to provide details  of  the  appellant's  father's
           work.  The FTTJ found that the appellant's father's  brother-in-
           law would have known more details about the  appellant's  father
           than  simply  that  which  had  been  conveyed  to  him  by  the
           appellant. This was a reasonable conclusion, particularly  given
           that the appellant was a child when he left Afghanistan.   Given
           the family relationship, it was reasonable to expect the witness
           would  have  personal  knowledge  of  the  appellant's  father's
           activities even if only in broad terms. This issue goes  to  the
           core of the appellant's claim to be at risk as a result  of  his
           father's activities.
        c. I agree that the finding at paragraph 31  regarding  the  chance
           meeting of one of the appellant's witnesses and the  appellant's
           mother is not based on the evidence. However, this is not a core
           issue in the appeal; it has little bearing on the outcome.
        d. I am unable to accept that the findings at paragraph 33 are  not
           sustainable on the evidence. FTTJ Beg makes an  adverse  finding
           on the basis of the implausibility of the  appellant's  evidence
           as regards contact between his aunt in Afghanistan and his uncle
           in the UK. The remaining findings largely flow from  that.  With
           the exception of FTTJ Beg's finding that the appellant's  mother
           moved to Pakistan for  medical  treatment  (which  is  based  on
           speculation and conjecture) the findings at  [31]  are  adequate
           and sustainable.


46. While, some of FTTJ Beg's reasoning is flawed, taken in the round,  her
    findings  are  sufficient  and  adequately  reasoned  and  justify  her
    conclusion on the appellants' credibility.


47. For these reasons, FTTJ  Beg's  decision  on  the  appellant's  adverse
    credibility and his entitlement to protection contain no material error
    of law. It should not be set aside.


Decision

48. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of any material error of law.  It should not be set aside.


49. The appeals of the appellant and respondent to this tribunal  are  both
    dismissed.




A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  24 November 2017




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  24 November 2017

