

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/01844/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 12 October 2016                      |On 19 October 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |



      Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    K A K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Farrelly, dismissing his appeal against refusal of recognition as
    a refugee from Iraq.

Grounds of appeal to the UT.

      ... The only substantive reason for dismissing the appeal  appears  to
      be,

      It is my conclusion it would be reasonable to expect  [the  appellant]
      to move to the Kurdish autonomous region. I also believe  it  possible
      that he could relocate to Baghdad the lack  of  support  and  language
      would make this least favourable (paragraph 19).

      The judge has erred in law... standing the  findings  in  AA  Iraq  CG
      [2015]:

      19. A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR  can  obtain  entry
      for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry  permission  for  a
      further 10 days. If K finds  employment,  K  can  remain  for  longer,
      although K will need to register  with  the  authorities  and  provide
      details of the employer. There is no evidence that the IKR authorities
      proactively remove Kurds from the IKR whose permits have  come  to  an
      end.

      20. Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, and reasonably be  expected  to
      avoid any potential undue harshness in that city by travelling to  the
      IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is likely to involve an assessment of
      (a) the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the  IKR  (such  as  to
      Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of K's securing  employment  in  the
      IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance from family and friends in
      the IKR.

      The judge makes no reference to the  fact  that  if  returned  to  the
      Kurdish region [the appellant] would only have a limited right to live
      there subject to finding employment, and consequently  the  judge  has
      failed to give adequate reasons for his findings. Reference is made to
      Wordie Property Co Ltd v Secretary of State for Scotland 1984 SLT  345
      at 348:

      The decision must, in short, leave the informed reader and  the  Court
      in no real and substantial doubt as to what the reasons  for  it  were
      and what where  the  material  considerations  that  were  taken  into
      account in reaching it.

Written response to the grant of permission.

 2. The judge properly considered whether the appellant could  relocate  to
    Baghdad and gave adequate reasons for so finding at  paragraphs  17  to
    19.  There is no material error of law in the decision.

Submissions for appellant.

 3. The evidence from the appellant about his background had  largely  been
    accepted. He is from  Sinjar,  a  city  within  the  disputed  area  of
    Ninewah, and is Kurdish  and  Shia.  There  was  a  minor  point  about
    language, not material. The decision says  that  the  appellant  speaks
    Kurdish Sorani but in fact he  speaks  and  gave  evidence  in  Kurdish
    Bardini. Although his initial interview is  recorded  as  having  taken
    place in Sorani, the substantive interview was in Bardini. He does  not
    speak Arabic. The conclusions in the decision at  paragraph  17  to  19
    were not adequately explained.  The judge  said  that  the  appellant's
    "home city now appears to be controlled by the legitimate  government",
    but that was based on only one news item handed in by the respondent on
    the day of the hearing. The respondent had  not  sought  to  amend  the
    terms of the refusal letter (paragraph 16) accepting that the appellant
    is from a contested area. The refusal letter is the source of the  slip
    about the appellant being a Sorani speaker. At paragraph 18  the  judge
    says that the appellant might relocate to the Kurdish autonomous region
    or to Baghdad, but gives no sufficient explanation. A  one-page  report
    from "Voice of America" was an insufficient basis for a  finding  which
    went against country guidance. As to the Kurdish region, the  appellant
    is neither Sunni nor a Sorani speaker as most of the inhabitants  there
    are.  He is not  of  the  general  background  to  adapt,  and  has  no
    connections. Further reasons would be needed to explain  why  he  might
    relocate there, or in Baghdad, or anywhere else. The judge did not make
    clear where the appellant was expected to go and how he was expected to
    get. The case should be remitted to FtT for a fresh decision.

Submissions for respondent.

 4. The grounds and submissions  for  the  appellant  overlooked  that  the
    burden both as to local risk and as to internal relocation was  not  on
    the respondent or on the judge, but on the  appellant.   The  appellant
    produced no evidence that as a Shia or as a speaker of Bardini he would
    be in any significant difficulty  in  the  Kurdish  region.  Background
    evidence and country guidance  showed  that  even  if  he  were  to  be
    admitted there initially for only 10  days,  the  authorities  did  not
    carry out expulsions thereafter.  The  evidence  that  Isis  no  longer
    controlled his home area was fairly brief, and was produced only on the
    day, but there was no reason to think it was inaccurate.  The appellant
    did not seek an adjournment and has not suggested since that  there  is
    evidence to the contrary. The judge was right to apply AA in  light  of
    that new evidence. Any slip about the language spoken by the  appellant
    was immaterial. The judge's findings on the appellant's good health and
    employment prospects were not challenged.  The  judge's  findings  were
    brief but sufficient and the decision should stand.

Reply for appellant.

 5. It was implicit in the Home Office submission that the  judge  had  not
    stated express or  adequate  reasons.  It  was  not  correct  that  the
    appellant could adapt in Baghdad as readily as he had done in the UK. A
    similar level of support and accommodation is not available in Baghdad.
    To depart from country guidance to the extent urged by  the  respondent
    would have to be justified by more than the short  documentation  which
    was supplied.

Conclusions.

 6. The grounds aim only at the internal relocation findings. They  do  not
    incorporate any challenge to the prior issue about the appellant's home
    area, which was developed only in submissions.

 7. The country guidance in AA was based on evidence up to May 2015.  There
    was found to be a state of internal armed conflict in certain parts  of
    Iraq, the "contested areas", of such intensity as to represent  a  real
    risk of indiscriminate violence qualifying applicants  for  protection.
    It is a case of some factual and legal complexity. It  was  decided  in
    full awareness of a changing situation on  the  ground.  It  cannot  be
    taken to have fixed  the  geographical  lines  of  control.  A  country
    guidance case is of course to be applied unless there  is  good  reason
    not to do so, but it is authoritative only in so far as any  subsequent
    appeal (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question,  and  (b)
    depends upon the same or similar evidence.

 8. The most recent evidence before the FtT was the report from  "Voice  of
    America  News"  headlined  "Kurds  seek   reconstruction   help   after
    liberating Sinja", dated 24 November 2015.  This  stated  that  Kurdish
    forces backed by US airstrikes liberated Sinja from the  Islamic  state
    terrorist group earlier in the month. That was evidence  which  clearly
    entitled the judge to depart from country guidance to the extent he did
    (as explained by paragraphs 14 and 17 of his decision).

 9. The appellant did not produce any evidence to contrary effect, did  not
    seek an opportunity to do  so  by  way  of  adjournment,  and  has  not
    suggested since that the situation was not (and does  not  continue  to
    be) as described in the news report. That was sufficient to decide  his
    case; he has not suggested that he might succeed if his  home  area  is
    under government and Kurdish control.

10. The rest of the judge's decision was in the  alternative,  but  in  any
    event I see nothing in the evidence which was before the  judge  or  in
    the country guidance which might have led him to decide that relocation
    to the Kurdish region or to Baghdad would not be available.  The  judge
    observed that Baghdad would be the "least favourable" option, but  that
    is only an observation that while least attractive to the appellant his
    situation there would fall short of undue harshness.

11. An anonymity direction was  made  in  the  FtT.   The  matter  was  not
    mentioned in the UT, and anonymity has been preserved.

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


            [pic]


            19 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




