
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01064/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 November 2018                            |On 13 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  miss r B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Sobowale, Counsel, instructed by Central
                    England Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   On  9  January  2018  the
    respondent refused her claim for international protection.  Her  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed by Judge Watson of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 1 March 2018, following a hearing that  took  place  on  22
    February 2018.  The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that  she
    had been a victim of trafficking.

2.   The three grounds on which the  appellant  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal argue  that  the  judge  erred  in  (1)  refusing  to  grant  an
    adjournment to allow the appellant to secure legal representation;  (2)
    wholly rejecting the expert  evidence;  and  (3)  concluding  that  the
    appellant "no longer claims to be a victim of trafficking".

3.   As regards (1), it is necessary to set  out  what  the  judge  said  at
    paragraphs 2 and 3, it being accepted by Mrs Aboni that  this  was  all
    the judge's decision had to say about this matter:

         "2.  The appellant's legal representatives  lodged  her  appeal  on
             22.01.18 and representatives were notified that  a  paper  pre
             hearing review would take place on 08.02.18  by  notice  dated
             24.01.18.  On 29.01.18 grounds of appeal  were  filed  by  the
             legal representatives.   On  05.02.18  the  Tribunal  received
             notification that the legal  representatives  were  no  longer
             representing the appellant.  Directions  were  issued  to  the
             appellant on 08.02.18 together with notice of hearing.


         3.   The case came before me for  hearing  on  the  22.02.18.   The
             appellant attended.  She had  not  obtained  any  other  legal
             representatives and did  not  claim  to  have  sought  further
             representation.  I explained that I would ensure she had every
             opportunity to explain her case to me.  She confirmed that her
             English  was  fluent  and   that   she   had   no   difficulty
             understanding the proceedings."

4.   Before proceeding to analyse ground (1), it should also be  noted  that
    on 7 February 2018 Central England Law Centre (CELC) sent a fax to  the
    FtT regarding the pre-hearing review fixed for 9 February 2018  seeking
    an adjournment on the basis that the appellant had only  been  informed
    by Duncan Lewis Solicitors that they were no longer able to act for her
    on 1 February and she had recently been hospitalised on the grounds  of
    her mental health from 12  January  2018  until  22/23  January  having
    expressed suicidal ideation to her mental health support  worker.   The
    fax  requested  an  adjournment  so  she  had  adequate  time  to  find
    representation.

5.   It is also clear that even though not noted  in  the  judge's  decision
    the appellant did apply for an adjournment at the hearing. That was not
    only the appellant's claim but the HOPO  note  recorded  that  such  an
    application had been made and  that  the  HOPO  had  opposed  it.   The
    judge's Record of Proceedings  also  records  the  same.   It  is  also
    pertinent to note that in the materials placed before the  judge  there
    was a report from Dr Katy  Robjani  a  psychologist  stating  that  the
    appellant may have cognitive difficulties and  was  "very  vulnerable",
    both on account of her depression and mild cognitive  difficulties  and
    because of her history of exploitation.  There was also a  report  from
    Ms Julie Barton stating that the appellant suffers from  PTSD  and  had
    HIV.

6.   In light of the above background I consider ground (1) is made out  for
    two main reasons.  First of all, given that the appellant  had  clearly
    applied for an adjournment, it was incumbent on the judge to state  why
    that application was refused.  To the extent that one can  extract  any
    reasons from what the judge said at paragraphs 2 and 3, the  judge  was
    factually incorrect: it was clear from  the  fax  sent  by  CELC  on  7
    February that she had taken steps to seek new representation.  The fact
    that the fax related to the pre-hearing review did not alter  the  fact
    that it was addressing the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  appellant
    pursuing her appeal without representation.  Second, on the face of the
    information in the fax, the appellant was a vulnerable person.  At  the
    very least the judge should have assessed whether on the basis of  that
    information (which  needed  to  be  placed  alongside  the  two  expert
    reports), the appellant should be treated as a  vulnerable  witness  in
    accordance with the 2010 Joint Presidential Guidance Note.   The  judge
    wholly failed to consider this matter.  As far as her remarks regarding
    the expert evidence are concerned, for reasons I shall  come  to  next,
    they do not serve as a proper basis for excluding  that  the  appellant
    may have been a vulnerable witness.

7.   For  the  judge  any  concerns  as  to  whether  the  appellant  was  a
    vulnerable witness appear to have been swept aside by the fact that the
    appellant began her evidence by saying that she had made up  her  story
    about having been trafficked by a man called Joe.  At paragraphs  11-13
    the judge said:

         "11. I asked the appellant to explain to me in her  own  words  why
             she did not wish to return to Nigeria and what was the  reason
             for any fear that she had.  The appellant very  candidly  told
             me that she did not wish to lie any more.  That her  fear  was
             of her father and mother and of no-one  else.   She  explained
             that she had been told to lie by a Mrs Candy who had taken her
             to claim asylum.  She had been told  to  tell  a  story  about
             being abused by an older man "Mr Joe"  and  further  that  the
             whole story about her fear of the authorities due to her being
             involved in the killing of a moslem  girl  was  similarly  all
             made up.  Mr Joe did not  exist  and  neither  was  there  any
             incident involving the killing of a girl.  The  appellant  had
             been a student in a college in her home state and  had  wanted
             to finish her studies  before  leaving  home.   She  had  been
             studying religious and social studies at college, but  at  the
             end of her first year her parents suggested that she could  go
             to the UK and work for her sister as a  nanny  and  send  some
             money back to Nigeria.  They had paid for her flight  and  she
             had then gone to live with  her  sister  where  she  had  done
             housework and looked after  the  children.   She  had  had  an
             argument with her sister and had left the home,  had  met  Mrs
             Candy who had then told her to claim asylum and  directed  her
             to tell a completely made up story.


         12.  The truth was, the appellant told the Tribunal  that  she  had
             wanted to go back to Nigeria before she had left her  sister's
             home in the UK in mid 2013 after being in the  UK  for  a  few
             months and her sister had said that would  happen,  but  there
             was a fight in the home and the appellant just left.


         13.  The real reason why she did not want to return to Nigeria  was
             because she would have to start again in her studies, she  was
             worried about her parents who had been expecting her  to  send
             money back to Nigeria and she had not done  so  and  would  be
             very angry with her.  She could no longer rely on  her  family
             for support and she was unable to support herself and fund her
             studies.  She did not think that she would be able to  find  a
             job."

8.   Irrespective of whether the appellant had  said  in  evidence  she  had
    made up her trafficking claim, there was separate  evidence  indicating
    that the appellant had recently been hospitalised for over ten days for
    mental health problems with some suicidal ideation. There was  a  clear
    need to give  distinct  consideration  to  that  evidence  and  to  its
    relevance or otherwise to the issue of whether  she  was  a  vulnerable
    witness.

9.   The conclusion I have just reached on ground  (1)  intersects  to  some
    extent with my analysis of ground (2).  A  paragraphs  20  and  21  the
    judge rejected  the  evidence  of  the  two  expert  reports  in  quite
    absolutist terms - the judge said they could be given "no weight".  The
    judge's reason was that their  contents  was  "shown  to  be  incorrect
    following the appellant's confirmation that she made  the  whole  story
    up" (paragraphs 21 and 22).  Yet as the  judge's  own  quote  from  the
    expert report/letter  by  Dr  Katy  Robjani  at  paragraph  20  of  the
    determination makes clear that letter assessed the appellant  as  being
    "very vulnerable ...  both  on  account  of  her  depression  and  mild
    cognitive difficulties and because  or  her  history  of  exploitation"
    (emphasis added).  All that the appellant had said she made up was  her
    history of exploitation.   This  report  could  not  simply  be  wholly
    discarded simply because of the appellant's recantation of her original
    asylum claim.

10.  The errors I have found in the judge's decision in respect  of  grounds
    (1) and (2) amount to material errors of law.  Had the judge  not  made
    them it cannot be excluded  he  would  have  assessed  the  appellant's
    evidence differently.  The case is remitted to the FtT.

11.  Given the above it is not strictly necessary for me to  address  ground
    (3) but it may assist the next FtT Judge dealing with the case to  know
    my view upon it.  I have  significant  difficulty  with  the  way  this
    ground  is  formulated  in  the  written  grounds  and  Mr   Sobowale's
    submissions did not abate that.  It is stated that  the  appellant  was
    not at any point asked if she was a victim  of  trafficking.   However,
    the judge's record of her evidence at paragraphs 11-13 was  clearly  to
    the effect that she was not a victim of trafficking.  There was nothing
    in what she said to suggest she had been forced to come to  the  UK  or
    forced to help with housework at her sister's house.   Mr  Sobowale  is
    entitled to say the judge should not have accepted this evidence on its
    face (for the reasons set out in my analysis of ground (1)), but he has
    no solid basis for arguing that somehow there was in the evidence given
    by the appellant to  the  judge  an  implicit  alternative  trafficking
    narrative.  Ground (3) at best helps reinforce ground (1)  but  has  no
    substance taken on its own.

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that:

         (a)  the decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material  error
         of law;


         (b)  the case is remitted to the FtT.

13.  It remains unclear from the earlier fax submitted by CELC  whether  the
    appellant will be able to obtain representation  before  the  FtT.   In
    order to assist the FtT, I direct that within fourteen days:

    (1)  the appellant's  current  representatives  write  to  the  FtT  to
         confirm whether or not the appellant will  be  represented  at  the
         hearing; and


    (2)  if the position is that the appellant will not be represented that
         they produce a supplementary written statement from her  explaining
         inter alia, (i) whether she accepts that her original claim to have
         been trafficked was made up; and (ii) on what basis she now  claims
         she was a victim of trafficking and on the basis of what evidence.

Anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 7 November 2018

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

