
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01352/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 October 2017                     |      On 30 October 2017            |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                    D Y R
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Chapman, Counsel instructed by Lambeth Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,  I
    continue the anonymity direction  previously  made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the
    appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the appellant  or  any  member  of  his
    family.


 2. This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff
    promulgated on 16 March 2017.  The appellant is a citizen of Rwanda. He
    was born in 1982 and is a  film  maker.  He  claims  that  he  will  be
    perceived as a government opponent because of the content of  his  work
    and that of his known associates. By letter dated 26 January 2017,  the
    respondent refused his application for asylum and  his  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal was dismissed. The appellant was granted permission
    to appeal on each of five substantive grounds.


 3. Miss Chapman, who acts for the  appellant,  takes  no  issue  with  the
    judge's approach or with his summary of the applicable law. This is  to
    be found at [17] and following, but particularly [20]:

     "To succeed in an asylum claim an Appellant must establish  that  there
         is a reasonable degree of likelihood that his account is  true  and
         further that as a consequence he will face real risk of persecution
         and/or treatment reaching article 3 severity on return.  The burden
         of proof is on the Appellant to establish this to what is  referred
         to as the 'lower standard'".

 4. Miss Chapman took  me  through  the  decision  forensically  indicating
    where, in her submission, the findings of the judge (i) were based on a
    misapprehension as to the factual evidence that was before him, or (ii)
    were  insufficiently  supported  by  adequate  reasons.  She  drew   my
    attention to the judge's finding at [41] that he found the appellant to
    be "broadly credible in respect of his account of what has happened".


 5. Miss Chapman's analysis of  the  decision  engaged  each  of  the  five
    grounds of appeal, but she directed her submissions holistically to its
    entirety, indicating that the grounds  were  cumulative,  and  had  the
    effect of undermining the judge's findings. Mr  Nath,  for  respondent,
    placed reliance on  the  Rule  24  statement  and  submitted  that  the
    compendious grounds of appeal amount to nothing more than  disagreement
    with the conclusions to which the judge came, and  which  were  clearly
    open to him on the evidence as he found it to be.


 6. For convenience, I consider the grounds separately  but  have  kept  in
    mind their inter-relationship  one  with  another  and  their  combined
    effect.

     Ground 1: The letter from Amnesty International
7.   The  first  ground  alleges  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to a letter from  Amnesty  International  dated  1  March
    2017. Miss  Chapman  quite  properly  concedes  that  that  letter  was
    undoubtedly before the judge and is referred to both in his summary  of
    the evidence and in his findings.  At [52] the judge says:

      "I  have  considered  the  letter  in  support  provided  by   Amnesty
         International.  In my assessment the letter does  not  particularly
         assist the Appellant in his claim because it simply highlights  the
         fact that those who are perceived to be genuinely  opposed  to  the
         government have been targeted  and  harassed  regardless  of  their
         status. The report makes reference to journalists disappearing  and
         to activists being charged for state security offences in 2014  and
         receiving 10 year prison sentences and other such  incidents.   The
         Appellant  has  been  in  Rwanda  since   such   practices   became
         commonplace and since the authorities  became  aware  of  the  full
         extent of his work.  The Appellant has not received as much  as  an
         express threat from anyone acting in  an  official  capacity.   The
         Appellant has not been able to point towards anything by way of  an
         official threat to him and crucially as I have noted above was  not
         harmed when two people he believes were government  officials  were
         alone with him in his rented house  late  at  night  in  Rwanda  in
         September 2015."

8.   In her submissions, Miss  Chapman  quoted  extensively  from  the  very
    lengthy letter from Amnesty making the point that this was far  from  a
    generic submission by a non-governmental organisation but was expressly
    crafted by reference to this individual appellant  and  his  particular
    circumstances. At paragraph 2 the letter reads:

     "We would also take this  opportunity  to  express  our  organisation's
         concern at the prospect of the Appellant being compelled to  return
         to Rwanda.  We regard the basis of his claim to  be  plausible  and
         are concerned that he may face a real  risk  of  arbitrary  arrest,
         unfair trial and potentially mistreatment if he were to be forcibly
         returned."

9.   I do not for present purposes propose to  rehearse  lengthier  sections
    of that letter (mindful of  safeguarding  the  appellant's  anonymity).
    Suffice it to say Miss Chapman took me to paragraph 62 and reference to
    the tactical use of various forms of intimidation adopted by agents  of
    the Rwandan authorities. This is expanded upon in  paragraph  65  where
    specific mention is made of the conduct of Rwandan officials,  both  in
    the United Kingdom  and  internationally,  reports  of  engagement  and
    monitoring  intimidation  and  dissent  and  perceived  anti-government
    activities in various countries around the world including Europe.

10.  The letter states that these activities can range in severity from  the
    form of intimidation which the appellant describes and, in the  extreme
    form, abduction or even murder. In the conclusions at paragraphs 75 and
    76, it is repeated that the claims made by the appellant are plausible.
    The letter states:

         "76. Our organisation would be concerned at  the  prospect  of  the
             Appellant being forcibly removed to Rwanda.  In  our  view,  a
             person with the Appellant's characteristics may  face  a  real
             risk  of  arbitrary  arrest,  unfair  trial  and   potentially
             mistreatment [sic] arising from the use of  Rwanda's  sweeping
             anti-divisionism, anti-revisionism, anti-defamation and  other
             media  censorship  laws.    Large   numbers   of   independent
             journalists, film  makers,  writers  and  other  human  rights
             defenders have been compelled to leave Rwanda as a  result  of
             intimidation and other pressure applied on them by the Rwandan
             authorities.  The Appellant's  work,  which  raises  questions
             about the RPF's conduct and the officially sanctioned genocide
             narrative, would be likely to put him within this bracket."

11.  Miss Chapman rightly concedes that it is for  the  judge  to  form  his
    independent assessment, but  submits  that  what  is  said  by  Amnesty
    International is of such a nature and is directed  exclusively  to  the
    particular circumstances of this appellant that the judge ought to have
    dealt expressly with its detailed contents, particularly if coming to a
    different conclusion.   She  criticises  the  brevity  of  the  judge's
    treatment at [52].

12.  In my judgment, looking at [52] both  in  isolation  and  also  in  the
    context of the decision overall,  the  judge  properly  took  Amnesty's
    letter into account, whilst applying his own independent judicial  mind
    to the totality of the evidence.  He came  to  a  conclusion  that  was
    properly open to him in the circumstances. It  was  for  the  judge  to
    assess the genuineness of the appellant's fear of future harm.  He  was
    entitled to take into account the absence of reported  threats  in  the
    past and whether that  might  be  indicative  of  the  likely  fear  of
    persecution in the future. The judge did not regard absence of previous
    harm or threat as determinative of future risk, but made an  evaluation
    based upon the evidence before him. That was a matter entirely for  his
    discretion and his conclusion cannot be faulted. Amnesty's  letter  was
    but one part of the available evidence and  the  judge's  findings  and
    reasons are adequately expressed.

    Ground 2: Failure to consider the evidence cumulatively
13.  The second ground of appeal argues that the judge erred in  failing  to
    consider the cumulative effect of the adverse incidents that led to the
    appellant seeking asylum. Miss Chapman developed  this  ground  in  her
    submissions by pointing to a series of events leading to  an  encounter
    at SOAS (an academic institution in London) which was,  she  said,  the
    particular  precipitating  event  and   immediate   trigger   for   the
    appellant's application for asylum.

14.  I can take this ground more briefly as it is  clear  from  the  judge's
    very full and carefully reasoned decision that proper account was given
    to these sequential events. The matters were  not  contentious  as  the
    judge considered the appellant's account to be broadly credible. It did
    not require more detailed recitation. The judge dealt with the specific
    encounter at [48] and concluded, for the reasons  he  gave,  that  even
    taking the  allegations  at  their  highest,  it  "cannot  sensibly  be
    inferred from the appellant's account ... that he would be at  risk  on
    return".

    Ground 3: Flawed approach to corroborative evidence of witness YMN
15.  The third ground of appeal alleges an error in  the  treatment  of  the
    potential corroborative evidence  of  YMN.  It  is  accepted  that  for
    technical reasons it was impossible to form a Skype link with  YMN  who
    was in Canada. The  judge  took  the  view  that  communicating  via  a
    "Facetime" or similar mobile phone app would not be appropriate.
16.  I do not consider  that  this  case  management  decision  can  be  the
    subject of legitimate challenge. This is particularly so as  the  judge
    had before him a letter from YMN and (notwithstanding that its contents
    may not have been in proper evidential form, noted at [36])  the  judge
    nonetheless took the letter fully into account. He described it at [51]
    as being "a genuine and reliable document" and did  not  consider  that
    the appellant had been prejudiced by not being able to call  him  as  a
    witness. I do not consider there to be any substance in this ground.



    Ground 4: Material error of fact
17.  The fourth ground of appeal alleges a  material  error  of  fact.  This
    ground, as it was developed by Miss Chapman, was put as  a  significant
    misapprehension as to the chronology of  events.   At  [44]  the  judge
    records (on the appellant's own account) that everything done to  bring
    himself to the adverse attention of the authorities occurred  prior  to
    his last visit to Rwanda. Miss Chapman took me to [45]  and  elsewhere.
    She submits that a number of events, in particular the screening  of  a
    particular film in Rwanda did not in fact take place  until  after  the
    appellant's last visit.

18.  In my judgment,  the  judge's  observations  at  [45]  deal  more  than
    adequately with the chronology.  The judge took a view which  was  open
    to him on the level of publicity which the appellant's work had already
    received prior to his last visit to Rwanda. The judge  notes  that  the
    film received its premiere at the Sundance Festival in early 2015. This
    screening at a world famous international event, the judge found, would
    have brought both  it  and  the  appellant  to  the  attention  of  any
    monitoring of artists by the Rwandan Government. The judge  noted  that
    subsequent showings of the film (presumably within Rwanda)  might  have
    brought more attention but the judge found (as he was entitled) that it
    was the Sundance screening which would have provoked  interest  of  the
    authorities.

19.  I do not consider this to be a misstatement of  the  evidence  as  Miss
    Chapman suggests. Nor do I consider the judge  can  be  criticised  for
    dealing as he did with events concerning the grant of asylum to YMN  in
    Canada at [46] and [47]. I can detect no material error of law in  this
    regard. Miss Chapman's  suggestion  that  the  judge  misconstrued  the
    chronology does not bear scrutiny. The full and explicit  reasoning  of
    the judge is sufficiently clear.

    Ground 5: Erroneous application of standard of proof
20.  The fifth ground concerns the erroneous application of the standard  of
    proof. The first point Miss Chapman raises is ill-founded because it is
    predicated on the wording adopted by the judge when directing, entirely
    properly at [55] that there be anonymity:

     "I have considered the question of an  anonymity  direction  and  given
         the Appellant's profile this is one  of  those  cases  where  I  do
         consider that if it became public knowledge that the Appellant  had
         claimed asylum in the UK there may be some scope for  him  to  face
         problems on return and accordingly I have made an  anonymity  order
         in these circumstances." (emphasis added)

21.  Miss Chapman's submission was that the use of  the  words  "some  scope
    for him to face problems on return" in some way undermines the  judge's
    conclusions elsewhere that  there  is  no  real  and  genuine  fear  of
    persecution. That submission cannot possibly succeed.   The  judge  was
    here directing his mind to  an  entirely  separate  issue,  namely  the
    consequences of an asylum application having been made.

22.   Miss  Chapman  additionally  submitted  that  the  standard  of  proof
    generally was not properly considered. She  suggested  that  there  are
    various places in the decision where the judge makes  express  findings
    that there have not been  threats  or  intimidation  in  the  past  and
    extrapolates from these that there will not be any in the future.  This
    is not a fair criticism. There is nothing in the  decision  to  suggest
    that the judge closed his mind to the prospect of future fear simply on
    the basis that there had been no real incidents of harm or intimidation
    in the past. On the contrary, the judge  adopted  the  proper  approach
    [20] and assessed whether on the basis of all the  available  evidence,
    the appellant had established to the lower standard that he  will  face
    real risk of persecution and/or treatment reaching Article  3  severity
    on return. He concluded [54] that the appellant had not discharged  the
    evidential burden. That finding is unimpeachable and was dispositive of
    the appeal.

23.  Taking each of those five  grounds  individually,  and  reviewing  them
    collectively in the forensic way in which Miss  Chapman  developed  her
    argument, I do not consider that, whether  separately  or  cumulatively
    they amount to  material error of law.  Undoubtedly the  appellant  and
    his advisers disagree with the conclusion to which the judge came,  but
    such conclusion was open to him and the judge's reasoning is clear  and
    explicit. In the circumstances this appeal must be dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    affirmed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed        Mark Hill                 Date     27 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


