


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/01073/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                 |Promulgated                       |
|On 24 May 2017                   |          On 25 May 2017          |
|                                 |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL


                                   Between

                       MR ABOULIE (AKA LAMIN K) JAMMEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr J M Rene, Counsel (instructed by Queen's Park
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on  11  April  2017  against  the
           determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pears  who   had
           dismissed  the  protection  and  human  rights  appeal  of   the
           Appellant.  The decision and reasons was promulgated on 15 March
           2017.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Gambia.  His identity and date of
           birth  were  disputed.   The  Respondent  further  disputed  the
           Appellant's assertion that he had  entered  the  United  Kingdom
           clandestinely in 1997 and had  not  left  since  then.   It  was
           common ground that the Appellant has always been in  the  United
           Kingdom illegally.  His immigration history is set out in detail
           at [3] onwards of the decision  and  reasons  and  need  not  be
           repeated here.


      3.    The judge dismissed the  Appellant's  protection  appeal.   That
           dismissal has not been challenged by the Appellant and is of  no
           further concern.


      4.    The judge found that the Appellant  had  been  living  with  his
           British Citizen partner since 2012 and was integrated  into  her
           and her family's lives.  It was accepted before the  judge  that
           the Appellant was unable to satisfy the requirements of Appendix
           FM of the Immigration Rules.  The  judge  also  found  that  the
           Appellant was unable to meet paragraph 276ADE.   In  effect  the
           judge applied section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002 as well as Chen  [2015]  UKUT  00189  (IAC)  and
           found that a temporary separation pending  entry  clearance  was
           proportionate in Article 8 ECHR  terms.   The  judge  ultimately
           dismissed the appeal on that basis.


      5.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had accepted the Appellant's identity as
           Abdoulie Jammeh at  the  start  of  the  hearing  and  had  thus
           forestalled submissions on that issue which would otherwise have
           been made.  It was also arguable that the judge had erred in his
           approach to Article 8 ECHR because he had failed to consider the
           Appellant's partner's circumstances in being  able  to  relocate
           and integrate into Gambia.


      6.    Directions were made by the tribunal, including that  the  judge
           provide his comments  on  the  assertion  that  the  Appellant's
           identity had been categorically accepted by him at the start  of
           the  hearing.   The  judge  robustly  dissented  from  any  such
           assertion.


      7.     A  rule  24  notice  opposing  the  appeal  was  filed  by  the
           Respondent, in letter form dated 26 April 2017.   There  it  was
           stated that the Home Office Presenting Officer who had  appeared
           before the judge had no note supporting the assertions  made  on
           the Appellant's behalf.




      Submissions


      8.    Mr Rene for the Appellant  relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.   He  submitted  an  email  with  accompanying
           manuscript notes of the First-tier Tribunal hearing, prepared by
           his instructing solicitors.  He accepted  that  the  notes  were
           difficult to decipher.  Mr Rene also  submitted  that  the  Home
           Office  had  failed   to   support   their   identity   evidence
           sufficiently, in that  photographs  of  the  Appellant  on  visa
           matches had not  been  provided.   The  other  "Mr  Jammeh"  had
           entered the United Kingdom as a spouse.


      9.    Mr Duffy for the Respondent relied on the  rule  24  notice  and
           submitted that there was plainly no material error of law.    It
           had been accepted that Appendix FM had  not  been  met  and  the
           judge's Article 8 ECHR findings were open to him.   The  onwards
           appeal should be dismissed.




      No material error of law finding


      10.   In the tribunal's view the grant of permission to appeal was far
           too generous, and was not based  on  a  proper  reading  of  the
           decision  and  reasons.   The  heading  of  the  appeal   merely
           reproduced the title of the case for administrative purposes and
           was not part of the judge's decision.  It  was  plain  from  any
           sensible reading of the decision that the  Appellant's  identity
           was one of the central issues in  this  appeal.   There  was  no
           reliable independent documentary evidence  before  the  tribunal
           which could possibly have led  to  the  very  experienced  judge
           making  a  statement  that  he  accepted  that  element  of  the
           Appellant's  case  before  hearing   the   oral   evidence   and
           submissions.  The decision and reasons shows that the summary of
           the evidence as to identity was followed  by  a  discussion  and
           findings: see [56].


      11.   The manuscript note of the hearing produced on  the  Appellant's
           behalf fails to support the assertion made in the permission  to
           appeal application.  The Home Office Presenting Officer  had  no
           note supporting the assertion, which was above  all  refuted  by
           the judge.  At best, the tribunal finds that the  Appellant  and
           his solicitors were subject to a misunderstanding for which  the
           judge had no responsibility and heard what they  had  wanted  to
           hear, rather than  what  was  said.   There  was  no  procedural
           unfairness.


      12.   Mr Rene's submissions (or perhaps observations, as  he  made  it
           clear that he was following his  instructions)  as  to  evidence
           from the Home Office tended towards  rearguing  the  appeal,  an
           appeal which, it must be observed, had been heard and  dismissed
           previously, and to which Devaseelan (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -
           Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka  *  [2002]  UKIAT   00702
           applied.  They were not points which had been taken before Judge
           Pears.  It is too late for them to be  taken  now,  and  in  any
           event they take the identity issue no further as the burden  was
           on the Appellant to prove long residence.


      13.   There was no suggestion that  the  very  experienced  judge  had
           misunderstood any of  the  evidence.   He  examined  the  family
           situation with care and was entitled to find that  the  obvious,
           reasonable and proportionate option was  for  the  Appellant  to
           return to Gambia and to seek entry clearance  from  there  under
           the Immigration Rules.


      14.   Mr Rene did not seek to argue that there  were  any  exceptional
           circumstances applicable to the appeal which had been overlooked
           by the judge.


      15.   Plainly, as the judge securely  found,  the  Appellant  and  his
           partner have several reasonable options open  to  them  for  the
           continuation of their family life, i.e.,  to  travel  to  Gambia
           together on a visit  while  entry  clearance  is  sought  or  to
           separate on a temporary basis while the Appellant obtains  entry
           clearance on the terms  prescribed  by  the  Immigration  Rules.
           The tribunal finds that the onwards appeal has no substance  and
           that there was no material error of law in the
            decision challenged.






      DECISION


      The appeal is dismissed


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.

      Signed                                  Dated 24 May 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




