
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01646/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 September 2019                           |On 23 September 2019          |
|Prepared on 4 September 2019                  |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Aziz, Solicitor, Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the UK illegally  and  made  a  protection
           claim on  the  basis  of  a  claim  to  Somali  nationality  and
           membership of a minority clan. He was said to  fear  persecution
           at the hands of members of  majority  clans  and  the  Al-Shabab
           group. That protection claim was refused on 14  June  2007,  and
           his appeal against that refusal was  dismissed  by  decision  of
           Immigration Judge S Reed of 13 August 2007 [A1-].
        2. Judge Reed made a series of adverse credibility findings in  the
           course of that decision [#24]. The Appellant  had  lied  at  his
           screening interview, in  his  witness  statement,  at  his  full
           interview, and, during the course of his  oral  evidence.  Judge
           Reed identified three different identities as having  been  used
           by the Appellant at different times. He noted that the Appellant
           had made a protection claim using a different identity  to  that
           in which he had applied for entry clearance to the UK  in  2004.
           He also noted  that  a  large  number  of  biographical  details
           provided then were  materially  different;  place  and  date  of
           birth, name, home area of Hargeisa  in  Somaliland  rather  than
           Mogadishu, travel to Ethiopia, occupation, and a British citizen
           father living in the UK rather than a Somali  living  in  Kenya.
           Finally he concluded that  the  Appellant  did  not  know  basic
           details of the Ashraf clan, although he claimed to be  a  member
           of one of its sub-clans. In consequence  Judge  Reed  concluded;
           (i) that the Appellant had not established that he  was  who  he
           claimed to be, and, (ii) that he was not a member of the  Ashraf
           as claimed, or indeed, any other minority Somali clan.
        3. Judge Reed also went on to reject as a fiction  the  Appellant's
           claim to have been tortured by individuals who had perceived him
           to be a member of the Ashraf, notwithstanding  the  evidence  of
           the scars that were visible upon  his  body,  and,  the  medical
           evidence that  was  then  relied  upon.  Although  we  were  not
           referred to this report,  it  would  appear  from  Judge  Reed's
           decision (and  we  note  this  does  not  appear  to  have  been
           subsequently challenged) that  this  medical  evidence  did  not
           follow the Istanbul Protocol, and, the author offered no opinion
           evidence upon how the injuries that had led to those scars might
           have been occasioned. Thus the medical report produced to  Judge
           Reed appears simply to have offered evidence of fact by  way  of
           the number, location, and appearance of the scars  then  visible
           upon the Appellant's body [#24(xi)].
        4. Although his appeal rights against the decision of  Judge  Reeds
           were exhausted in January 2008, the Appellant  was  not  removed
           from the UK. In December  2012  he  lodged  further  submissions
           which were accepted by the Respondent as amounting  to  a  fresh
           claim to protection. This too was refused on  12  January  2018,
           which prompted a further protection appeal that  was  heard  and
           dismissed on all grounds  by  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Hanbury of 19 June 2019.
        5. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal this decision  by
           First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  because   it   was
           arguable that the Judge had overlooked the existence and content
           of a report by Dr Christopher Jensen of 18 March 2019  upon  the
           scarring that could be found upon the Appellant's body.
        6. No Rule 24 Notice had been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before us.


      The Judge's approach to the decision of Judge Reed
        7. In the course of his decision, Judge Hanbury  took  the  adverse
           findings of Judge Reed as his starting point. He noted  however;
           (i) the passage of  time  since  that  hearing,  (ii)  that  the
           Appellant now relied upon evidence from a  country  expert  upon
           conditions within Somalia, and, (iii)  that  the  Appellant  now
           relied upon evidence from two individuals who claimed to be able
           to confirm from their own knowledge of him, that  the  Appellant
           was a member of a sub-clan to the Ashraf minority clan. Thus  he
           directed himself that he should look at  all  of  the  currently
           available evidence.
        8. Having conducted that exercise Judge Hanbury concluded  that  he
           could place no material weight upon  the  evidence  of  the  two
           individuals who claimed to be able to  confirm  the  Appellant's
           clan membership:  neither  had  known  the  Appellant  prior  to
           meeting him during a spell of mutual  immigration  detention  in
           the UK. His reasons for that conclusion were entirely  adequate,
           and no challenge is offered within the grounds to it.
        9. Judge Hanbury went  on  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  claim  to
           membership of the Ashraf clan, and to infer that  the  Appellant
           was a member of a majority clan, whose home area was Hargeisa in
           Somaliland, as indeed Judge Reed  had  done  previously.  It  is
           unsurprising in the circumstances that no positive  finding  was
           made as to which clan the  Appellant  was  in  truth  a  member.
           Again, the reasons for that conclusion were  entirely  adequate,
           and no challenge is offered within the grounds to it.

      The report of Dr Jensen
       10. It is common ground before us that the Judge's decision contains
           no express reference to Dr Jensen's report. As indicated  to  Ms
           Aziz at the outset of the hearing we  therefore  considered  the
           core complaint made out.  On  the  face  of  the  decision,  the
           existence and content of Dr Jensen's  report  appeared  to  have
           been overlooked. We therefore invited Ms Aziz to address us upon
           whether this would amount to  a  material  error  of  law,  that
           required us to set the decision aside, since the grounds did not
           address this, and it was not immediately obvious that the  error
           required such an approach, given Judge Hanbury's approach to the
           appeal.
       11. Despite repeating that invitation on a number of  occasions,  we
           were left with the bald proposition that if Dr  Jensen's  report
           had been overlooked, we were necessarily obliged  to  set  aside
           the decision of Judge Hanbury, and to remit the  appeal  to  the
           FtT for complete rehearing with no findings of  fact  preserved.
           We are unable to accept that proposition for three reasons.
       12. Perhaps the most obvious is that Judge Hanbury addressed in  the
           course of his decision (albeit briefly) the  issue  of  internal
           relocation in the event that the Appellant was in truth a member
           of a sub-clan of the Ashraf as he  claimed  to  be  [45-7].  His
           finding that members of the Ashraf clan could return to areas of
           Somalia without facing a real risk of inter  clan  violence,  or
           persecution on the basis of their ethnicity alone, was  entirely
           consistent with the available country guidance for Somalia,  and
           the grounds of appeal offered no challenge to it.
       13. Second, even taking Dr  Jensen's  report  at  its  highest,  its
           content offered no proper  basis  for  re-opening  Judge  Reed's
           adverse findings about the Appellant's use of a  false  identity
           when claiming protection in 2007, and by extension continuing to
           use a false identity in his dealings with the Respondent and the
           Tribunal thereafter. Nor could its content offer an  explanation
           for the Appellant's lack of knowledge of the clan  of  which  he
           claimed membership, which both Judge Reed and Judge Hanbury  had
           concluded was a false claim to membership  of  the  Ashraf.  Nor
           could its content  offer  an  explanation  for  the  Appellant's
           original claim to have been born, and to have lived his life  in
           Hargeisa in Somaliland, rather than Mogadishu.
       14. Third, what Dr Jensen provided in the course of his  report  was
           the usual mix of evidence of fact and opinion that is offered by
           an expert witness.  He  offered  evidence  of  fact  as  to  the
           location and appearance of nine  scars  to  be  found  upon  the
           Appellant's abdomen, both wrists, and both forearms [ApB p53-7].
           That evidence was not in dispute, and there is nothing in  Judge
           Hanbury's decision that is inconsistent with it.
       15.  Dr  Jensen  also  offered  opinion  evidence,  based  upon  his
           professional experience, and taking into  account  the  location
           and appearance of these scars, in the context of the Appellant's
           explanation to him of how the injuries that had occasioned  them
           had been sustained, as to the degree to which their location and
           appearance was consistent with his explanation. In so doing,  he
           sought to apply the Istanbul Protocol.
       16. It is perhaps important to note that even with the benefit of Dr
           Jensen's evidence this appeal was a very long way  removed  from
           the circumstances under consideration in KV (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD
           [2019] UKSC 10 @ [20] or [25].
       17. As Ms Aziz accepts, Dr Jensen did not conclude that the location
           and appearance of any of the scars were either "diagnostic", or,
           "typical" of the account given to him; the two  highest  degrees
           of consistency in the Istanbul Protocol between  the  appearance
           of scars and  their  attribution  by  the  Appellant.  Thus  his
           opinion was not that their appearance meant they "could not have
           been caused in anyway other than that described", or, that their
           appearance was such "that is usually found  with  this  type  of
           trauma, but there are other possible causes".
       18. When the scars were examined and  reported  upon  by  Dr  Jensen
           individually, only the location and appearance  of  one  of  the
           nine  scars  was  said  to  be  "highly  consistent"  with   the
           Appellant's account of  how  he  had  sustained  the  underlying
           injury (this being a burn scar to the abdomen  4.7).  This  scar
           was therefore in his opinion one that "could have been caused by
           the trauma  described,  and  there  are  a  few  other  possible
           causes".
       19. The location and appearance of the other eight scars  were  only
           "consistent" with the account given  by  the  Appellant  of  the
           injuries, the lowest degree of  consistency;  "they  could  have
           been caused by the trauma described but  they  are  non-specific
           and there are many other possible causes".
       20. Specifically Dr Jensen noted that each of the none  scars  could
           have been sustained as a result of an accidental injury. In  his
           concluding remarks, Dr Jensen sought to  take  a  more  holistic
           approach,  albeit  without  reference  to  the  lies  that   the
           Appellant  had  undoubtedly  told,  and  thus  he  offered   the
           following concluding opinion;
           The scars present on  As  body,  although  not  possible  to  be
           precise as to whether the injuries were caused accidentally,  by
           self  infliction,  or  not,  are  consistent  with  the   events
           described by A ...
           Given the type of injuries and the symptoms which A displays, my
           overall evaluation is that there is a reasonable likelihood that
           he was subjected to beating and torture in Somalia.
       21. We are not able to accept that any Tribunal  properly  directing
           itself upon the applicable burden and standard of proof, and the
           proper approach to be taken to the findings of Judge Reed  would
           in the circumstances be persuaded to  accept  that  Dr  Jensen's
           evidence required Judge Reed's adverse findings of fact to be re-
           opened and remade so that either the Appellant's account of  his
           identity, his clan membership, or, the circumstances in which he
           had sustained the injuries that had led to this  scarring  would
           necessarily be accepted. It is in our judgement plain that  even
           with the benefit of Dr Jensen's evidence  no  Tribunal  properly
           directing itself would be able to conclude  that  the  Appellant
           had told the truth about  the  circumstances  in  which  he  had
           sustained the injuries that led to any of these scars.
       22. With the benefit of  Dr  Jensen's  report  we  accept  that  the
           Appellant can establish upon  the  applicable  low  standard  of
           proof that he had at some unknown  date,  and  in  some  unknown
           circumstances, suffered burn and blunt trauma injuries, but that
           is beside the point. Both Judge  Reed  and  Judge  Hanbury  were
           perfectly entitled to find that if he were genuinely a member of
           the Ashraf he would not have given the answers that he did  when
           questioned about his knowledge of that clan. Indeed that was the
           only  realistic  inference  open  to  them.  Equally  both  were
           perfectly entitled to find that Appellant  had  lied  about  his
           true identity,  and  again  that  too  was  the  only  realistic
           inference open to them.  In  our  judgement  the  only  sensible
           inference that was open to the Tribunal was therefore  that  the
           Appellant had not yet disclosed the true circumstances in  which
           he had sustained the injuries that had led to these  scars,  and
           in turn, the true identity of those who had inflicted them.
       23. We note that the grounds do not dispute that if the Appellant is
           in truth a member of a majority clan whose home area is Hargeisa
           in Somaliland (as would appear to be overwhelmingly likely to be
           the case) he could  be  returned  to  that  city  directly  from
           outside Somalia. Moreover he has not yet identified  any  reason
           why he could not be expected to return to that  area,  and  live
           there in safety. Nor, given the current country guidance, has he
           identified within the grounds any reason why  he  could  not  be
           expected to make a life for himself in Mogadishu  in  safety  if
           that were to be the point of return, and he was  disinclined  to
           travel onward to Hargeisa.
       24. In the  circumstances,  whilst  we  accept  that  Judge  Hanbury
           appears to have fallen into error through giving the  appearance
           of having failed to take into account the evidence of Dr Jensen,
           we are satisfied that if he did, then this was an  error  of  no
           consequence. Such an error would not require us to set aside his
           decision, and we decline to do so. The submission  that  we  are
           obliged to do so is misconceived; our powers are permissive  and
           we decline to exercise them for the reasons given above.
       25. The decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal on all grounds is
           accordingly confirmed.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 19
   June 2019 contained no material error of law in the decision to  dismiss
   the Appellant's protection appeal on all grounds, and that  decision  is
   accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 4 September 2019


