
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01188/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 April 2021                     |On 26 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     A I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by M A Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The Appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Komorowski ("the judge"), promulgated on 2 June 2020, by which he dismissed
the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusals of her protection
and human rights claims.  Those claims focussed on the assertion that the
Appellant, a national of Pakistan, had entered into an arranged marriage in
that country but had then divorced her first husband.  She then married her
current husband, a Pakistani national, to the disapproval of her family in
Pakistan.  She claimed that an uncle held a position of influence in a
district within Lahore and that he would be able to use this influence to
do her harm in her home area or indeed anywhere else in that country.  The
Appellant's current husband was residing in the United Kingdom as an
extended family member of a cousin of his, pursuant to the Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

In refusing the Appellant's claims, at paragraph 54 of the decision letter,
the Respondent accepted that she had demonstrated a "genuine subjective
fear" of returning to Pakistan.  However, the decision letter went on to
state in clear terms that that fear was not well-founded for reasons set
out in considerable detail.  It was not accepted that the Appellant would
be at risk of any harm, nor that she would be unable to internally relocate
if a risk in her home area did in fact exist.  In addition it was said that
the Pakistani authorities could provide sufficient protection.  In respect
of Article 8, it was said that she was unable to satisfy any of the
relevant Immigration Rules and there were no exceptional circumstances in
her case.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge noted the Respondent's limited concession at the outset of his
decision.  He adopted the approach of taking the Appellant's case at its
highest.  Having accepted, on this premise, that she would be at risk from
her uncle in Lahore, the judge went on to consider whether that risk
extended to all parts of Pakistan and also whether the Appellant could
internally relocate.  The judge made reference to the evidence before him,
such as it was, setting out in some detail what the Appellant herself had
said about her uncle and his claimed influence.  The judge found that the
evidence did not go to show that the uncle would or could exert relevant
influence over the Pakistani authorities anywhere outside of Lahore and
that as a result no risk elsewhere in that country existed.  Further, the
judge found that the Appellant could internally relocate without that
option being unduly harsh.  This was in view of the absence of a risk from
the uncle and that the Appellant would be able to travel back to Pakistan
with her current husband.

The Appellant's challenge

The grounds of appeal essentially assert that the judge did not deal
correctly with the Appellant's evidence about her uncle's influence and
that he failed to take relevant evidence and submissions into account.

In granting permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane commented that the
grounds "amounted to no more than a disagreement with the findings of the
judge" but went on to detect what he described as a "Robinson obvious
point", namely that the judge appeared to have gone behind the concession
made a paragraph 54 of the decision letter.  This concession, it appeared
to Judge Keane, covered the issues of risk and/or internal relocation in
areas away from Lahore.

At the outset of the hearing I indicated to the parties that I was willing
to hear submissions on both the grounds as pleaded and the point taken in
the grant of permission.  In my view, if Judge Keane had wished to formally
restrict the grant of permission he could and should have stated this in
the decision part of the notice (in other words, above the horizontal
line).  He did not do so.

The hearing

With his usual candour, Mr Gajjar confirmed that he was relying on the
grounds of appeal (of which he was not the author) and the grant of
permission, in respect of which he acknowledged the actual wording of the
concession stated in the decision letter.  He did not have any further
submissions to make.  I indicated that I did not seek any additional
assistance from him by way of oral submissions.

Mr Avery had nothing to add.

Conclusions

As I indicated to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that there are no
errors of law in the judge's decision.

It is quite apparent that the Respondent's concession contained in
paragraph 54 of the decision letter was limited in nature to the acceptance
of a subjective fear on the Appellant's part.  Such a fear, if it is
necessary at all, is clearly not sufficient to make out a protection claim:
there must be a well-founded fear based on an objective risk.  It is
equally clear that the Respondent had in no way conceded that such a risk
existed in the Appellant's case, nor that it would be unduly harsh for the
Appellant to internally relocate.  Nothing in the judge's decision
indicates that he went behind the limited concession.

I am bound to say that I struggle to see why Judge Keane granted permission
in the terms he did.  The "Robinson obvious point" was neither obvious nor
arguable.

In terms of the grounds of appeal themselves, I agree with Judge Keane's
observation that they in truth amount to nothing more than a disagreement
with the judge's findings.  The judge clearly had full regard to the
Appellant's evidence, setting it out in some detail at paragraph 15.  He
took her evidence at its highest and was in my view plainly entitled to
find that even on this evidence it had not been shown to the requisite
standard that the uncle had any relevant influence extending beyond, at
most, the city of Lahore (see the final part of paragraph 15).

The judge was in turn entitled to conclude that there was no risk to the
Appellant elsewhere in Pakistan.  The judge was also entitled to conclude
that it would not have been unduly harsh for the Appellant to internally
relocate.  Even if a submission that it would have been unduly harsh had in
fact been made at the hearing, what is said in paragraph 10 of the grounds
of appeal indicates that the argument focussed on a risk to the Appellant
(by virtue of the assertion that the uncle could use "exit control lists"
to locate the Appellant) rather than the much wider assessment of relevant
circumstances pertaining to the reasonableness of internal relocation.

In light of SM (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067
(IAC), and the fact, as the judge found it to be, of the husband's ability
to return to Pakistan with the Appellant, it was open to him to conclude
that internal relocation was indeed a viable option.  There has been no
specific challenge to the judge's finding on the husband's position, but in
any event, the husband was residing in this country solely as an extended
family member of an EEA national and on the face of the evidence there was
nothing remotely problematic (let alone factors indicating insurmountable
obstacles) for him to return with his wife.

In all the circumstances, the judge's decision is sustainable and the
Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal must be dismissed.



Anonymity

It is appropriate to maintain the direction made by the First-tier
Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed   H Norton-Taylor                     Date: 15 April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

