
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01571/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 October 2019                         |On 20 November 2019              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                              A M (Bangladesh)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Layme instructed by Saint Martin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Steven Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  order.  I  continue  that  order
pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008:
unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall identify  the  original
appellant, whether directly or  indirectly.   This  order  applies,  amongst
others, to all parties.

Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Judge dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  decision  to
    refuse him refugee recognition, humanitarian  protection  or  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on  Article  8  private  and  family  life
    grounds.

 2. The First-tier Judge found  the  appellant's  evidence  comprehensively
    lacking in credibility for the reasons set out in the decision at [46]-
    [66].  It is plain from the decision that the Judge applied the correct
    standard of proof and weighed all  the  evidence  which  the  appellant
    chose to put before him.

 3. For the appellant, Mr Layme accepts that the first ground of appeal, 'a
    mistake of identifying  the  correct  factual  influence  that  led  to
    significant unresolved issues' is incorrect.  The grounds  allege  that
    the First-tier Judge failed  to  make  a  finding  as  to  whether  the
    appellant was a member  of  the  student  wing  of  the  BNP  while  at
    university, but in fact there is such a finding at [53] in  the  First-
    tier Judge's decision.

 4. The second ground of appeal is that it was not open  to  the  court  to
    find an absence of any evidence that the appellant's Facebook posts had
    brought him to the adverse attention of the authorities in  Bangladesh.
    That finding was  unarguably  open  to  the  First-tier  Judge  on  the
    evidence before him.

 5. There being no other grounds of appeal, this appeal cannot succeed  and
    is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:      15 November
2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



