
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/01270/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st August 2019                      |On 13th September 2019             |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   mr S M
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, instructed by UK & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judges Parkes and Plowright promulgated on 2nd May  2019.
    The appellant, a national of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity, claims to be of
    adverse interest to the Iranian Authorities because of suspected  links
    to the PJAK (the Party for Free Life in Kurdistan).  He asserts a range
    of  errors  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  when
    dismissing his appeal.

 2. As set out in the grant of permission large parts of the  grounds  were
    generalised and did not come close to identifying errors of  law.   The
    grant confirmed that the only  focused  assertions  were  contained  in
    pages 3 to 4.

 3. The grounds for permission advanced that the judge had failed  to  give
    adequate reasons and  the  approach  adopted  was  unfair  because  the
    appellant had not been given the benefit of the doubt as per the  UNHCR
    material should form part of the overall examination and had failed  to
    apply the correct burden of proof.  The Tribunal had failed to consider
    all of the evidence and had not given the evidence the relevant weight.
     It was submitted that the judge had failed to be fair by  taking  into
    consideration only the respondent's submission and the submitted bundle
    of documents included a detailed witness statement where the  appellant
    had consistently explained the reaction  of  the  regime  and  how  the
    Iranian Authorities dealt with him and his family.  This had  not  been
    addressed properly.

 4.  Paragraph  12  was  criticised  for  only  taking  into  account   the
    respondent's  submission.   Paragraph  13  of  the  determination   was
    disputed because the appellant had clearly explained how his family and
    he were involved in helping his brother who was a PJAK member and  that
    the Iranian Authorities wanted to arrest  him;  accordingly  the  judge
    failed to take into consideration the appellant's  evidence  "perfectly
    and carefully, and  unfairly/harshly  has  found  A's  evidence  to  be
    incredible.  We submit that  the  IJ's  (sic)  finding  is  unsafe  and
    unlawful".

 5. The Tribunal had failed to be fair at  paragraphs  14  and  15  by  not
    taking into consideration the appellant's situation,  particularly  the
    witness statement and had only  taken  into  account  the  respondent's
    submission.

 6. The appellant asserted that the judge had failed to take  into  account
    the appellant's witness statement throughout the determination and from
    paragraph 13 onwards.    At  paragraph  18  the  judge's  findings  (in
    relation to Section 8) was 'too harsh'.

 7. There was criticism of paragraph 19 because the judge failed to ascribe
    appropriate weight to the circumstances of the case and the appellant's
    evidence clearly indicated why he had not  been  in  contact  with  his
    family in Iran because his family would be at risk.

 8. At paragraph 20 it was asserted the judges only took into  account  the
    refusal letter and not the appellant's detailed witness statement.

 9. The grant of permission stated that it was arguable that the panel  had
    failed to give consideration to the appellant's evidence  as  a  whole,
    including in  particular  that  contained  within  his  appeal  witness
    statement.  Alternatively it was arguable that the panel had failed  to
    give adequate reasons for finding that the additional  information  and
    explanations contained in the witness statement had been rejected.

10. Mr Coleman took me through the evidence in detail in order to  set  the
    context of the material before the First-tier Tribunal.  He referred to
    the asylum interview and the  "appeal  statement"  from  the  appellant
    dated 15th April 2019.  In particular  he  stated  that  there  were  a
    number of reasons why the panel did not believe him, which included the
    lack of raiding the place of  work,  the  brother's  ability  to  visit
    unimpeded, the appellant's ability to evade arrest, the reaction of the
    Authorities and surveillance and  the  way  the  regime  behaved.   The
    overall evidence demonstrated the  conclusions  on  the  evidence  were
    materially flawed.  The determination was irrational  and  speculative.
    The appellant had stayed in a stable after his escape and he  had  been
    at all times in the hand of an agent.  Most of the points  raised  were
    not considered or engaged with.

11. There is no substance to the charge that the Tribunal  only  took  into
    account the respondent's submissions or refusal letter  and  failed  to
    address  the  appellant's  own  account.   There  is   a   freestanding
    assessment of the material submitted by the appellant and a judge  does
    not have  to  refer  to  every  piece  of  material  submitted  by  the
    appellant. As held in Budhathoki (reasons for  decisions)  [2014]  UKUT
    00341, judges needed to resolve  the  key  conflicts  in  evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their reasons for preferring one  case
    to the other so parties could understand why they had lost.

12. The Tribunal did apply the correct burden and standard of  proof  which
    is evident at  paragraphs  3  and  4  and  a  careful  reading  of  the
    determination  demonstrated  that  the   judges   directed   themselves
    appropriately.  There is no requirement in this instance  to  give  the
    appellant, in accordance with the UNHCR guidelines, the benefit of  the
    doubt.  The Tribunal  applied  the  relevant  standard  of  proof  when
    considering the evidence overall.  Nor is there substance to the charge
    that  the  Tribunal  only  took  into  consideration  the  respondent's
    submissions or refusal letter.  There is a freestanding  assessment  of
    the material submitted by the appellant.

13. At paragraph 12 of the  determination  there  is  a  reference  to  the
    reasons for refusal letter because of the country  background  material
    incorporated into it.  The assertion that the Tribunal failed  to  take
    into account the appellant's case is simply not made out.   There  were
    key difficulties with the account and which were not resolved even with
    Mr Coleman's careful references to the evidence.   Paragraph  13  makes
    specific reference to the appellant's account.

14. Much was made of the appellant's contention that he  went  to  work  at
    different places each day in Bashmakh, which  at  paragraph  7  of  his
    witness statement he described as a "very big area" and a  "place  that
    you can turn up any day  you  want  and  going  there  without  knowing
    whether you will be hired for any  work  or  not  and  by  whom".   ...
    "I never knew which warehouse would require my help" and "it could have
    been anywhere in Bashmakh".  That, however was not quite the point that
    was being made by the Tribunal.  As the appellant acknowledged  in  his
    witness statement, "the Authorities must be  watching  and  controlling
    us".  At paragraph 14 of its determination the Tribunal identified  and
    reasoned that "it may not be the case that a watch was mounted  for  24
    hours a day, seven days a week, but if observations were made then  the
    routines of the household and family  would  be  known".   The  evident
    deduction was that the Authorities would have considered a simultaneous
    raid because they would have known the routines such as what  time  the
    appellant would, for example, have left the house.  Further there  must
    have been a point of hiring at Bashmakh, otherwise  the  employers  and
    prospective employees would not know  where  to  go  to  secure  casual
    labour.  It is correct that the appellant  confirmed  that  he  had  no
    place of work but he must have attended a particular place in order  to
    secure casual employment rather than wander the vast area in  which  he
    stated employment might follow after being secured.  The crucial  point
    is that the Authorities  would  have  observed  the  behaviour  of  the
    appellant and his family and  have  been  able,  bearing  in  mind  its
    sensitivities and sophisticated surveillance techniques  deployed  (and
    as found by the Tribunal at 15) to detain the appellant along with  his
    family in a simultaneous raid.

15. Mr Coleman took particular issue with paragraph 13 and the approach  of
    the Tribunal to the treatment of the  appellant  and  his  mother.   Mr
    Coleman submitted that had HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT  00430  (IAC)
    been followed properly, it would have underlined that the  reaction  of
    the Authorities would be unpredictable  and  the  Tribunal  misdirected
    itself in its approach.  There was simply no way of  knowing  what  the
    Authorities would do and the Tribunal's approach was mere  speculation.
    However, as set out in HB and recorded in the decision the  Authorities
    have a "hair trigger" approach to those suspected of  involvement  with
    Kurdish politics and that must extend to the family  of  a  known  PJAK
    activist such as the brother, and there was  an  overly  sensitive  and
    harsh reaction of the Iranian  regime.   The  Tribunal  did  faithfully
    record the guidance in HB and as supported in the background  evidence.



16. As set out in HB

(7)  Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at  risk  of
arrest, prolonged detention and physical abuse by the  Iranian  authorities.
Even Kurds expressing peaceful  dissent  or  who  speak  out  about  Kurdish
rights also face a real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.



(8)  Activities that can  be  perceived  to  be  political  by  the  Iranian
authorities include social welfare and charitable activities  on  behalf  of
Kurds. Indeed, involvement with any organised activity on behalf  of  or  in
support of Kurds can be perceived as political and thus involve  a  risk  of
adverse attention by the Iranian authorities with  the  consequent  risk  of
persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.



(9)  Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that is  perceived  to
be political, such as, by way of example only, mere possession  of  leaflets
espousing or supporting Kurdish rights, if  discovered,  involves  the  same
risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. Each case  however,  depends
on its own facts and an assessment will need to be made as to the nature  of
the material possessed and how it would  be  likely  to  be  viewed  by  the
Iranian authorities in the context of the foregoing guidance.



(10) The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as a 'hair-
trigger' approach to those suspected of  or  perceived  to  be  involved  in
Kurdish political activities  or  support  for  Kurdish  rights.  By  'hair-
trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion is low and  the  reaction
of the authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme.

17. This  was  the  context  of  assessing  the  reaction  of  the  Iranian
    Authorities.  It should be  emphasised  that  it  was  the  contrasting
    reaction of the authorities over time as described in  the  appellant's
    account that the Tribunal found not  credible.   The  reaction  of  the
    Authorities was set out by the appellant himself and  recorded  by  the
    Tribunal at 7 of the determination.  It was his case that

         "Shortly after his brother left home and joined the  Peshmerga  the
         appellant and his mother were asked to attend the  offices  of  the
         Etelat and asked to persuade him to return.   A  second  invitation
         took the same form and  they  were  released  without  incident  or
         conditions".

    It is that account which the Tribunal factored into its  assessment  at
    13 and  found  not  credible  when  considering  the  reaction  of  the
    Authorities as explained in HB and the  background  material.   As  the
    Tribunal found, quite logically, "the conversations  described  by  the
    appellant when they were asked to persuade their brother to return  and
    (sic) are difficult to reconcile with the attitude of  the  Authorities
    in Iran".  The fact is that the appellant maintained that not once, but
    twice, he and his mother had been questioned  by  the  Authorities  and
    released without incident.  It was open to the Tribunal  to  find  that
    that was not believable bearing in mind  the  country  guidance.   This
    makes clear that the Tribunal did take into account the particular  and
    individual circumstances of the appellant and the relevant context.

18. I  have  addressed  the  question  of  the  appellant's  work  and  the
    Tribunal's findings in relation to 14 and 15 and I  do  not  find  that
    anything turns on the Tribunal comments at paragraph 16.

19. Turning to paragraph 17 of the  determination,  Mr  Coleman  emphasised
    that the appellant had stayed  in  a  stable,  not  with  relatives  as
    indicated by the Tribunal.   However,  the  Tribunal  at  paragraph  17
    stated "the ability of the appellant to remain with family  members  is
    surprising as it would be surprising if the Authorities  did  not  look
    for someone who was wanted among the  wider  family  group  within  the
    general area".  The appellant at question 94 of  his  asylum  interview
    specifically stated that Ahmed was a relative  of  his  brother-in-law.
    He would fall into the wider family group.

20. At question 127 of his asylum interview, the appellant  confirmed  that
    the stable was at Ahmed's house where he stayed for more than a  month.
    This clarifies that the appellant was in fact staying with a member  of
    his wider family in the curtilage of that person's home.  The  Tribunal
    cannot be criticised for its finding at paragraph 17.

21. Although it was noted that the appellant no longer has contact with the
    family,  the Tribunal was in particular commenting on the treatment  of
    the mother and the appellant himself prior to the claimed arrest of the
    mother and disappearance of the brother.

22. At paragraph 18 the Tribunal noted that the  appellant  did  not  claim
    asylum en route but found it "not a major point" although "we find that
    his failure to do so  does  undermine  his  claim  to  be  in  need  of
    international protection".  This is criticised by  Mr  Coleman  on  the
    basis that the appellant had made  it  known  that  he  was  under  the
    control of an agent throughout.  In fact at question 144 of his  asylum
    interview when asked  why  he  did  not  claim  asylum  in  Italy,  the
    appellant replied "I was in control of the agent and I did not  know  I
    was in Italy."   Even  if  that  was  an  interpretation  mistake,  the
    appellant was recorded in his asylum interview as  being  fingerprinted
    in Italy.  This rather undermines the later assertion that he was under
    control of the agent all the time.  Indeed he states at paragraph 12 of
    his witness statement dated 12th December 2018 that he was held  in  a
    police station for about an hour.  He was not under the control  of  an
    agent at that point.

23. The determination specifically recorded that the only information which
    was key and relevant would be referred to.  Indeed the  central  tenets
    of the appellant's claim were addressed.  I am not persuaded  that  the
    finding at 19 that he had not been in contact with his  family  renders
    the determination unsafe.  As the determination states, the  fact  that
    he had not been in contact did not have a bearing on the case.

24. At paragraph 20 the Tribunal made clear  that  it  had  regard  to  the
    observations in the refusal letter, applied the lower standard of proof
    but found the appellant's claim to be fundamentally undermined overall.
     The Tribunal also considered the question of whether he had left  Iran
    illegally. It is evident that the Tribunal addressed and  assessed  the
    relevant evidence.  Mere disagreement about the weight to  be  accorded
    to  the  evidence  is  a  matter  for  the  judge  and  should  not  be
    characterised as an error of law.

25. This is a succinct and concise determination which resolves the central
    issues and affords adequate reasoning.  Although there is a legal  duty
    to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on the central issue  on
    which an appeal is determined, those reasons need not be  extensive  if
    the decision as a whole makes sense,  having  regard  to  the  material
    accepted by the judge,  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set  aside)
    [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

26. As set out in UT Sri Lanka and the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1095

    '19.     ... although "error of law" is widely defined, it is  not  the
         case that the UT is entitled to remake  the  decision  of  the  FTT
         simply because it does not agree with it, or because it  thinks  it
         can produce a better one. Thus, the reasons given  for  considering
         there to be an error of law really matter. Baroness Hale put it  in
         this way in AH (Sudan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         at [30]:

             "Appellate courts should not rush to find  such  misdirections
             simply because they might have reached a different  conclusion
             on the facts or expressed themselves differently." '

27. Overall, I find there is no material error of  law  in  this  decision.
    The reasoning is adequate, to the point and sufficient.   The  decision
    will stand and the appeal remains dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Helen Rimington                     Date 11th September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

