
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/01415/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th June 2017                     |On 13th June 2017                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                   E M M E
                         (anonymity direction  MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt born in 1978.  He  appeals  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Telford,  dated  18th  March  2017,
    dismissing his appeal against the refusal of his  protection  claim  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.



2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bird  on
    18th April 2017 on the grounds that it was arguable the judge erred  in
    law in refusing an  adjournment  to  enable  the  Appellant  to  obtain
    further medical evidence. The Appellant was epileptic and was  vomiting
    during a short adjournment of the hearing. There was evidence that  the
    Appellant suffered fits and received psychotherapy in detention. It was
    arguable that, in failing to investigate further and in continuing with
    the hearing, the judge failed to give the Appellant an  opportunity  to
    have a fair and full hearing.

3.   Mr Duffy expressed his concern for other matters in  the  decision,  in
    particular the judge had failed to appreciate the current situation  in
    Egypt in assessing the Appellant's return there in 2006.

4.   I find that the judge's refusal to adjourn the hearing  was  unfair  in
    the particular circumstances of this case. I have decided in accordance
    with paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statements of  25th  September  2012
    that the decision dated 18th March 2017 should be  set  aside  and  the
    appeal remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  None  of  the  judge's
    findings are preserved.


                                 DIRECTIONS

(i)  The Tribunal is directed pursuant to section 12(3)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal at  a  hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Telford.

(ii) I direct that the Appellant serve on the Respondent  and  the  Tribunal
    not less than 14 days before the  hearing  any  further  evidence  upon
    which he intends to rely.

(iii)    An Arabic (Middle Eastern) interpreter is required.  Time  estimate
    two hours.



           J Frances

Signed                                  Date 12th June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
