
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01403/2020 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 25 August 2021                    |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On 5 August 2021                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     AHA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A de Ruano, Goodfellows Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 4 August 1977.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 November 2009.  On  18
    November 2009, he claimed asylum.  That application was refused  on  17
    December 2009.  The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Walters) was dismissed on 8 February 2010.  Thereafter,  he  was
    refused permission to appeal by both the First-tier Tribunal and  Upper
    Tribunal and he became appeal rights exhausted on 24 September 2010.

 4. The appellant made further submissions to the Home  Office  on  5  July
    2012 which were refused on 1  October  2012.   He  again  made  further
    submissions on 15 October 2014 and those were refused on 16 April 2015.
     Neither decision gave rise to a right of appeal.

 5. Then, on 22 March 2017 the  appellant  made  further  submissions.   He
    claimed to be a member of the minority, Tuni clan from Mogadishu and to
    be at risk on return from majority  clan  militia  and  also  from  Al-
    Shabab.  He  claimed  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  that  his
    removal would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

 6. On 31 December 2019,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  each  of  the
    appellant's claims.  The Secretary of State did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant was a citizen of Somalia or that he was a member of the Tuni,
    minority clan.  The Secretary of State rejected the appellant's  claim,
    therefore, to be at risk of  persecution  on  return  and  also  to  be
    entitled  to  humanitarian  protection   under   Art   15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC).   Further,  the
    Secretary of State concluded that the appellant could not succeed based
    upon his private and family life  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  para
    276ADE(1) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (HC 395  as  amended)
    or under Art 8 outside the Rules.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant again appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision
    sent on 30 November 2020, Judge M R Hoffman dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 8. Unlike the Secretary of State, the judge accepted  that  the  appellant
    was a citizen  of  Somalia.   However,  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant was a member of the Tuni, minority clan or that he  would  be
    at risk on return to Mogadishu either under the Refugee  Convention  or
    under Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  The judge  also  found
    that  the  appellant  had  not  established  that  there   were   "very
    significant  obstacles"  to  his  integration  on  return  under   para
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules or that  his  removal  would  breach  Art  8
    outside the Rules.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  7
    January 2021, The FtT (Judge Adio) granted the appellant permission  to
    appeal.

10. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice
    Centre on 5 August 2021.  I was based in court whilst Mr de Ruano,  who
    represented the appellant, and Mr Avery, who represented the  Secretary
    of State, joined the hearing remotely by Microsoft Teams.

The Appellant's Challenge

11. On behalf of the appellant, Mr de Ruano  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal which he developed briefly in his  oral  submissions.   Although
    unenumerated, I will conveniently refer to these as Grounds 1-5.

12. First, Mr de Ruano submitted that the judge had wrongly failed to  give
    proper regard to the fact that the appellant had  been  established  by
    DNA evidence to be the brother of two sisters who (together with  their
    mother) had been granted refugee status in the UK.  That, he submitted,
    was strongly indicative that the appellant  was,  as  his  sisters  had
    claimed, a member of the Tuni, minority clan.  He  submitted  that  the
    judge had applied an "unduly high burden of  proof"  in  not  accepting
    that evidence.  (Ground 1)

13. Secondly, Mr de Ruano submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    proper regard to the expert report of Mr Omer Ahmed who had stated that
    the appellant was "to a high degree  of  probability  likely  to  be  a
    member of the Tunni clan" on the basis that the expert's report  lacked
    detail about the questions he had asked the appellant.  He relied  upon
    the expert's expertise and qualifications.  (Ground 2)

14. Those were the grounds upon which Mr de Ruano  made  oral  submissions.
    There are an additional  three  points  raised  in  paras  7-9  of  the
    grounds, which Mr de Ruano was content to rely upon  in  their  written
    form.

15. Thirdly, the grounds contend that the judge,  whilst  recognising  that
    there were problems with the previous judge's (Judge Walters)  reliance
    upon the Sprakab Linguistic Report, had not taken  into  account  those
    shortcomings.  (Ground 3)

16. Fourthly, the judge's finding that appellant's relatives  in  Mogadishu
    would be able to provide support  for  him,  was  speculative  and  not
    founded on any solid evidence. (Ground 4)

17. Finally, in respect of Art 8 of the ECHR, the grounds contend that  the
    judge was wrong not to accept that "family life" had  been  established
    between the appellant and his close family in the UK as these were  his
    only family members and they had all fled Somalia to come  to  the  UK.
    (Ground 5)

The Respondent's Submissions

18. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Avery submitted that the  judge
    had not erred in law in dismissing the appeal.

19. First, he submitted that the judge had, at paras 28 and  29,  addressed
    the issue concerning the respondent's recognition  of  the  appellant's
    sisters as being refugees.  However, Mr Avery submitted that the  judge
    was right to note that it was not  known  upon  what  basis  they  were
    granted refugee status.  Mr Avery acknowledged that there was no record
    held by the Home Office on that issue.  It was, he submitted, likely to
    be a combination of factors and they were both  lone  females  with  no
    family to return to in Mogadishu.  It could not  be  assumed  that  the
    Secretary of State had accepted that they were  members  of  the  Tuni,
    minority clan.

20. Secondly, as regards the expert's report, Mr Avery submitted  that  the
    judge had dealt with this at paras 29-32 of his  decision.   The  judge
    had explained why he did not give weight to  the  expert's  conclusion.
    Mr Avery also pointed out that the expert had relied on  the  fact  the
    appellant's sisters had been granted refugee status and  that  the  DNA
    evidence showed they were related as he claimed.

21. Thirdly, Mr Avery submitted that the  issue  of  the  appellant's  clan
    membership was not a key factor.  The  judge  had  applied  MOJ  &  Ors
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) and had accepted that the  appellant
    could reasonably and safely return to Mogadishu where he would  not  be
    at risk including risk from Al-Shabab.

22. Fourthly, Mr Avery submitted  that  it  had  been  open  to  the  judge
    reasonably to find that 'family life' was not established  between  the
    appellant and his adult siblings and mother in the UK.

Discussion

23. I will deal with each of the grounds in turn.

    Ground 1

24. Judge Hoffman dealt  with  the  argument  concerning  the  respondent's
    recognition that the appellant's sisters and mother were refugees  and,
    therefore, that supported the appellant's claim to be a member  of  the
    Tuni, minority clan at paras 28 and 30.

25. At para 28, the judge said this:

         "Despite the findings of Judge Walters, the appellant submits  that
         I should nevertheless find that he is from the Tuni clan.  He first
         seeks to rely on the fact that he has provided  DNA  evidence  that
         demonstrates that he is related as claimed to his three sisters and
         mother.  He submits  that  his  sisters  and  mother  were  granted
         refugee status by the respondent on the basis that they were from a
         minority clan.  While I acknowledge that  the  appellant's  sisters
         and mother also claim to be Tuni, I find that their evidence  alone
         is not sufficient to discharge the burden given that they will have
         an interest in helping their brother remain in the  UK.   Moreover,
         there is no evidence before me to demonstrate  on  what  basis  the
         appellant's  sisters  and  mother  claimed   asylum.    In   cross-
         examination,  all  three  sisters  confirmed  that  the  respondent
         granted them refugee status rather than them having  to  appeal  to
         the Tribunal.  Mr de Ruano submitted that it  is  almost  certainly
         the case that the appellant's sisters and mother  would  have  been
         granted refugee status on the basis that they were from a  minority
         clan.  Ms Mepsted, however, argued that they  could  in  fact  have
         been granted refugee status  on  the  basis  that  they  were  lone
         females, and that Home Office policy in respect of Somali  refugees
         was likely very different 20 years ago".

26. Then, having considered the expert report of Mr Ahmed at paras  29  and
    30, the judge added this at para 30:

         "However, I  accept  Ms  Mepsted's  submission  that  there  is  no
         evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to  demonstrate  what  basis   the
         appellant['s] sisters were granted refugee  status,  and  I  accept
         that it is arguable that it may have been the basis that they  were
         lone females rather than that they were from a minority clan.  I do
         not therefore find that the fact that the appellant['s] sisters and
         mother  were  granted  refugee  status  is  determinative  of   the
         appellant's clan status".

27. The judge's reasoning is legally unassailable.  The  basis  upon  which
    the appellant's sisters and mother had been granted refugee  status  is
    simply unknown and, it would seem from Mr Avery's position,  no  record
    is held by the Home Office as to the basis  of  the  grant  of  refugee
    status to the appellant's family members.  Mr de Ruano did not seek  to
    contradict Mr Avery's position as to Home Office  records  and,  it  is
    common knowledge that, in granting refugee  status,  the  Secretary  of
    State does not give reasons for doing so.  In my  judgment,  the  judge
    properly considered  this  issue  and  was  reasonably  and  rationally
    entitled to conclude that,  despite  the  familial  relationship  being
    accepted now on the basis of DNA evidence, there was no evidence as  to
    the basis upon which  the  appellant's  sisters  and  mother  had  been
    granted refugee status.  There was no evidence that it was on the basis
    that the Secretary of State accepted that  they  came  from  the  Tuni,
    minority clan.  To have reached a finding in the appellant's favour  on
    this issue, the judge would have had improperly to speculate as to  the
    basis of the grant of refugee status without any evidence to support  a
    positive conclusion in the appellant's favour.

28. For these reasons, I reject ground 1.  Whether  or  not  the  appellant
    could establish that he was from the Tuni, minority  clan  fell  to  be
    decided, taking Judge Walters' determination  as  a  'starting  point',
    based upon the evidence before the judge, in particular  the  appellant
    relied on the expert report of Mr Ahmed.  The judge's treatment of that
    report forms the basis of ground 2.

    Ground 2

29. In relation to Mr Ahmed's report, Mr de Ruano relying on para 5 of  the
    grounds and criticised the judge's  reasoning  for  giving  the  expert
    report "little weight" as there was a lack of  detail  about  questions
    asked by the expert of the appellant in order to found  his  conclusion
    that it was "to a high degree of probability" likely that the appellant
    was a member of the Tuni clan.

30. Mr Ahmed's  report  dealt  with  two  issues:  first,  the  appellant's
    knowledge; and secondly, a linguistic assessment.  At paras 29-31,  the
    judge said this:

         "29. The appellant also seeks to rely on an expert report  provided
             by a Mr Omer Ahmed [AB/25-70].  According to his CV, Mr  Ahmed
             is a British citizen and a Somali-speaking  lawyer  (qualified
             in England and Wales).  He says that he  is  'registered  with
             the UK Stabilisation Unit as a deployed civilian expert,  with
             experience   of   delivering   legal   services   in   fragile
             conflict/post-conflict jurisdictions, and strong knowledge and
             expertise in Justice and Security  sector  reform,  Governance
             Rule of Law [sic]'.  His CV sets out  an  impressive  list  of
             organisations  that  he  claims  to  have  worked   alongside,
             including the Foreign & Commonwealth Office as a legal adviser
             for Somalia and Somaliland between January 2013 and July 2014.



         30.  In his report, Mr Ahmed, states that  '[b]ased  on  my  expert
             knowledge of Somali clan structure and supported both  by  the
             telephone interview with the  appellant,  and  review  of  the
             documents on  [sic]  in  this  matter,  I  conclude  that  the
             appellant is to a high degree of probability likely  to  be  a
             member of the Tunni clan' [AB/42-43].  However, I find that  I
             can attach little weight to  Mr  Ahmed's  conclusion.   First,
             while I accept that he has a degree from LSE on Law and Social
             Anthropology, Mr Ahmed's field of expertise appears to be that
             of a lawyer rather than an expert on Somali  clan  structures.
             Secondly, while Mr Ahmed refers to a telephone interview  with
             the appellant and  documents  that  he  has  reviewed,  it  is
             unclear from the report what questions Mr Ahmed actually asked
             the appellant in order to satisfy himself that  the  appellant
             is indeed from the Tuni clan.  Instead, Mr Ahmed simply refers
             to the fact that the appellant has provided DNA  test  results
             to show that he is related to his sisters.  However, I  accept
             Ms Mepsted's submission that there is no evidence  before  the
             Tribunal to demonstrate what basis the appellant (sic) sisters
             were granted refugee status, and I accept that it is  arguable
             it may have been the basis that they were lone females  rather
             than that they were from a minority clan.  I do not  therefore
             find that the fact that the appellant (sic) sisters and mother
             were  granted  refugee  status   is   determinative   of   the
             appellant's clan status.

         31.  Mr Ahmed then  goes  on  to  consider  the  dialect  that  the
             appellant speaks and whether it is one used by the  Tuni.   Mr
             Ahmed  acknowledges  that  he  is  not  a  linguistic  expert,
             although he says that he is 'an expert speaker of Somali  with
             extensive country of origin expertise' [AB/45].  However, as a
             lawyer of England and Wales, Mr Ahmed  should  be  well  aware
             that he  is  not  a  linguistics  expert,  he  should  not  be
             purporting to give expert evidence on  linguistics.   Whatever
             his personal experience of the Somali language, it is  not  in
             my view adequate for him to put himself forward as  an  expert
             witness on this point.  In any event, while Mr Ahmed claims to
             have 'undertake[n] a detailed assessment  of  the  appellant's
             Somali language, dialect and  accent',  his  report  is  again
             silent as to what the criteria and questions he used to assess
             this.  While Mr Ahmed says that the  appellant  was  'able  to
             identify key neighbourhoods, and features within the different
             areas of Mogadishu', Mr Ahmed fails to provide examples of any
             of these nor does he consider whether the appellant could have
             learnt this information from open sources since  his  previous
             asylum appeal was dismissed.  Mr Ahmed says that the appellant
             'had knowledge of the clan dynamics in  Mogadisho  (sic),  but
             limited knowledge of clan  lineage',  which  he  found  to  be
             'unsurprising' given the appellant's age  and  background  and
             his lengthy absence from  Somalia.   I  would  reiterate  that
             there is no evidence that Mr Ahmed  is  an  expert  on  Somali
             clans and, furthermore, he does not refer to any  academic  or
             other sources to support  his  opinion  that  Somalis  of  the
             appellant's age are less likely  to  have  knowledge  of  clan
             lineages.  As the respondent argues, it  might  also  be  said
             that the appellant displays limited knowledge about  the  Tuni
             clan's lineage because he is not himself Tuni.  And whilst  Mr
             Ahmed says that the appellant speaks with a Mogadishu  accent,
             in my view that is not determinative of this  clan  given  the
             large number of clans that live in that city".

31. At para 32, the judge dealt with Mr Ahmed's  comments  in  relation  to
    Judge Walters' reliance on the Sprakab Report which I  will  return  to
    shortly.

32. Mr de Ruano submitted that Mr Ahmed had  satisfactorily  explained  his
    expertise and qualifications and  the  judge  should,  therefore,  have
    given his opinions greater weight.

33.  Of  course,  as  is  well-known,  unlike   in   criminal   and   civil
    jurisdictions, whether  an  individual  is  an  expert  (and  therefore
    entitled to express opinions) is not a condition to  the  admissibility
    of that evidence but, of course, expertise adds weight  to  an  opinion
    (see Kapela [1998] Imm AR 294 at  p.301).   Expertise  may  be  derived
    from,  either  in  isolation   or   combination,   qualifications   and
    experience.  To be considered an  expert,  even  if  only  relevant  to
    weight, requires the Tribunal to be satisfied as  to  the  individual's
    qualifications and/or experience so as  to  justify  treatment  of  the
    evidence as being  that  of  an  expert.   Consequently,  for  example,
    linguistic experts -  employed  by  Sprakab  -  may  well  be  able  to
    establish expertise in linguistic matters but as  regards  country  and
    cultural knowledge, without more, any expertise does not flow from  the
    fact that they are linguistic experts and the latter evidence must,  as
    a result, be seen in that light  if  their  expertise  in  relation  to
    culture, country and origins is not also established (see SSHD v MN and
    KY [2014] UKSC 30 at [50]).

34. In SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155, Stanley Burnton LJ  (with
    whom Maurice Kay and Lewison LJJ agreed) observed (at [21]):

         "Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to be given to expert  (or
         indeed any) evidence is a matter for the trial judge ... A  judge's
         decision not to accept expert evidence does not involve  any  error
         of law on his part, provided he approaches that evidence  with  the
         appropriate care and gives good reasons for his decision".

35. That comment applies with equal force to assessing  the  weight  to  be
    given to Mr Ahmed's report.

36. Mr Ahmed is a Somali-speaking lawyer qualified  in  England  and  Wales
    with some experience of working in government as  a  legal  adviser  in
    relation  to  Somalia.   He  also  has  a  degree  in  Law  and  Social
    Anthropology from the London School of Economics.  However, apart  from
    being a speaker of Somali, there was nothing in his  report  or  before
    the judge which marked him out as a linguistic  expert.   A  linguistic
    expert may well speak a language  fluently  but  his  expertise  is  in
    analysing speech or the  written  word  by  others  and  assessing  its
    origins.  Simply, for  example,  because  an  individual  is  a  fluent
    speaker of English and has command of that language does not mean  that
    that individual is an expert in linguistic analysis so as to be able to
    assess whether another individual  is  speaking  English  because,  for
    example, he or she lives in England (rather than has  acquired  English
    whilst living elsewhere) or speaks a particular dialect of  English  or
    speaks English with a particular accent.  In  that  regard,  therefore,
    the judge did not err in law in giving Mr Ahmed's  evidence  concerning
    the appellant's  linguistic  origins  little  weight.   He  was  not  a
    linguistic expert.

37. Likewise, nothing before the judge established whether  Mr  Ahmed  was,
    indeed, an expert on Somali clan structures.  He may well, as a  result
    of his experience, have some knowledge of Somali clans but neither  his
    academic nor practical experience made it ipso facto clear that he  was
    an authority or had expertise.

38. Equally, the judge was entitled to take into account that Mr Ahmed gave
    no detail as to the questions he had asked the appellant which had  led
    him, in part, to his conclusion  that  there  was  a  "high  degree  of
    probability" that the appellant was a member of the Tuni clan.

39. I am unpersuaded that the judge erred in law in assessing  what  weight
    to give to Mr Ahmed's report for the reasons that the judge sets out at
    some length in paras 29-31 of  his  decision.   For  these  reasons,  I
    reject ground 2.

    Ground 3

40. Ground 3 is linked to, but separate from, the challenge to the  judge's
    approach to Mr Ahmed's report.  Principally, it relates to the  judge's
    comment in para  32  concerning  criticisms  of  the  Sprakab  language
    assessment relied on by Judge Walters in the earlier appeal.  Paragraph
    7 of the grounds states:

         "The  Tribunal   Decision   rightly   acknowledges   that   Sprakab
         assessments are questionable (para 32)  but  errs  in  nevertheless
         accepting Judge Walter's findings would not have been  affected  by
         such shortcomings."

41. At para 32 the judge said this:

         "Mr Ahmed also criticises the conclusions of the  Sprakab  language
         assessment that was relied upon by the  respondent  in  the  appeal
         before Judge Walters [AB/62].  While  I  accept  that  the  Supreme
         Court in the case of N v Advocate General for Scotland [2014]  UKSC
         30  cast  doubt  on  Sprakab's  past  practice  of  commenting   on
         claimants' knowledge of a country (and, indeed  Judge  Walters  did
         appear [to] rely on Sprakab's evidence in  this  regard),  it  also
         held whilst not infallible, Sprakab's assessment of language  could
         be accepted unless the evidence showed otherwise.  In  the  present
         case, Mr Ahmed has  acknowledged  that  he  is  not  an  expert  on
         linguistics and, in my  view,  his  views  cannot  be  said  to  be
         sufficiently weighty to undermine the findings of Judge Walters  on
         this point".

42. In  MN  and  KY,  the  Supreme  Court,  as  I  have  noted  above,  did
    differentiate between the approach a judge should give to the  opinions
    expressed in Sprakab Reports concerning, on the  one  hand,  linguistic
    analysis and, on the other hand, the knowledge of an  individual  about
    their claimed home area (see [51]).  Mr de Ruano relied on  para  7  of
    the grounds that the  judge:  "errs  in  nevertheless  accepting  Judge
    Walters' finding would not have been affected by such shortcomings".

43. In para 9 of  his  decision,  Judge  Hoffman,  when  referring  to  the
    respondent's decision letter, commented that Judge Walters:

         "did not accept that the appellant was Somali because  he  spoke  a
         variety of Somali spoken in Kenya, Judge Walters also placed weight
         on the Sprakab Report's findings that the appellant did not display
         any knowledge of the Mogadishu area or the sub-clan that he claimed
         to belong to (see paras 8 to 10 of the decision letter)".

44. It is not entirely clear what the error of law  is  being  asserted  in
    para 7 of the grounds.  The judge referred to Mr Ahmed's  criticism  of
    the Sprakab language assessment but, of course, Mr Ahmed -  unlike  the
    Sprakab assessors - is not a  linguistic  expert.   Likewise,  even  if
    after MN and KY care must be taken in relying on opinions expressed  in
    Sprakab Reports about "knowledge of  country  and  culture",  again  Mr
    Ahmed's expertise was not established.  Judge Hoffman  had,  therefore,
    no obvious evidential basis to undermine Judge  Walters'  finding  that
    the  appellant  had  not  established   his   Tuni   clan   membership.
    Importantly, however, given the burden of proof was upon the appellant,
    there was no significant evidence before  Judge  Hoffman  to  establish
    that clan lineage once Mr Ahmed's report had been properly  taken  into
    account but not, as the judge was  entitled  to  do,  given  sufficient
    weight to carry the appellant's claim.

45. I, therefore, reject ground 3 that the judge erred in law in para 32 in
    rejecting the  contention  that  Mr  Ahmed's  report  undermined  Judge
    Walters' findings and, in the context  of  the  evidence  before  Judge
    Hoffman, could, or should, have led Judge Hoffman to reach a  different
    conclusion on the appellant's clan affiliation.

    Ground 4

46. Mr de Ruano did not address this ground in his oral submissions.   Para
    8 of the grounds states succinctly that it was wrong of  the  judge  to
    find that the appellant's "distant relatives would definitely  be  able
    to support" the appellant on  return  to  Mogadishu  because  that  was
    speculative and not founded on any solid evidence.

47. At para 37, the judge noted that  the  appellant  had  said  in  cross-
    examination that he was in contact with "distant  relatives"  from  his
    clan living in Mogadishu but he claimed that they would not be able  to
    help him find a job or place to live on return.  The judge said this:

         "In submissions, Ms Mepsted asked me to  find  that  the  appellant
         could avail himself of the assistance of his distant  relatives  to
         help re-establish himself on return.  In my view, I can only attach
         limited weight to the appellant's claim that his distant  relatives
         would be unable to help him on return given that his evidence  here
         inevitably could be said to be self-serving".

48. It is not entirely clear precisely the issue which the  judge  thought,
    in terms of risk on return, this matter related to.  He referred to MOJ
    & Ors and the headnote at para (viii).  That provides as follows:

         "(viii)  The significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
                changed.  Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support
                mechanisms and assist with access to livelihoods, performing
                less of a protection function than previously.  There are no
                clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence, and  no  clan-
                based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for  minority  clan
                members".

49. As this recognises, unlike at earlier times, membership of  a  minority
    clan is not determinative or  significant  in  determining  whether  an
    individual faces a real risk of persecution in Mogadishu.  The basis of
    clan membership is now  related  to  social  support  mechanisms.   Its
    relevance is, in large measure, to  issues  of  the  reasonableness  of
    internal relocation to Mogadishu (irrelevant to the appellant who comes
    from  Mogadishu)  or  to  Art  8  of  the  ECHR  and  the  individual's
    circumstances on return.  The factors set out in MOJ & Ors at [407(f)]-
    [407(h)] do not even relate to the issue of whether a breach of  Art  3
    is established (see Said v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 442  at  [26]-[28]  and
    SSHD v MS (Somalia) [2019] EWCA Civ 1345 at [76]).  It was,  therefore,
    not material to the judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's  risk  on
    return either under the Refugee Convention or under Art 15(c)  although
    it could be relevant under Art 8.  However, in that  regard  the  judge
    went on to  find  in  paras  38  and  39,  that  as  regards  financial
    assistance in order to live in Mogadishu, the appellant would  continue
    to have financial assistance from his sisters in  the  UK  which  would
    help him to re-establish himself.  That finding is  not  challenged  in
    the grounds.  And provides a sound evidential  basis  for  the  judge's
    ultimate finding that the  appellant  would  be  able  to  re-establish
    himself in Mogadishu on return.

    Ground 5

50. Mr de Ruano did not address this ground in his  oral  submissions.   In
    para 9 of the grounds the judge is criticised for finding in para 50 of
    his decision that it had not been established that  there  was  "family
    life" between the appellant and his adult siblings and mother in the UK
    because there was nothing "more than  normal  emotional  ties"  between
    them.  The ground simply asserts that the judge failed to  address  the
    fact that these were the appellant's only family and "they all have had
    to flee their country, bringing them closer to each other".

51. In para 50, the judge correctly directed himself applying the  approach
    to Art 8 and "family life" set out in Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31 which remains good law (see, e.g. Rai v ECO, New Delhi  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 320 at [17]).  He accepted  in  para  49  that  the  appellant  had
    established private life in the UK, since he arrived eleven years  ago,
    "primarily with his sisters and mother", but, in para 50,  he  did  not
    accept there was family life:

         "In the present case, I  do  not  accept  that  the  appellant  has
         discharged the burden of demonstrating a relationship above  normal
         emotional ties exists between him and his mother, whom he does  not
         live with".

52. Then at para 51 the judge went on:

         "As for the appellant's sisters, while I accept that the  appellant
         lives with [R] and that all three  sisters  provide  some  form  of
         financial assistance to their brother, the evidence before me  does
         not demonstrate that this goes beyond normal emotional ties between
         adult siblings".

53. The bare assertion that the judge erred in law by failing to take  into
    account that the family was close because they had  all  fled  Somalia,
    comes nowhere establishing a material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    reasons  leading  to  him  finding  that  family  life  had  not   been
    established with his family in the UK.  As I  have  already  said,  the
    judge  correctly  directed  himself  in  line  with  Kugathas.   It  is
    difficult to conceive that the judge, given the nature of the  evidence
    presented to him, was not aware of the fact that the appellant with his
    sisters and mother had fled Somalia.  He dealt with their circumstances
    in the UK including that the appellant did not live with his mother but
    that he did live with one sister and obtained  some  financial  support
    from them.  The  appellant's  mother,  although  she  had  submitted  a
    witness statement setting out her medical condition, had  not  attended
    court to give evidence and  the  judge  was,  in  those  circumstances,
    entitled not to accept her health  problems  were  established  as  she
    claimed.

54. Having considered all the evidence, and the judge  having  applied  the
    correct legal approach, his finding can only amount to an error of  law
    if it is Wednesbury unreasonable or irrational, namely it was a finding
    that no reasonable judge properly directing himself could reach.  That,
    in my judgment, is not established.  The judge was reasonably  entitled
    to find that the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his  adult
    siblings and mother in the UK, though close, was  no  more  than  would
    usually be expected between an adult individual and his  adult  family.
    That was not such as to amount to "more than normal emotional ties" and
    "family life" for the purposes of Art 8.1.

55. For these reasons, I reject ground 5.

    Conclusion

56. I have not directly addressed Mr Avery's submission  that,  in  effect,
    the judge  rejected  the  appellant's  international  protection  claim
    because he found that the appellant was not at risk  on  return  as  an
    ordinary citizen returning to Mogadishu and that there was no real risk
    of persecution or of serious harm falling within Art 15(c) as a  result
    of Al-Shabab in Mogadishu (see paras 41 and 42).  It may well  be  that
    the finding followed, both in relation to the  Refugee  Convention  and
    under  Art  15(c),  regardless  of  the  appellant's  clan  membership.
    However, given that the judge made the finding that the  appellant  had
    not established  that  he  was  a  member  of  the  Tuni  clan,  it  is
    unnecessary to express any further view on  Mr  Avery's  submission  on
    this issue.

57. For the above reasons, the judge did  not  materially  err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    grounds or under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

58. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.   That  decision,
    therefore, stands.

59. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              10 August 2021
