
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01293/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2019                          |On 18 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     m m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M McGardy, Counsel, instructed by J M Wilson
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is  the  Appellant's  challenge  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal ("the judge"), promulgated on 21 June  2019,
    in which he dismissed her appeals against the Respondent's decision  of
    3 January 2019, which in turn refused her protection and  human  rights
    claims.  Those claims were essentially based upon the  following.   The
    Appellant had grown up in extremely impoverished circumstances and  was
    illiterate.  She had  been  forced  to  marry  a  much  older  man  who
    subsequently abused her over the course of some  six  years.   She  had
    undergone FGM.  As a  result  of  the  unhappy  marriage  she  has  two
    children, a boy and a girl, aged 5 and  3.   The  girl  has  also  been
    subjected to the act of FGM.  Circumstances led to  the  Appellant  and
    her children living in Guinea for a number of years. The Appellant then
    had to return to Mozambique, where she resided for some six years prior
    to her journey to the United Kingdom. At the date of hearing before the
    judge and to date, the children remain in Guinea.  The Appellant was to
    be returned to Mozambique.



The judge's decision

 2. The Respondent was not represented before the judge.

 3. Importantly, the judge found the Appellant  to  be  entirely  credible.
    This included an acceptance of all of the various matters that  I  have
    set out in the first paragraph of my decision.  By way of  implication,
    the judge accepted that the Appellant had been born in  1999,  and  not
    1990, as asserted by the Respondent.  The judge found  that  there  had
    been past persecution for a Convention reason and that there  was  risk
    in the home area.  When turning to the issue of internal relocation, he
    concluded that the Appellant's husband would not be able to  track  her
    down elsewhere, for example to the capital of Maputo, and that she  may
    be  able  to  have  sought  the  assistance  of  an  NGO  operating  in
    Mozambique.  In light of this the judge found that the Appellant  could
    internally relocate.

 4. Turning  to  the  issue  of  Article  8  and  in  particular  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi), the judge concluded that as the Appellant had resided in
    Mozambique for the past six years, spoke Malinka (a language spoken  in
    Guinea, not Mozambique), French, and a little English,  and  was  "more
    than aware" of how life in Mozambique was carried on, there  would  not
    be "very significant obstacles" to her reintegration into  the  society
    of that country.

 5. The appeal was duly dismissed on all grounds.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The succinct grounds of appeal assert that the  judge  failed  to  take
    into account highly relevant factors when  considering  the  issues  of
    internal relocation and paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

 7. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Omotosho on 24 July
    2019.



Decision on error of law

 8. At the outset of the hearing before me, and in  my  view  applying  his
    customary fair approach to such matters, Mr Bramble accepted that there
    were material errors of law in the judge's decision and that it had  to
    be set aside.

 9. I entirely agree with this position.  In my view the assessment of both
    internal relocation and paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) are clearly inadequate,
    given the positive findings  of  primary  fact  reached  by  the  judge
    earlier in his decision.  With all due respect, I struggle to  see  how
    the very significant  factors  relating  to  the  Appellant's  personal
    characteristics could have been left out of account in  the  assessment
    of the two core legal issues.  However, left out they were.

10. The judge's decision is set aside.

11. The findings of primary fact are unchallenged, and they shall stand.



Remaking the decision

12. In respect of disposal, both representatives  quite  properly  accepted
    that I could, and should, remake the decision in this case, based  upon
    the evidence before me and the findings of primary fact reached by  the
    judge. This I now do.

13. Again, to his credit Mr  Bramble  did  not  offer  up  any  substantial
    opposition to the success of the Appellant's appeal  in  light  of  the
    findings made by the judge.

14. Having assessed the relevant issues for myself, I take into account the
    following matters, none of which are now in dispute.  The Appellant can
    properly be described as an exceptionally vulnerable individual, having
    regard to a litany of horrific circumstances which  have  befallen  her
    over the course of her young life.  She is essentially  the  victim  of
    torture with regards to FGM, as is her young daughter; she is  entirely
    illiterate; a victim of  egregious  domestic  abuse  over  a  prolonged
    period of time; a single mother without any support network whatsoever;
    without any relevant work experience; without assets of any kind;  and,
    perhaps unsurprisingly, is a person of what I would describe as at  the
    very least, fragile mental health.

15. The Appellant would, as the First-tier Tribunal found,  undoubtedly  be
    at risk of persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment in her home area.

16. Turning to internal relocation, and with regard  to  the  Qualification
    Directive and the well-known principles set out in AH (Sudan) [2008]  1
    AC 678 and Januzi [2006] 2 AC 426 (as summarised more recently in,  for
    example, AS (Afghanistan) [2019] EWCA  Civ  873),  there  is  only  one
    rational outcome in this case,  namely  that  it  would  without  doubt
    unduly  harsh  for  this  individual  to  relocate   elsewhere   within
    Mozambique.  In light of the personal characteristics I  have  set  out
    above, the conclusion is in my view self-evident.

17. The same applies to paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   Whether  there  is  any
    difference between the unduly  harsh  test  and  the  very  significant
    obstacles test, makes no difference  in  this  particular  case.   Such
    obstacles  would  quite  clearly  have  existed  at  the  date  of  the
    Appellant's claim in this country (that being 14 October 2017) and now.

18. I make a final observation.  Without  intending  any  criticism  of  Mr
    Bramble, this appeal should have resolved itself before coming  up  for
    hearing. The Respondent really should have taken stock and  provided  a
    rule 24 notice conceding both the error of law and the ultimate result.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
is set aside.





I remake the decision by allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and
human rights grounds.






Signed   [pic]         Date: 16 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

