
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01700/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 May 2018                     |On 14 May 2018                      |
|                                  |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                  ANGEL [U]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson (counsel) instructed by WTB
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Agnew promulgated on 14 September 2017, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1986 and is a  national  of  Rwanda.  On  1
February 2017 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Agnew ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 16 November  2017  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Pullig gave permission to appeal stating

    "1. The appellant, a national of Rwanda, seeks permission to appeal, in
    time, against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Agnew, decided on
    the papers  and  promulgated  on  14  September  2017,  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  refusing
    her protection claim. The appellant was unable to give evidence as  she
    was medically unfit to conduct proceedings and  litigation  friend  had
    been appointed.


    2. The grounds seeking permission  complain  first  about  the  Judge's
    treatment of the medical evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  medical
    condition and the psychiatric report in evidence. They note  that  [29]
    contains the comments that the Judge had said "either that [her  mental
    health has deteriorated - as found by the  psychiatrist]  or  she  was,
    following the refusal of her claim for  asylum  on  01  February  2017,
    pretending to have serious mental health issues to  support  her  claim
    ..."  (emphasis  in  the  grounds).  The  Judge   observed   that   the
    psychiatrist had not seen her medical notes or other evidence. However,
    say the grounds an independent psychiatric report was requested by  the
    Tribunal and the  Judge's  comment  was  outside  her  expertise.  From
    reading the Judge's decision and the psychiatric report,  it  is  clear
    that the appellant was  suffering  from  the  mental  health  condition
    demonstrated. It is not clear what, if any, findings the Judge made  in
    this respect or how it affected her decision for  a  vulnerable  adult,
    notwithstanding this appeal was decided on the papers.  This  discloses
    an arguable error of law as amplified in the grounds.


    3. The grounds  also  complain  about  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant is not a lesbian. After much consideration  of  the  evidence
    that conclusion is found at [63]. I find that the reasons  are  unclear
    because,  leading  up  to  that,  I  find  that  there  are  clear  and
    sustainable adverse credibility findings about article written in which
    the appellant's name had been inserted on the one hand and the evidence
    regarding  her  sexual   orientation   from   other   confirming   that
    orientation. That should have led the Judge to  consider  HJ  (Iran)  v
    SSHD [2010] UKSC 31. I find this is also arguable.


    4. Thus, I find there are arguable material errors of law and  I  grant
    permission."


The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Mr Nicholson moved the grounds of appeal. He  told
me that there are two grounds of appeal. The first is that the Judge  strays
into the role mental health professional at [9] of  the  decision  and  does
not treat the medical evidence correctly. The second relates to the way  the
Judge dealt with evidence about the appellant's sexuality.

(b) Mr Nicholson focused on [29] of the decision. He reminded me  that  this
case was determined on documentary evidence alone. He took me  through  [20]
to [29] of the decision, referring me to the Judge's various expressions  of
surprise  throughout  those  paragraphs,  before  dwelling  on  the  Judge's
comments at [29]. He told me that at [29] the Judge was wrong  to  look  for
evidence relating to mental health within the letters of  support  from  the
appellant's church & from the LGBTI community. He told me that it was  wrong
to look for evidence relating  to  the  appellant's  mental  health  in  the
report  prepared  by  Karen  Smith  from  Lesbian  Immigration  Support   in
Manchester. He told me that the fundamental flaw is in  the  sixth  sentence
of [29] where the Judge says

    "Either that or she was, following the refusal of her claim for  asylum
    on 1 February 2017, pretending to have serious mental health issues  in
    order to support a claim for asylum ..."


(c) Mr Nicholson addressed the Judge's treatment  of  the  evidence  of  the
appellant's sexuality. He relied on the respondent's policy for  identifying
sexual issues in an asylum claim. He took me  to  various  passages  of  the
appellant's asylum interview record and told me that  the  Judge  failed  to
consider the appellant's evidence contained in  her  asylum  interview,  and
failed to analyse the report from Karen Smith,  together  with  the  witness
statements and letters of support contained in the appellant's bundle.

(d) He told me that the decision  is  inadequately  reasoned  and  does  not
contain an analysis of crucial evidence. He urged me  to  set  the  decision
aside and to remit this case to the First-tier to be determined of new.

6. (a) For the respondent Ms Petterson took me to [32] of the  decision  and
told me that the Judge took account of background information. She  told  me
that the Judge effectively found that, even if the appellant is  a  lesbian,
her  claim  cannot  succeed  because  it  is  not  supported  by  background
information. The Judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  lesbians  are  not
persecuted in Rwanda.

(b) When Ms Petterson turned her attention to [29], she conceded  that  what
the Judge says in the sixth sentence (there) undermines  the  decision.  She
told me that what the Judge says is unfair, and  indicates  that  the  Judge
may have approached the evidence with a closed mind. She told  me  that  she
accepts that this case needs to be  remitted  so  that  a  new  fact-finding
exercise can be carried out.

Analysis

7. This case has a slightly unusual procedural history.  There  was  medical
and psychiatric evidence indicating that the  appellant  would  struggle  to
give evidence. Even though other witnesses were available, no oral  evidence
was led, and the case was determined on the documentary evidence.

8. The appellant's bundle contains a witness statement from  the  appellant,
a supporting witness statement and four letters of support. In  addition,  a
detailed  letter  from  Karen  Smith,  of   Lesbian   Immigration   Support,
Manchester,  was  placed  before  the  Tribunal.  The  respondent's   bundle
contained  the  appellant's  asylum  interview  and  a  transcript  of   the
appellant's screening interview.

9. At [22] and [23] the Judge considers the letter from  Ms  Smith.  Between
[23] and [28} the Judge considers the letter from  the  appellant's  GP  and
the psychiatric report dated 23 July 2017. The error that  the  Judge  makes
is at [29] where the Judge examines the letter from the  appellant's  church
and the four letters of support for evidence of mental illness. Neither  the
appellant's church, nor Ms Smith, nor the appellant's  supporting  witnesses
can offer psychiatric evidence. The Judge compounds that error  by  using  a
poor choice of words creating the impression that the  Judge  dismisses  the
medical evidence and concludes that the  appellant  is  dishonest  -  before
considering the remaining strands of the appellant's evidence.

10. I do not doubt that the  Judge's  intention  was  to  take  an  holistic
approach to all of the evidence in the case, but  the  choice  of  words  at
[29]  creates  the  impression  that  the  Judge  closed  her  mind   before
approaching the appellant's witness statement, the asylum  interview  record
and the other strands of evidence.

11. Parties now agreed that [29] contains a  material  error  of  law.   The
choice of words at [29] creates the impression that, after  considering  the
psychiatric evidence, the Judge's mind is made up. The choice  of  words  at
[29] creates the impression that  the  Judge  approaches  the  rest  of  the
evidence in this case on the basis of the appellant has  deliberately  duped
the psychiatrist, so that her overall credibility is undermined. It  is  not
clear from the decision how the Judge reached the potential conclusion  that
the appellant has been dishonest with the author of the psychiatric  report.
It is not clear from the decision why the Judge rejects the  conclusions  of
the psychiatrist.

12. There is also a separation between  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
psychiatric evidence and the Judge's analysis  of  the  appellant's  witness
statement & the record of asylum interview. In M (DRC)  [2003]  UKIAT  00054
the Tribunal said that it was wrong to make adverse findings of  credibility
first and then dismiss the report.  Similarly, in Ex parte Virjon  B  [2002]
EWHC 1469, Forbes J found that an Adjudicator had been wrong to use  adverse
credibility findings as a  basis  for  rejecting  medical  evidence  without
first considering the medical evidence itself. That too was the view of  the
Court of Appeal in the case of Mibanga [2005] EWCA  Civ  367  and  in  Ladji
Diaby v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 651.  In HE (2004)  UKIAT  00321  the  Tribunal
said that "where the report is specifically relied on as a  factor  relevant
to credibility, the adjudicator should deal with it as an integral  part  of
the findings on credibility, rather than just as an add on, which  does  not
undermine the conclusions to which he would otherwise come".

13. This case is slightly  different  because  the  Judge  appears  to  have
considered, and rejected, the psychiatric evidence  before  considering  the
appellant's evidence, but the principle remains  the  same.  The  Judge  was
wrong to  reach  a  conclusion  based  on  one  strand  of  evidence  before
considering all of the evidence cumulatively. In S  v  SSHD  2006  EWCA  Civ
1153 the Court of Appeal said that an error of law only  arose  where  there
was artificial separation amounting to a structural failing, and  not  where
there was a mere error of appreciation  of  the  medical  evidence  (Mibanga
distinguished).

14. What is contained at [29] amounts to  a  material  error  of  law  which
creates a fundamental flaw in the Judge's overall reasoning.

15.  As the decision is tainted by a material error of law, I set it  aside.
I am asked to remit this case to the First -tier. I consider whether or  not
I can substitute my own decision, but find that I cannot do  so  because  of
the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b) the nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


17. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

18. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Manchester  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Agnew.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on  14  September  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 2 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

