
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01877/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd July 2019                    |On 05th August 2019                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                Blessing [I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 11th March  1981.   She
    claims to have entered the United  Kingdom  originally  in  2001.   She
    claimed asylum on 11th October, 2017 and the  claims  were  refused  on
    14th February, 2019.

2.   She has two daughters, one born on 18th December 2012 and another  born
    on 27th June 2018, both are dependent on her claim.

3.   The appellant appears to have at  some  stage  been  deported  back  to
    Nigeria and she travelled again to the United Kingdom with an  aunt  in
    2006.  She claims that she returned to Nigeria in 2012, remaining there
    for two years before coming back to the United Kingdom.

4.   The appellant claims that she was born and  lived  in  Benin  and  left
    Nigeria because she was afraid of the Ogboni  and  the  Asigidi  cults.
    Her father, she claimed, was a member of both.  The appellant  observed
    rituals performed by her father which she found to be  inhumane.   This
    involved killing animals and using their blood for various  activities.
    The appellant travelled to the United Kingdom on  false  documents  and
    stayed with a female friend of her uncle.  She then lived with a friend
    called Stefano.  The appellant used his credit card to  buy  food.   It
    was a stolen card and Stefano and the appellant were convicted of theft
    and the appellant was  imprisoned  for  three  months.   Following  her
    release from prison she was deported, together with Stefano in 2002.

5.   The appellant lived with a cousin and then subsequently  with  an  aunt
    who cared for the appellant following the appellant's  mother's  death.
    The aunt held Nigerian and Italian nationality and took  the  appellant
    to live in Benin where the  appellant  had  grown  up.   The  appellant
    travelled to the United Kingdom in 2006 with her aunt  and  received  a
    residence card in 2010.  The appellant was contacted and told where her
    father had died in December, 2011.  The friends of hers told  her  that
    she should go home and worship for her father's spirit.  The  appellant
    returned to Nigeria she claims in March, 2012 despite the fact that her
    father had died some three months earlier.  She says that her  father's
    funeral took place two days after she returned  to  her  home  area  of
    Benin and she attended his home  disguised  in  a  burka.   During  the
    funeral ceremony she claims  she  was  shocked  to  discover  that  her
    father's corpse had been mutilated, in that his  eyes  and  tongue  had
    been removed.  She was told by a  lady  present  at  the  funeral  that
    removal of the eyes and the tongue were part of the cult's  traditions.
    Other cult members she claimed  ate  them  to  give  them  power.   The
    appellant threw sand at the coffin and as she did so her veil  blew  up
    and people identified her.

6.   Three days after her father's funeral a  member  of  the  Asigidi  cult
    approached her.  Since she was the only child of  her  father,  it  was
    claimed that she  had  to  take  over  the  leadership  position.   The
    appellant claimed that she would have been killed if she refused.   She
    was told that she was a man who had been reincarnated as a female.   As
    a result she had to be cleaned.  She would be seen  as  a  princess  or
    goddess.  The appellant told cult members that she did  not  want  this
    role and they gave her time to accept it.  If she did not she was  told
    that she would be killed.

7.   The appellant travelled to Lagos to join her friend.  She  remained  in
    Lagos for a week but cult members found her and visited her.  She heard
    cult members asking for her.  The appellant ran out of the  house  from
    the backyard and went to a hotel and booked a ticket  to  fly  back  to
    London the next day.  The appellant met a friend while she was  staying
    with her friend in Lagos.  His name is Wilfred Edward.  He  is  also  a
    national of Nigeria and he came to the United Kingdom shortly after the
    appellant in March, 2012.  They began a relationship and  as  a  result
    the appellant gave birth to her first daughter.  The appellant is still
    in a relationship with Mr Edward,  but  she  does  not  live  with  him
    because he could not afford to support his family.  He has no leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  He it is claimed sees  his  children  at
    least twice a month.  He calls the appellant several times a day.

8.   The appellant  claims  that  she  cannot  return  to  Nigeria  for  two
    reasons.  Firstly because she would be forced  to  join  the  cult  and
    secondly because her daughters would be forced  to  undergo  FGM.   The
    appellant appealed the respondent's decision and her appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd in Manchester on 11th  April,  2019.
    Judge Lloyd made various credibility findings and  concluded  that  the
    appellant could return and live safely in Nigeria away  from  the  cult
    members and that her children would not be at risk of FGM, since  there
    is in Nigeria effective state protection likely to be available to her.
     In paragraph  57  of  the  determination  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant could live in a different part of Nigeria.  Unfortunately the
    judge did not apply the correct test and decide whether or not it would
    be unreasonable for the appellant to go and live  in  another  part  of
    Nigeria.

9.   In paragraph 59 she applied the following test.  She said

         "I accept that living elsewhere will not be an easy option for  the
         family, but it remains unreasonable for the appellant to  seek  the
         surrogate protection of the  international  community  rather  than
         relocating within her own country".

10.  That is not the correct test.  The correct test is whether or  not  the
    appellant can reasonably and without  undue  hardship  be  expected  to
    relocate having regard to his or her circumstances.  The  determination
    was challenged because of various  credibility  findings  made  by  the
    judge which it is said were unfair.  It  was  also  challenged  on  the
    basis of the judge's considerations of Article 8.  I have not been able
    to find any error of law in what the judge said in relation to  Article
    8.  Counsel agreed with me that there was in fact  no  evidence  placed
    before the judge to suggest that  it  would  be  unreasonable  for  the
    appellant's  oldest  child  to   leave   the   United   Kingdom.    The
    determination was also challenged in connection with the assessment  of
    risk of FGM to the appellant's daughters.  The judge failed to consider
    the background evidence before her that suggests that the  practice  of
    FGM in Nigeria is still prevalent and the authorities do not provide  a
    sufficiency of protection.  With very great respect  the  evidence  was
    that they do provide an element of protection.  The fact that FGM still
    occurs does not mean that it is not adequate.  The judge has I  believe
    erred however in relation to the question of  internal  relocation  and
    for that reason I set aside the whole of the determination.

11.  I should point out that at paragraphs 42 and 43  the  judge  refers  to
    findings made by a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  connection  with  an
    earlier hearing.  Those findings  are  still  relevant  and  of  course
    Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka
    * UKIAT 00702 applies to them.   I  concluded  that  the  determination
    should be set aside and the hearing be remade by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Lloyd.  The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    that purpose, given that the appellant has been denied a fair  hearing.
    Three hours should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

Dated 26 July 2019
