

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01249/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |             Decision & Reasons         |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 1st December 2017                |             On 19th February 2018      |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                  miss k Y
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Gemma Loughram, Counsel instructed by UK Law,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia and she applied  for  permission
    to appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
    on 22nd March 2017  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse her protection and human rights claim.

 2. She left Ethiopia on 21st  September  2015,  travelled  through  Sudan,
    Libya and France and arrived in the UK in 2016 and was  encountered  in
    the back of a lorry.  She claimed asylum on the basis that she would be
    imprisoned or harmed owing to her affiliation  with  the  Ginbot  7  in
    Ethiopia of which she claimed she was a low-level member.

 3. The grounds for permission asserted the following:-

      1) There was a lack of reasoned findings in relation to  the  decision
         and credibility.  The judge found the  appellant's  account  to  be
         lacking in credibility partly because of the discrepancies  in  her
         evidence.  She gave mixed evidence as to when she became  a  member
         of the PG7, whether in 2013 or as early as 2006,  which  the  judge
         stated "as  she  stated  in  her  oral  evidence  today".   It  was
         contended in the grounds, however, that  the  appellant  stated  in
         2006 in oral evidence in  court  as  she  spoke  referring  to  the
         Amharic  Julian  calendar  not   the   Gregorian   calendar.    The
         appellant's  interview  record  of  question  76   supported   that
         assertion, and the witness statement  prepared  in  English  stated
         2013 and was consistent with the appellant's account.  As such  the
         judge was misled by the factual error and that led to an  error  in
         law by basing a finding on a misapprehension of fact.

    I find that it is arguable the judge may have made a mistake  regarding
    the appellant's evidence of when the appellant became a member  of  the
    PG7 in Ethiopia.  The judge's findings are based on the totality of the
    discrepancies in the appellant's evidence and indeed it is  clear  that
    in her interview record she stated that she joined the party in 2013.

      2) It was further contended that the appellant was not  asked  by  the
         interviewing officer or her solicitors as to  what  she  was  doing
         when she was not attending the cell meeting, but in  oral  evidence
         stated where she was and what she was doing.  Further, the  judge's
         observation that the appellant was not a member until 28th December
         2016 was incorrect.  It was that she did not provide her membership
         number until that date.

    It does appear that the appellant in her  witness  statement  did  make
    clear that she was a member prior to 2016 but was  not  sent  the  code
    until 28th December 2016, but this did not mean that  she  was  not  an
    actual member and the judge erred in his approach at paragraph 32.

 4. In my view the judge did approach the assessment of credibility with  a
    misapprehension  of  the  evidence  which  renders  his   findings   on
    credibility unsafe.

 5. In relation to ground 2 it was advanced that at  paragraph  33  of  the
    determination the judge had found that she was a low-level affiliate to
    PG7 and that was not likely  to  put  her  at  risk,  but  the  court's
    attention was drawn to the fact that G7/PG7 was a  banned  and  illegal
    party in Ethiopia and labelled as a terrorist organisation.   There  is
    no CIG note on PG7, but the fact that she is a low-level affiliate  did
    not prevent the authorities from targeting her.  I find that the  judge
    has  made  very  limited  findings  and  in  essence  given  inadequate
    reasoning as to why he concluded that she would not be at risk  because
    she was low-level.

 6. The third ground was that the judge's dismissal of the appellant's  sur
    place activities corroborated with a series of demonstrations in the UK
    and the question was whether she would be perceived as being at risk on
    return  on  this  basis.   It  was  argued  that  there  was  extensive
    surveillance  practiced  by  the  authorities  in  Ethiopia  and   that
    dissidents abroad were monitored by the Ethiopian authorities and it is
    likely that she may have been identified in demonstrations.

 7. I note the judge stated at paragraph 32:-

         "She also says that she has attended demonstrations in the  UK  and
         the authorities will be aware of her  attendance  through  Facebook
         and other social media sources, though she accepted that  this  has
         not yet been published".

 8. The judge proceeded to state "I have not found the appellant's  account
    to be credible".  That may be the case but  the  judge  has  failed  to
    address YB Eritrea v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  360   and  address  how  the
    appellant would be perceived on return as a result of activities in the
    United Kingdom regardless of credibility in relation to  matters  prior
    to relocation from Ethiopia.

 9. The judge however did not appear to assess the risk to the appellant in
    relation to the sur place activity itself, regardless  of  credibility,
    and the reasoning is inadequate further to MK (duty  to  give  reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641. Shizad (sufficiency of  reasons:  set  aside)
    [2013] UKUT 00085  (IAC)  confirms  that  there  is  no  need  to  give
    extensive reasoning but to my mind the reasoning here is too  truncated
    to be clear.

10. There is merit in the fourth ground  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the background evidence in relation  to  assessing  credibility
    and the fifth ground of challenge that there was an inadequate risk  on
    return assessment.  It was asserted the judge had materially failed  to
    take into account,  on  the  findings,  that  the  appellant  would  be
    persecuted if returned to Ethiopia on the basis of  country  background
    information and I note that the judge at paragraph 33 states:-

         "Even taking her case at the highest, her activities with PG7  were
         at low level and not likely to put her at any risk.  Her activities
         in the UK have been to enhance her asylum claim".

11. The judge has failed to assess the risk on return through  an  analysis
    of the country background that was produced and the  evidence  overall.
    In view of my findings on credibility which  are  fundamental  although
    the latter errors are of import  the  overall  approach  by  the  judge
    renders the decision unsafe.

12. I find that there is an error of law and  the  decision  shall  be  set
    aside with no findings preserved.

13. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 21st December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington






