
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01844/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 23 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     SH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. J. Blair, Counsel, instructed by Central England
Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moan, promulgated on 3 July 2019, in which she dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse a
    grant of asylum.

 2. I make an anonymity direction continuing that made in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The challenge is that the Judge failed to consider or make
         findings on the discrete issue of risk based on her being a single
         woman with two very young, illegitimate children.  That is
         arguable."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard submissions from both
    representatives, following which I stated that I found the decision
    involved the making of a material error of law.  I found that the
    grounds were made out and that the Judge had failed to consider risk on
    the basis of the Appellant's return as a single mother with two young
    children.  After a short adjournment, I heard submissions on the
    remaking of the appeal.  My decision is set out below.

Error of Law

 5. At [58] the Judge states:

         "The Appellant has not shown that she has a well-founded fear of
         persecution to the lower standard (reasonable degree of
         likelihood).  I dismiss her asylum claim and her claims under
         article 2 and 3 based of (sic) fear of persecution."

 6. The Judge has dismissed the asylum claim and the claim under Articles 2
    and 3 at [58], and it follows therefore that she must have done this
    based on the findings set out prior to her conclusion at [58].
    However, in the preceding paragraphs, although the Judge has considered
    the Appellant's claim to have been trafficked, she has not considered
    the risk on return to the Appellant given that she will be returning as
    a single mother of two children.  The children have two fathers, and
    the Appellant is neither married to either father, nor is she in
    contact with either of them.

 7. It was accepted by Mr. Howells that the decision was muddled and
    unstructured.  However he submitted that the Judge had considered
    return as a single mother with two children within the decision.  There
    is reference from [59] onwards to the Appellant's circumstances, in
    particular her two young children and her mental health.  However, I
    find that any findings made in these paragraphs are not part of the
    consideration of the asylum claim, as it is clear from [58] that the
    Judge has already made her decision in relation to the asylum claim.
    These findings cannot have played a part in her decision on the asylum
    claim, but only relate to Article 8.

 8. Further, I find that while there is some consideration of the
    Appellant's circumstances in these paragraphs, it is inadequate.  There
    is inadequate consideration of the case law and the best interests of
    the Appellant's two children.  In particular, although there are some
    instances where the Judge appears to accept that the fact that the
    Appellant has had two children outside of marriage may be an issue when
    reuniting with her family or reintegrating into society, there is no
    reference to the country guidance caselaw.

 9. It was submitted by Ms. Blair that the country guidance indicates that
    a mother may be required to abandon her children in such circumstances,
    yet there was no reference to this in the decision.  She submitted that
    there was a risk that the Appellant's family would force her to abandon
    her children.  This was an issue which had been considered in the
    country guidance cases, and which had also been raised in the expert
    report provided for the Appellant's appeal.  The expert had considered
    the high proportion of abandoned children in Albania [37].  He stated
    that 30% of children in public residential care were children from
    single parent families but that, given that the divorce rate in Albania
    was extremely low at 0.2%, it was logical to assume that a significant
    proportion of children in care were those born outside of marriage and
    therefore abandoned by their parents.  I find that there is no
    reference in the decision to the possibility that the Appellant may be
    required to abandon her children.

10. I have taken into account [59] to [74] of the decision, where the Judge
    considers the Appellant's circumstances.  At [69] she states:

         "The background material supports the submission that single
         mothers will face discrimination.  However, there are organisations
         that can assist with accommodation and support, and it is not
         impossible for single mothers to find accommodation and employment.
          Paragraphs 107 to 108 to TD gives examples of such successes.  In
         the event of a voluntary return, this Appellant may be assisted by
         the UK with funds."

11. I find that the Judge has erred in the standard of proof which she
    applied to her finding that the Appellant would be able to find
    accommodation and employment.  She states that it is "not impossible"
    for single mothers to find accommodation and employment.  This is too
    high a standard of proof.  Further, the paragraphs to which she refers
    from TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) contain
    only three examples of where women have managed to make it on their
    own.  At [109] of TD and AD it states that for less resilient or
    adaptable women, the path to financial independence is not so
    straightforward.  The three examples referred to at [107] to [108] are
    not the norm.  At [49] of TD and AD, as set out in the grounds, it
    states that mothers of illegitimate children "are not well received in
    social groups and find it difficult to work long hours to make the
    money needed to cover living expenses".  Even if I were to find that
    these findings were relevant to the asylum claim, I find that the Judge
    has read the country guidance caselaw selectively, in addition to
    applying the wrong standard of proof when finding that it is "not
    impossible" for single mothers to find accommodation and employment.
    Given the relevance of the ability to support herself to the
    Appellant's claim, I find that these are material errors of law.

12. I further find that there is no proper consideration of the best
    interests of the children.  The best interests assessment is at [72], a
    paragraph of only three lines.  It contains no reference to the
    possibility that the Appellant might be forced to abandon her children.



13. I find that the Judge has failed properly to consider whether the
    Appellant will be at risk on return on account of being a single mother
    of two children born outside marriage.  She did not make any findings
    on the Appellant's circumstances when coming to her conclusion that the
    claim failed on asylum grounds and under Articles 2 and 3.  I find that
    this is a material error of law.  The Judge's consideration of the
    Appellant's circumstances was carried out only in the context of
    Article 8.  Further, these findings involve the making of material
    errors of law.

14. Accordingly I set the decision aside to be remade.

Remaking

15. In remaking the decision, I have taken into account the documents
    contained in the Respondent's bundle (to H1), the Appellant's bundle
    (42 pages) and the skeleton argument.  I have also taken into account
    the cases of AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80
    (IAC), and TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC).
    Both representatives made oral submissions.

Asylum, Articles 2 and 3

16. As discussed at the hearing, there has been no challenge by the
    Appellant to the finding that she was not trafficked, and this finding
    stands.  The remaking of the appeal relates to the risk on return to
    the Appellant as a single mother with two children born outside
    marriage.  It is not disputed that the Appellant would be returning as
    a single mother of two children aged three and one.  Her children were
    born in the United Kingdom.

17. I have considered the risk to the Appellant from her family on account
    of the fact that she is a single mother with two young children.  I
    find that there is a real risk that her family will reject her.

18. It is not disputed that the Appellant comes from the north of Albania.
    This is an area of Albania where Kanun law dominates.  AM and BM
    states:

         "Traditional Albanian society, particularly in the north, is
         influenced by the strict code of "honour" embodied in the "Kanun of
         Leke Dukagjinit" which sets out how a woman should behave and the
         inferior role of women in society.  At its worst, and very rarely,
         it can lead to honour killings of women who are thought to have
         damaged a family's honour by having stepped outside rigid standards
         of behaviour.  Such women are referred to as "kurva" and may face
         discrimination.  Families may well consider that having an
         illegitimate child brings particular dishonour on a family and for
         that reason are likely to refuse to have the trafficked woman
         returned to them, or if they accept her back, would refuse to take
         the child.  Albania has a large number of children who have been
         abandoned.  Victims of trafficking may well be considered by their
         families and by society to be a very poor marriage prospect and
         they could face being forced into a marriage with someone whom they
         would not choose themselves. [213]

         Each case will turn on its own particular facts or circumstances.
         The treatment which such women might receive from their families
         could in certain circumstances amount to persecution." [214]

19. The headnote to TD and AD states:

         "Much of Albanian society is governed by a strict  code  of  honour
         which  not  only  means  that  trafficked  women  would  have  very
         considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their home  areas  on
         return but also will affect their ability to  relocate  internally.
         Those  who  have  children  outside   marriage   are   particularly
         vulnerable.  In extreme cases the close relatives of the trafficked
         woman may refuse to have the trafficked woman's child  return  with
         her and could force her to abandon the child."

20. TD and AD also refers to girls in Northern Albania experiencing "higher
    levels of abuse within their family" [52].  Although the Appellant has
    not been trafficked, she has children outside marriage.  Following this
    caselaw, I find that there is a reasonable likelihood that her family
    will not take her back, and/or will force her to abandon her children
    who have both been born outside marriage.

21. I find that there would be particular dishonour brought on the family
    by the fact that the Appellant is a single mother with two children.  I
    find that this would put her at risk of a forced marriage and/or
    abandonment of her children.  I therefore find, with reference to the
    cases of AM and BM and TD and AD, that the Appellant would be at risk
    from her family and I find that she cannot return to her home area due
    to this risk.

22. I have considered whether it would be reasonable to expect the
    Appellant to relocate to Tirana.  It has not been suggested that she
    could relocate to any other area of Albania.

23. I have considered the expert report.  This was referred to by the Judge
    at [18] where she found that it was based on a number of erroneous
    assumptions regarding the Appellant's claim.  It is not clear what
    weight she attached to it.  I have carefully considered the report, and
    even though the Appellant was found not to be a victim of trafficking,
    this does not negate the weight that can be attached to parts of this
    report given the qualifications and expertise of Dr. James Korovilas,
    set out at pages 1 to 6 of the report.

24. At [34] Dr. Korovilas states that although there were "no particular
    problems" associated with being single and having an illegitimate
    child, there were "significant difficulties reported in terms of being
    stigmatised as having a dishonourable past, with this stigmatisation
    being the direct result of having an illegitimate child.  The result of
    this stigmatisation was that women in this position found it difficult
    to effectively reintegrate into Albanian society.  These stigmatisation
    issues will ultimately impact upon the wellbeing and life chances of
    [the Appellant's] young child[ren]" [34].  (Although the report post-
    dates the birth of the Appellant's second child, it does not appear
    that Dr. Korovilas was made aware of this.  I find that this does not
    affect the weight given to his report.)

25. At [35] he states that there is the risk that her children will be
    taken into care if the Appellant is unable to provide for them.  "This
    risk is particularly acute since [the Appellant] is unable to rely on
    the support of her family" [36].

26. I have found that the Appellant will not have the support of her family
    in her home area.  I find that she will have no support in Tirana.  I
    find that she would have to find some kind of support to look after her
    children who are aged only three and one in order that she could work.



27. I find that she would be at risk of exploitation as she would have to
    work in order to support herself and two young children.  Ms. Blair
    submitted that the Appellant would have to rely on the "grey economy",
    where wages were low, and where there was no permanence or guarantee of
    work.  I was referred to [109] of TD and AD which states:

         "The problem she identifies is that women in Albania tend to find
         work in the low-skilled, informal sector where employment is not
         secure or protected, and where wages rarely keep up with the costs
         of living: this is the "grey economy" discussed in AM & BM.  All of
         the evidence supports a finding that the financial constraints make
         survival in the cities difficult: we accept Professor Haxhiymeri's
         evidence of her personal experience of trying to find accommodation
         for survivors of domestic violence. Workers at her NGO typically
         find that the cost of basic accommodation in Tirana, even in the
         outskirts, is E200 per month whereas a woman working in those
         conditions will typically earn no more than E150."

28. Although the Appellant has a level of education, and has some
    experience of working, she has never been self-sufficient in Albania.
    She was working in a friend's shop when, as a single mother with no
    children, she was having to live with her uncle rent-free.   Further,
    she has not been in Albania for over five years.

29. The Appellant will not return voluntarily to Albania, so she will not
    be eligible to receive a resettlement grant from the Respondent.

30. I find that the Appellant suffers from poor mental health.  There is a
    letter from Dr. S. Nazir dated 2 April 2019, which states that she was
    diagnosed with depression in September 2016.  In March 2019 she was
    still suffering from low mood and stress.  She is prescribed sertraline
    100mg daily.  As at the date of the hearing before me, the Appellant is
    still taking medication, and is receiving counselling, albeit that this
    is somewhat sporadic.  I find that this is an additional factor which
    would make her much less resilient, and would hamper her ability to
    find work.  She has not been in Albania for some five years.

31. I have considered the best interests of the Appellant's children.
    These must be a primary concern.  I find that they will have to live
    with the stigma of being children born outside of wedlock.  At [79] of
    AM and BM, when considering the evidence of whether or not a family
    would take back a victim of trafficking with her children, it states:

         "It would be a difficult situation for the child as the child would
         have to face the gossip from others and the social ostracism. The
         child herself would have problems in marrying."

32. Both of the Appellant's children are girls, and so they would have to
    deal with the lifelong consequence of stigmatisation due to being born
    out of wedlock.  I find that it is not in their best interests to
    return to Albania with their mother who faces rejection at best from
    her family, and/or faces having to abandon them.  In Tirana, their
    mother, on whom they are dependent, will have no support, and will have
    to find accommodation and employment against a backdrop of
    stigmatisation and discrimination, and with poor mental health.  I find
    that there is a real risk that the Appellant and her children would
    become destitute.

33. I find that it would not be in the best interests of the Appellant's
    children to return to Albania.  Due to the Appellant's circumstances,
    her lack of support, stigmatisation, having two very young dependent
    children, and her poor mental health, I find that it would be unduly
    harsh for the Appellant to relocate to Tirana.  It is not reasonable
    and it will not be safe for the Appellant or for her children.  I
    therefore allow the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds, and under
    Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

Article 8

34. In case I am wrong in this finding, I have considered Article 8.  I
    have taken into account all of my findings above.  I find that the
    Appellant has shown that she meets the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) as I find that she has shown that there will be very
    significant obstacles to her reintegration into Albania.  I find that
    she will be stigmatised as a result of being a single mother of two
    young children born out of wedlock.  I find that she will face very
    significant difficulties reintegrating as a result of this.  She will
    have no support from her family.  She has no financial resources on
    which to rely.  Her poor mental health will make it harder for her to
    reintegrate, as will the fact that she has two very young children who
    are dependent on her.  She will struggle to find work in order to
    support herself and her children.  Further, her daughters will also
    face lifelong stigmatisation on account of having been born out of
    wedlock.

35. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the Appellant has
    shown on the balance of probabilities that she meets the requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

36. I find that the Appellant has both private and family life in the
    United Kingdom, and that therefore Article 8(1) is engaged.  Following
    TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 and OA and Others (human rights;
    'new matter'; s.120) Pakistan [2019] UKUT 00065 (IAC) I find that the
    decision would therefore be a breach of the Appellant's rights under
    Article 8.  TZ states at [34]:-

         "That has the benefit that where a person satisfies the Rules,
         whether or not by reference to an article 8 informed requirement,
         then this will be positively determinative of that person's article
         8 appeal, provided their case engages article 8(1), for the very
         reason that it would then be disproportionate for that person to be
         removed."

37. Following on from this, in relation to section 117B(1),  this  provides
    that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.  I have found above that the Appellant meets the requirements
    of the immigration rules.  I therefore  find  that  there  will  be  no
    compromise to the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  by
    allowing her appeal.

38. I have no evidence of the Appellant's English language skills  (section
    117B(2)).  She is not financially independent  (section  117B(3)).   In
    relation to sections 117B(4) and 117B(5), although  the  Appellant  has
    not had leave to remain, the Respondent  has  provided  a  route  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) where more weight is given to  a  private  life
    when certain requirements are met.  The Appellant has  shown  that  she
    meets these requirements.  I therefore find that more weight should  be
    given to her private life.  Section 117B(6) is not relevant  given  the
    ages and nationality of the Appellant's  children,  but  I  have  found
    above that return to Albania is not in their best interests.

39. Taking all of the above into account, giving particular weight  to  the
    fact that the Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules, I find that the balance comes down in favour of  the  Appellant.
    I find that the Appellant has shown on  the  balance  of  probabilities
    that the decision is a breach of her rights, and those of her children,
    to a family and private life under Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

40. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

41. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 17 January 2020
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 17 January 2020
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
