
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01412/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 January 2018                   |On 31 January 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                    mr AS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ashwar, counsel instructed by Lei, Dat & Baig
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a claimed national of  Eritrea,  born  on  1.1.93  in
Sudan. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 26.8.15 and claimed  asylum.  The
basis of his claim is that  he  had  no  right  to  reside  in  Sudan  as  a
consequence of which he was detained in 2011 and deported to Eritrea,  where
he was detained in mistreated. He escaped to  Libya  and  travelled  to  the
United Kingdom via Italy and France. His asylum application was  refused  by
the Respondent in a decision dated 30.1.17.

2.    The Appellant appealed and his appeal came before First tier  Tribunal
Judge Shergill for hearing on 7.8.17. In a decision and reasons  promulgated
on 21.8.17, the judge dismissed the appeal, essentially on  the  basis  that
he did not accept that the Appellant was  a  national  of  Eritrea;  he  was
satisfied that the Appellant is entitled to Sudanese nationality and he  was
not satisfied that the evidence of the witness, R, was genuine.

3.    An application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
made, in time, on the basis that the judge had erred materially  in  law  in
his assessment of the Appellant's nationality and failed to properly  engage
with the expert opinion of Dr John Campbell.

5.    Permission to appeal was  granted  in  general  terms  by  First  tier
Tribunal Judge Page in a decision dated 13 November 2017.

Hearing

6.    At the hearing before me, Ms Ashwar sought to rely  upon  the  grounds
of appeal in full. She submitted that the issues are whether  the  Appellant
is entitled to  Sudanese  nationality  and  whether  he  is  a  national  of
Eritrea. He was born on the border and his parents emigrated to Eritrea.  He
spent 3 months in Eritrea at the age of  9  years  and  time  in  prison  in
Eritrea in 2011 and the rest of the time he was in  Sudan.  The  expert,  Dr
Campbell makes  clear  that  the  Appellant  is  not  entitled  to  Sudanese
nationality. At [22] of the expert report he sets out  the  requirements  to
obtain nationality and the changes in 1994 as a  consequence  of  which  the
Appellant must show that his father was born in Sudan and resident in  Sudan
since 1924. The Appellant's case is  that  his  parents  were  born  in  mid
1950's and not in Sudan. At [23] the expert highlighted  that  changes  have
jeopardized the right of historic migrants.

7.    In respect of Eritrean nationality, the Appellant  has  had  extremely
limited exposure to Eritrea thus his knowledge is limited  and  at  [8]  and
[13] of the expert report he was consistent when tested and [11] the  expert
confirms that anyone born to a father  and  mother  abroad  is  an  Eritrean
national by birth. This is  accepted  by  the  Respondent  at  [21]  of  the
refusal and the Appellant ought to be accepted to be an  Eritrean  national.
No reason has been given as to why the judge's knowledge overcomes  that  of
the expert. The judge demands a certificate of nationality but there  is  no
evidence this  exists  and  there  is  no  application  to  be  made  for  a
certificate of nationality if one is that nationality from  birth.  Dr  John
Campbell has been cited with  approval  in  Country  Guidance  cases.  There
needed to be good reasons for the judge to depart from the findings  of  the
expert. The  judge  has  failed  to  engage  with  the  expert  report.  The
Appellant's asylum interview was conducted in Tigrinya and the  witness,  R,
was granted refugee status in his own right  as  an  Eritrean  national.  Ms
Ashwar asked for the decision to  be  set  aside  and  that  there  was  new
evidence the Appellant would like to present.

8.     In  his  submissions,  Mr  Bates  stated  that  the  record  of   the
Appellant's evidence at [16] of decision records that he claims his  parents
fled Eritrea 40 years ago. However, at [21] of expert  report  it  is  clear
that nationality is possible based on a 10 year  period  of  residence.  The
Appellant was born in Sudan and the expert does not seem  to  have  assessed
whether his parents obtained Sudanese nationality. There is  no  distinction
between the Sudan Nationality Act 1994 expert report and the  extract  cited
in refusal letter at [28]. The Appellant needed to take reasonable steps  to
show he is not such a national:  [32]  and  [34]  and  there  has  been  non
compliance with the reasonable steps set out in MW [2016] UKUT  00453  (IAC)
at [31].

9.    The judge dealt with the evidence put forward  by  the  Appellant  and
his witness at [40] onwards and noted various  discrepancies  between  their
evidence as a result of which he concluded that he had not put forward as  a
genuine witness at [45] and there had been no  mention  of  the  Appellant's
family in his statement in support of his own asylum claim. [45]. The  judge
was clearly of the view that it was only as a result of the evidence  served
by the Home Office Presenting Officer  on  the  day  otherwise  the  witness
would have maintained position he  had  met  the  Appellant.  The  Appellant
failed to approach either the Sudanese or the Eritrean  Embassy  to  confirm
his nationality, contrary to the caselaw.

10.   Mr Bates submitted that it was not accepted  that  the  expert  report
was reliable for the reasons given by the judge, who was not satisfied  that
the expert has dealt with all the issues  and  has  given  reasons  for  his
conclusion at [31] and [32]; [17]-[18]  and  [37]-[48]  in  respect  of  the
Appellant's credibility. It had been open to the judge to conclude that  the
Appellant has  not  made  out  his  case.  His  parents  may  have  obtained
nationality before the Appellant was born.

11.   In her reply, Ms Ashwar stated that  she  continued  to  rely  on  the
grounds already submitted. She submitted that  the  case  essentially  boils
down to the issue of nationality.

12.   I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Findings

13.   The judge's findings on the issue of nationality are set out at  [16]-
[29] of the decision and reasons and in summary comprise the following:

    (i)    he was satisfied that  even  if  the  Appellant  does  not  know
    anything of his mother's  status  or  whether  she  had  identification
    documents it does not mean that his family members did not  or  do  not
    have such documents or a right to status (in Sudan) [18];

    (ii)   the expert report makes  clear  that  a  significant  number  of
    Eritrean refugees in Sudan were born in Sudan and they must  have  some
    status  there  given  that  they  are  able  to  work  and  can  obtain
    identification if they register with the local authorities [19];

    (iii)  in respect of Eritrean nationality it is clearly envisaged  that
    an individual has to apply for a certificate of nationality and as  the
    Appellant has not done so it leaves the question open  as  to  why  the
    Eritrean authorities would treat him as a national in  the  absence  of
    such a document [20];

    (iv)   for these reasons the judge was not satisfied that the Appellant
    is solely a national of Eritrea and at its highest  it  may  be  he  is
    entitled to Eritrean  nationality  rather  than  currently  holds  that
    nationality [21];

    (v)    the evidence put forward by the Respondent and  in  the  English
    translation of Sudanese legislation is that the  Appellant  would  have
    been able to claim Sudanese nationality once he became 18 years of  age
    [23]-[24];

    (vi)   in respect of the expert evidence the judge  was  not  satisfied
    that information relating to the secession of South Sudan can  found  a
    proper basis for conclusion in a case relating to Eritrea [25];

    (vii)  [24] of the expert report suggests there is a route to  Sudanese
    nationality and the matter is not black and white but he has  not  been
    provided with a full  text  of  the  legislation  which  generally  has
    caveats and exceptions [26];

    (viii) the expert has simply  not  dealt  with  the  assertion  by  the
    Respondent that ancestors from his father's side were residing in Sudan
    since 1.1.56 given the Appellant's  claim  that  his  mother  had  been
    residing there for 40 years because she was very old [28];

    (ix)    it  is  unclear  whether  section  4(1)(b)  of   the   Sudanese
    Nationality Act 2004 is to be read in a manner which requires both  (i)
    and (ii) to be met or whether either/or can apply and  the  expert  has
    not dealt with why the Appellant does not qualify under  (i)  given  he
    was born in Sudan [28];

    (x)    consequently the judge rejected the expert's view at  [26]  that
    the Appellant is not entitled to Sudanese nationality  and  found  that
    the Appellant is so entitled [29].

14.   I have concluded that the First tier Tribunal Judge  materially  erred
in his assessment of the  key  issue  of  the  Appellant's  nationality.  My
reasons are as follows:

14.1. As Ms Ashwar submitted, Dr Campbell  is  an  expert  of  some  repute,
whose evidence and reports have featured in five country guidance  decisions
of the Upper Tribunal. Whilst the judge was not obliged to accept the  views
of the expert, it is trite law then if he reached  a  different  conclusion,
it was incumbent upon him to give adequate reasons for so doing.

14.2. I do not consider that  the  judge  has  given  adequate  reasons  for
reaching different conclusions from the expert. His  findings  at  [18]-[20]
as to the Appellant's entitlement to Eritrean  nationality  are  essentially
speculative and based on substituting his own view for that  of  the  expert
e.g. as to the rights of Eritrean refugees in Sudan. It is  clear  from  the
terms of Article 2 of the Eritrean  Nationality  Proclamation  (No  21/1992)
set out at [11] of the expert report that it is widely drafted to  encompass
those born not only in Eritrea but also abroad  to  either  a  father  or  a
mother who is of Eritrean origin. The judge accepted  that  the  Appellant's
parents are Eritrean; that the Appellant is a Tigrinya speaker  and  may  be
entitled to Eritrean nationality, but in so finding failed  to  engage  with
the text of Eritrean nationality law and the expert report.  In  respect  of
the issue of a certificate of nationality, whilst the Appellant  appears  to
be entitled to such a certificate, upon application, there does  not  appear
to be any evidential basis that such a  certificate  is  required  to  prove
Eritrean nationality, contrary to the judge's finding at [20].

14.3. As to the judge's findings on the Appellant's entitlement to  Sudanese
nationality, it is clear  from  the  expert  report  at  [20]  that  Article
4(1)(b) of the Sudanese Nationality Act 2004 requires  both  conditions  (a)
and (b) to be met i.e. there needs  to  have  been  both  residence  of  the
individual and paternal ancestral residence in Sudan since 1957. It  follows
that the fact that the Appellant's mother may have resided in Sudan  for  40
years is irrelevant given that it is clear  from  Sudanese  nationality  law
that it is the paternal ancestors who count. In any event,  at  [18](c)  the
expert sets out the fact that if an  individual  lacks  the  relevant  civil
documentation viz birth certificates or identity papers it is  not  possible
to prove that a parent, grandparent or great grandparent was born in  Sudan.
The judge failed to take this evidence into  account  or  make  findings  in
respect of it.

Decision

15.   I find material errors of law in the decision of First  tier  Tribunal
Shergill. I remit the appeal for a hearing before the  First  tier  Tribunal
to be listed before a judge other than First tier Tribunal  Judge  Shergill.
Given the absence of any  challenge  to  the  findings  in  respect  of  the
witness R, I preserve those findings, however, the issue of the  Appellant's
nationality remains live and requires determination.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                      30 January 2018
