
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01521/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th September 2020                |On 15th September 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     P S
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Bayati, Counsel instructed by S Satha and Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  As
the appeal raises matters regarding a claim for international protection,
it is appropriate for an anonymity direction to be made.  Unless and until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.

   1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is Mr P
      S.  However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I
      adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to Mr P S
      as the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


Remote Hearing


   2. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference
      hearing held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I sat at the Birmingham
      Civil Justice Centre and the hearing room and building were open to
      the public. The hearing was publicly listed, and I was addressed by
      the representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been, if
      the parties had attended the hearing together.  The appellant joined
      the hearing by Skype.  I was satisfied: that this constituted a
      hearing in open court; that the open justice principle has been
      secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there
      has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as
      necessary and proportionate.  Neither party objected to a remote
      hearing, and I was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice
      and in accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a
      remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions against
      the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a
      remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly
      in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
      complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


Introduction


   3. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He arrived in the UK in May
      1998, aged 13, with his parents. The appellant's immigration history
      is helpfully summarised at paragraph [2] of the decision of Judge
      Colvin:


         "... His father claimed asylum that was refused but ILR was granted
         in April 2004 under the Family Amnesty exercise. The appellant's
         first conviction was in March 2004 when he received 18 months
         conditional discharge and the second conviction was in March 2008
         for affray when he received 21 months imprisonment. A deportation
         order was made in May 2009 with a First-tier Tribunal appeal being
         dismissed in October 2009 and a subsequent High Court Review led to
         the appeal being allowed on human rights grounds only in March
         2010. He was granted ILR in June 2016. In September 2017 the
         appellant was convicted for dangerous driving and sentenced to 16
         months imprisonment. A further deportation order was made on 17
         December 2018."


   4. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision of 17 December 2018
      to refuse his protection and human rights claims. His appeal was
      allowed for reasons set out in a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Colvin promulgated on 23 January 2020.


The decision of Judge Colvin


   5. The appellant attended the hearing of his appeal and gave evidence.
      His evidence is summarised at paragraphs [5] to [9] of the decision.
      There is nothing to be gained by repeating his claim in this decision.
      Judge Colvin also heard evidence from the appellant's mother as set
      out in paragraphs [10] to [12] of her decision.  The findings and
      conclusions reached by Judge Colvin are set out at paragraphs [27] to
      [47] of her decision.  She noted, at [29], the previous deportation
      order made in 2009 following the appellant's conviction for affray
      that resulted in a sentence of 21 months imprisonment. She noted that
      on that occasion, the appellant was said to have acted with others as
      a gang to attack a victim at his home.


   6. Judge Colvin noted, at [29], the second deportation order made against
      the appellant following his conviction in September 2017 of dangerous
      driving resulting in a prison sentence of 16 months. She noted the
      sentencing remarks.  At paragraph [30] she referred to the evidence
      before the Tribunal regarding the conduct of the appellant since his
      release from prison in November 2018 and the risk of reoffending.


   7. The appellant's claim that his deportation would be country to the
      United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention is addressed
      at paragraphs [32] to [40] of the decision.  Judge Colvin found that
      the appellant will be returning to Sri Lanka without any record of
      himself or his father having come to the adverse attention of the Sri
      Lankan authorities in the past, and concluded that the appellant has
      not established that he is at risk upon return to Sri Lanka under the
      refugee Convention or on humanitarian grounds.  Those findings and
      conclusions are not challenged by the appellant.


   8. The Article 8 claim advanced by the appellant is addressed at
      paragraphs [41] to [47] of the decision.  At paragraph [41], Judge
      Colvin noted that a previous appeal was allowed by the Upper Tribunal
      on Article 8 grounds for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on
      12 March 2010.  She stated:


         "... This was based on findings set out at paragraphs 51 - 53 and
         included that, at that time, the appellant had been in the UK for
         11 years continuously with his teens and adolescence having been
         spent here. He had a strong family life with his then wife and
         child in the UK who were British citizens and that they would be
         significantly affected by the deportation as it would lead to a
         prolonged separation and the daughter would be deprived of her
         father for a long and important part of her life. It was also found
         that the appellant had no close family or links with Sri Lanka and
         no one to whom he could turn for support in Sri Lanka as his entire
         family was in the UK and British citizens."


   9. At paragraph [42], Judge Colvin noted the appellant and his wife have
      been separated since 2015 and the appellant has been unable to have
      contact with his daughter since that time.  Judge Colvin noted at
      paragraph [43], that the appellant has been lawfully in the UK since
      the age of 13 and resident in the UK for over half his life. She was
      satisfied that the appellant is socially and culturally integrated in
      the UK for reasons set out at paragraph [43] of her decision.  The
      judge then went on to consider whether there would be very significant
      obstacles to the appellant's integration into Sri Lanka.  At paragraph
      [44] she refers to the judgement of Lord Justice Sales in SSHD v
      Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and having directed herself to the "high
      test", at paragraphs [45] and [46], stated:


         "45. As stated above the Upper Tribunal in 2010 found that the
         appellant had no close family or links with Sri Lanka and no one to
         whom he could turn to for support as his parents and sister were in
         the UK. Whilst it seems from the evidence of his mother at this
         appeal that there are some relatives whom she stayed with when last
         visiting Sri Lanka in March 2019, it remains the case that the
         appellant himself has not visited the country since 2005 and has
         not remained in contact with anyone there. It is still the case
         that his close family members are in the UK. He is living with his
         mother and sister when she is not at university. And whilst I do
         not find on the evidence before me that family life under Article 8
         is engaged with these adult family members I do find that the
         relationship between the appellant and his mother since the death
         of the father last November can reasonably be taken into account as
         part of the appellant's private life. The appellant has clearly
         stepped into the role of supporting his mother as the only son
         including taking over running the family business. There is also
         evidence that the appellant has been upset and stressed since the
         breakdown of his marriage and lack of contact with his daughter -
         factors that are said to have led to his excessive drinking at the
         time of the offence - and is presently on medication for
         depression.


         46.  Although it is a difficult assessment to make I have reached
         the view - albeit on a fine balance - that the appellant is likely
         to face "very significant obstacles" in reintegrating into Sri
         Lanka. This is for the reasons mentioned above when taken
         cumulatively with the most important being his absence from the
         country for some 22 years since the age of 13, the lack of support
         from close family members in Sri Lanka and the changed family
         circumstances in the UK since the recent death of his father."


  10. Judge Colvin noted the deportation of the appellant from the UK is
      conducive to the public good and in the public interest because he has
      been convicted of an offence for which he has been sentenced to a
      period of imprisonment of at least 12 months but found that the
      private life exception set out paragraph 399A of the immigration rules
      applies.


The appeal before me


  11. The respondent initially advanced two grounds of appeal. First, Judge
      Colvin erred in her analysis of whether there would be very
      significant obstacles to the appellants integration into Sri Lanka.
      The respondent accepts that Judge Colvin properly referred to the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813,
      but having done so, submits Judge Colvin confined her assessment to
      the appellant's ties to the UK and Sri Lanka rather than addressing
      whether there would be very significant obstacles to integration.
      Second, and connected to the first ground, Judge Colvin failed to
      provide adequate reasons for her conclusion that there would be very
      significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Sri Lanka,
      and disregarded relevant factors such as the appellant's educational
      qualifications, and the skills the appellant has acquired through
      employment.  Permission to appeal was granted on both those grounds by
      Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald on 18th February 2020.


  12. The appeal was listed for hearing on 5 May 2020, but that hearing was
      vacated.  In reply to directions issued by Upper Tribunal Judge
      O'Connor, the respondent provided written submissions dated 25th May
      2020 in support of the assertion of an error of law, and on the
      question whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision should be set
      aside if error of law is found.  The respondent also applied for
      permission to add a third ground of appeal.  The respondent claimed
      Judge Colvin also erred in the reliance placed upon the findings made
      by the Tribunal in March 2010 when the previous appeal had been
      allowed on Article 8 grounds.  The appellant filed and served written
      submissions in reply, that were received by the Tribunal on 26 May
      2020.  In the submissions filed, both parties objected to the
      determination of the question of whether the making of the First-tier
      Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error of law, without a
      hearing, but the parties agreed that a remote hearing is appropriate
      in all the circumstances.  I granted the respondent permission to rely
      upon the additional ground of appeal that Judge Colvin adopted an
      erroneous approach to the previous findings made by the Tribunal in
      March 2010, and directed that the appeal be listed for a remote
      hearing.


  13. On behalf of the respondent, Mrs Aboni adopted the respondent's
      written submissions dated 25th May 2020.  The respondent submits that
      despite her self-direction in line with the decision of the Court of
      Appeal in SSHD v Kamara, Judge Colvin failed to conduct the 'broad
      evaluative assessment' required.  The respondent submits that in
      conducting her assessment, Judge Colvin took into account matters that
      are irrelevant such as the fact that the appellant is living with his
      mother and sister when she is not a university, and that he has
      stepped into the role of supporting his mother following the death of
      his father.  The judge also had regard to the claim that the appellant
      has been upset and stressed since the breakdown of his marriage, but
      these are simply not germane to the issue as to whether there are very
      significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Sri Lanka.


  14. Mrs Aboni submits a wider assessment is required to determine whether
      the appellant is enough of an insider so that he could live and build
      relationships in Sri Lanka.  The judge failed to carry out that
      assessment and the focus is upon the appellant's ties to the UK rather
      than the position upon return.  The respondent submits that at
      paragraphs [45] and [46] of the decision, Judge Colvin failed to
      address the question that was to be determined by the Tribunal and
      failed to give adequate reasons to support the finding that there
      would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration
      into Sri Lanka.  As to the third ground of appeal, Mrs Aboni submits
      the judge erred in her reliance upon the decision of the Tribunal
      promulgated in 2010.  She accepts that the decision was, as Judge
      Colvin set out at paragraph [41], the "starting point", but, she
      submits, Judge Colvin failed to have adequate regard to the
      significant change in circumstances since that decision including the
      lengthy passage of time during which the appellant will undoubtably
      have matured, and gained more life experience.


  15. In reply, Ms Bayati adopted the written submissions in reply sent to
      the Tribunal on 26 May 2020.  The appellant submits Judge Colvin
      properly directed herself to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in the
      appellant's previous appeal in March 2010 as the "starting point", and
      referred to the matters relied upon by the Tribunal when it allowed
      the previous appeal on Article 8 grounds.  Ms Bayati submits Judge
      Colvin expressly referred to the fact that the appellant and his wife
      have been separated since 2015 at paragraph [42] of her decision, and
      that is a clear acknowledgement that there has been a change in the
      appellant's circumstances.  Ms Bayati submits Judge Colvin properly
      addressed the private life exceptions under paragraph 399A of the
      immigration rules, and in considering whether there are very
      significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Sri Lanka, at
      paragraph [44], Judge Colvin noted the "high test" and the judgement
      of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v Kamara.  She submits Judge Colvin
      then applied the relevant test to the facts of this case and it was
      open to Judge Colvin to conclude that there would be very significant
      obstacles to the appellant's integration into Sri Lanka for the
      reasons set out at paragraphs [45] and [46].  Ms Bayati submits that
      in reaching her decision, Judge Colvin made it clear that she had
      reached her conclusion, in particular, based upon the very
      considerable time the appellant has been outside of Sri Lanka, the
      lack of ties/support in Sri Lanka and the change in the family
      circumstances in the UK.  She submits the appellant's circumstances in
      the UK are relevant to the assessment because they have a direct
      impact upon the appellant's ability to integrate in Sri Lanka.  Ms
      Bayati submits that in reaching her decision, Judge Colvin was fully
      aware of the appellant's age, and his ability to work, and the Judge
      was not required to make express reference to those factors in her
      reasons.  She submits the appeal amounts to nothing more than a
      disagreement with the conclusions reached by the Judge.


Discussion


  16. There is in my judgement, no merit in the third ground of appeal
      concerning the reliance placed by Judge Colvin upon the decision of
      the Tribunal in 2010.  It is clear from a careful reading of
      paragraphs [41] and [42] of her decision that Judge Colvin regarded
      the previous decision as nothing more than a "starting point", and she
      clearly had regard to the change in the appellant's circumstances
      since that decision.  There was no obligation upon Judge Colvin to
      make express reference to the passage of time since that decision.


  17. In assessing the Article 8 claim, Judge Colvin was required to
      consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A of the immigration rules apply.
       If not, the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
      other factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
      above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  As the appellant
      does not have children or a partner, paragraph 399 does not apply.


  18. The respondent does not challenge the findings made by Judge Colvin
      that the appellant has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
      his life and paragraph 399A(a) is met. For reasons set out at
      paragraph [43] of her decision Judge Colvin found the appellant is
      socially and culturally integrated in the UK, and thus paragraph
      399A(b) is met.


  19. The judge then went on to consider whether there would be very
      significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Sri Lanka
      and addresses the question in two short paragraphs, at paragraphs [45]
      and [46].  Judge Colvin was undoubtedly entitled to have regard to the
      fact that the appellant himself has not visited Sri Lanka since 2005
      and has not remained in contact with anyone there.


  20. At [45], Judge Colvin noted that it remains the case that the
      appellant's close family members are in the UK. She refers to the
      evidence of the appellant's mother that there are some relatives with
      whom she stayed when she last visited Sri Lanka in March 2019.
      However, Judge Colvin does not appear to consider whether those
      relatives are able to, or could reasonably be expected to provide
      support to the appellant particularly in the short-term following his
      return to Sri Lanka.


  21. At paragraph [45], Judge Colvin notes the appellant is living with his
      mother and sister when she is not at university.  At [46], she noted
      the appellant has clearly stepped into the role of supporting his
      mother including taking over running the family business. She also
      noted there is evidence that the appellant has been upset and stressed
      since the breakdown of his marriage and the lack of contact with his
      daughter, leading to excessive drinking at the time of the index
      offence and that the appellant is presently on medication for
      depression.


  22. In my judgement, at paragraphs [45] and [46], Judge Colvin failed to
      adequately address the question whether there would be very
      significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Sri Lanka.
      She failed to conduct the broad evaluative judgment as to whether the
      appellant will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how
      life in the society in Sri Lanka is carried on and his capacity to
      participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be
      accepted there, and to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis and to
      build up within a reasonable time, a variety of human relationships to
      give substance to his private or family life.  The focus, erroneously,
      appears to have been upon the appellant's ties to the UK, rather than
      addressing the obstacles to integration into Sri Lanka.


  23. In my judgement the decision of FtT Colvin is vitiated by a material
      error of law and the decision must be set aside.


Notice of Decision


  24. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge  Colvin  promulgated
      on 23rd January 2020 to allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
      (paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  an   exception   to
      deportation) is set aside, and I remit the matter  for  re-hearing  in
      the  First-tier  Tribunal,  limited  to  the  question   whether   the
      appellant's deportation would be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


  25. The findings and conclusions reached by FtT Judge Colvin at paragraphs
      [32] to [40], that the appellant's deportation would not  be  contrary
      to the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention  are
      preserved.


Signed                                  Date          9th September 2020
         V. Mandalia

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



