

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/01657/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 24th January  2018                  |         On 29th January 2018        |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     sb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Paramjorthy, instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  13th
    September 2017, dismissed his claim for  protection.   The  Appellant's
    immigration history is set out within the determination at paragraphs 3-
    4, and in the papers before the Tribunal, namely,  that  the  Appellant
    had applied for entry clearance as Tier 4 (general) student on 16  June
    2010. He arrived in the United Kingdom in  October  2010  with  a  Visa
    valid until October 2012. However records  indicated  that  he  was  no
    longer studying by January 2012 and therefore his leave  was  curtailed
    in April 2012 to expire in June of that year. On 16  December  2013  he
    applied for a residence card as an extended family  member  of  an  EEA
    national and  that  application  was  refused  on  31  March  2014.  He
    exercised his right of appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  but  his
    appeal was dismissed in a  determination  promulgated  on  24  November
    2014. Further permission to appeal was refused by both  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.

 3. On 7 July 2015 he made a fresh application for residence  card  relying
    on new documentation. He was later detained on  reporting  and  made  a
    claim for asylum  on  6  September  2015.  He  attended  a  substantive
    interview on  7  January  2016.  A  decision  was  made  refusing  that
    application on the 3rd February 2016 and the Appellant appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. In a determination  promulgated  on  the  30th  of
    August 2016 the appeal was dismissed. An appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    was lodged. The Upper Tribunal found the First-tier Tribunal  had  made
    an error of law and remitted the appeal.

 4. He appeal came before the FTT on the 30th August 2017 and in a decision
    promulgated on the 13th September 2017 his appeal  was  dismissed.  The
    Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and permission  was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pooler) on the 14th  November
    2017 as follows:

         "The application for permission was made in time and  submits  that
         the judge erred in law in his assessment of credibility and of  the
         risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka.  It  is  arguable  that  the  judge
         misdirected himself in law by rejecting the  Appellant's  claim  to
         have been detained and tortured without taking account of the  rule
         35 medical report and expert scarring and psychiatric reports;  see
         for example the final sentence of [50]. It is  also  arguable  that
         the judge aired in his assessment of risk arising  from  sur  place
         activity in the UK. All grounds may be argued."

 5. At the hearing before the Tribunal,  Mr  Paramjorthy  relied  upon  the
    grounds  as  he  had  drafted  and  supplemented  them  with  his  oral
    submissions. Whilst the Respondent had provided a Rule 24 reply on  the
    7th December 2017, Ms Fijiwala placed  no  reliance  upon  that  as  it
    referred to a previous decision and not the one  under  challenge.  She
    therefore made oral submissions.

 6. I have taken into account the respective submissions by the parties  in
    reaching a decision as  to  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point  of  law.  I  shall
    deal with the parties  respective  submissions  when  considering  this
    question.

 7. The first paragraphs of the grounds relate to the challenge made on the
    basis that the judge had made findings of fact in  isolation  from  the
    consideration of the expert medical reports (the  scarring  report  and
    psychiatric evidence). It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant  that
    a careful reading  of  the  determination  revealed  that  the  adverse
    findings of credibility were  made  before  the  consideration  of  the
    medical evidence and thus was a classic "Mibanga" error. Mr Paramjorthy
    made reference to  the  determination  and  the  findings  of  fact  by
    reference to the material that was before the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    that the adverse findings were clearly made before  making  any  proper
    assessment of the medical evidence.

 8. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge had considered  all  the  evidence
    before reaching his findings of fact. She referred to the determination
    at paragraphs 23 - 25 where he made reference  to  the  medical  report
    (scarring) and the psychiatric report (at 25). She submitted  that  the
    determination should be read as  a  whole  and  should  not  simply  be
    considered on the basis  of  the  findings  at  paragraph  41  onwards.
    Furthermore she submitted at paragraphs 50 - 51 the judge gave  reasons
    for rejecting the scarring report. As to the submission made relying on
    the case of Mibanga, she submitted that the judge was required to start
    somewhere in his assessment of credibility and did  so  by  considering
    the issue of delay and the rule 35 report. She made  reference  to  the
    decision in HH (medical evidence: effect of Mibanga) [2005] UKIAT 00164
    where the Tribunal considered that there was a danger of Mibanga  being
    misunderstood. The Tribunal held that the judgements in that case  were
    not intended to place judicial fact  finders  in  a  form  of  forensic
    straitjacket. In particular, the Court of Appeal was not to be regarded
    as laying down any rule of law as to the order in which  judicial  fact
    finders were to approach the evidential material before them.

 9. The judge's findings begin at [41 - 52]. I would not disagree with Miss
    Fijiwala's general submission that the determination is to be read as a
    whole but I do not accept that in the context in which that  submission
    is made that the judge made his findings on credibility by  considering
    all the evidence "in the round" or holistically as required. The  judge
    rejected the Appellant's credibility  in  isolation  from  the  medical
    evidence presented on the Appellant's behalf. At paragraph 47 the judge
    made the following finding; "The Tribunal  places  very  little  weight
    upon the  events  which  the  Appellant  describes  in  Sri  Lanka.  It
    certainly does not accept that the Appellant was detained and  tortured
    in the manner which is described. It will be  remembered  that  he  was
    effectively sent to the UK from Sri Lanka in 2010 with a valid  student
    Visa. Given the background which he describes, it is  neither  possible
    nor conceivable that he would simply  wait  for  five  years  and  just
    before his removal, lodge a claim for asylum in  the  UK.".  The  judge
    went on to state at paragraph 48;  "The  Tribunal  does  not  therefore
    accept that there was a warrant for arrest in Sri Lanka or indeed  that
    he was detained and tortured on account of his alleged support  of  the
    LTTE. Despite the alleged arrest  warrant,  it  is  of  note  that  the
    Appellant was able to obtain a student Visa and depart from the airport
    in Sri Lanka. There  is  only  one  airport  there  and  his  departure
    proceeded the end of the previous hostilities in that country."

10. In the preceding paragraphs at paragraphs 43 - 46, the  judge  set  out
    his  findings  of  fact  relating  to  his  immigration   history   and
    applications made whilst in the United Kingdom which  he  found  to  be
    adverse and also the delay in making his asylum claim. It  is  then  at
    paragraph 47 that the judge expressly rejects the  Appellant's  account
    of events in Sri Lanka and reaches the finding that  he  had  not  been
    detained or tortured in the manner in which he has described.

11. At paragraph 48 he rejected that there was a  warrant  for  his  arrest
    based  on  the  same  findings.  The  judge  therefore   rejected   the
    Appellant's account of detention and torture in Sri Lanka based on  his
    adverse history and delay in claiming asylum. I am satisfied  that  the
    finding as to adverse credibility is made before the  judge  considered
    the medical evidence in the form of the scarring report  (at  paragraph
    50) and the psychiatric report at (51 and 55). I would accept  also  as
    Miss Fijiwala  submitted  that  a  judge  has  to  start  somewhere  in
    analysing the evidence however I am satisfied  that  that  the  adverse
    assessment of credibility was  made  before  properly  considering  the
    medical evidence and that this is an error  of  law  (  see  Mibanga  v
    SSHD[2005] EWCA Civ 367).

12.  This  is  further  exemplified  by  the  finding  at  [51]   and   his
    consideration of the medical evidence.  In  relation  to  the  scarring
    report his findings are set out at paragraphs [50] - [51].  The  expert
    found scarring to be consistent with the account given  to  the  expert
    taking  into  account  the  shape,  type  of  scarring  presented.   He
    summarises his conclusions in line  with  the  Istanbul  protocol  that
    there was "no doubt" that the injuries were  caused  intentionally  and
    the most likely explanation was that  he  was  severely  tortured.  The
    judge set out at [50] that "this report cannot exclude the  possibility
    that his scars were caused by means other than his alleged torture. The
    wounds described are stated to be  typical  or  supportive  of  history
    given. However, as a history given has been rejected by the Tribunal it
    follows that it is not accepted that  the  scars  were  caused  by  the
    alleged torture".

13. Therefore the judge rejected the medical evidence on the basis that  he
    had already rejected the Appellant's history  in  Sri  Lanka  primarily
    based on his adverse immigration history and delay in making  a  claim.
    Also reliance was placed on his ability to leave Sri Lanka  but  it  is
    accepted by Miss Fijiwala that that finding set out in paragraph 48 was
    in error as it was  inconsistent  with  the  decision  of  GJ  and  the
    objective material.

14. Furthermore the paragraph also displays a factual  error  in  that  the
    report did in fact consider alternative causation, as to whether it was
    likely due to a skin disease, accidental injury or whether it was self-
    inflicted. It is not clear whether the judge  was  referring  to  self-
    affliction by proxy when he stated that "the report cannot exclude  the
    possibility that his scars were caused by other means" but  as  Counsel
    submits that issue was not put to the Appellant (See KV v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 119), although it was suggested that it was caused by farming,
    which is different. Therefore there was no basis in such a  finding  if
    it was indeed based on SIBP.

15. Similarly the judge reached adverse  findings  on  credibility  without
    considering the psychiatric report. The consideration at  [51]  whereby
    it was stated "The Tribunal is neither equipped nor  needs  to  find  a
    cause for the medical condition",  did  not  engage  with  the  medical
    evidence as a whole.

16. The grounds raise other credibility issues. As  set  out  above  it  is
    accepted on behalf of the Respondent that the finding at [48]  was  not
    open to the judge in the light of paragraph 367 of GJ (Sri  Lanka)  and
    the background evidence.  Furthermore,  the  finding  at  paragraph  49
    relating to the Appellant's mother was rejected solely on the basis  of
    it being "self-serving" and should have been considered in the light of
    the background material (see 13.1.2 of the CIG).

17. The second issue relates to the Appellant's sur place activities and in
    particular his status as  a  member/volunteer  for  the  TGTE  and  his
    attendance at demonstrations.

18. The skeleton argument made reference to the decision of UB (Sri  Lanka)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 85. The Court of Appeal in that decision considered the
    implications of neither the First-tier Tribunal nor the Upper  Tribunal
    being referred to the  Home  Office  policy  guidance  of  August  2015
    entitled "Tamil Separatism". The Court considered that there  had  been
    an obligation on the Secretary of State to serve that material  on  the
    parties and to produce it before the Tribunal.

19. However as set out in the decision, the Appellant's  Counsel  had  made
    reference to the country information and guidance (CIG)  on  Sri  Lanka
    entitled "Tamil Separatism" dated August 2016 (see  paragraph  (xv)  of
    his skeleton argument. The judge considered the issue at paragraphs [58-
    64]. Miss Fijiwala on behalf of the Secretary of State  submitted  that
    the findings of fact were open to him on  the  evidence  and  that  the
    judge had properly made a distinction as to the Appellant's position at
    [62].

20. However as Counsel submits, there is no reference to  the  Respondent's
    guidance and in particular the objective material that makes  reference
    to the possibility of the Appellant being interviewed on return and  no
    reference to the material in the CIG (see UB (Sri Lanka) to the letters
    from the BHC dated 25th of July 2014 which makes reference to returnees
    and that they "may be questioned on arrival by CID, SIS and TID."

21. The decision of GJ  and  others  makes  reference  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities approach being based on sophisticated  intelligence  as  to
    the activities in the Diaspora  (see  paragraph  356(8))  and  did  not
    consider that attendance at demonstrations alone would be sufficient to
    create a real risk or a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  such  a
    person would attract adverse attention (see paragraph  336  of  GJ  and
    others).  Furthermore  at  paragraph  351,  whilst  the  attendance  at
    demonstrations is not of itself evidence to person is a committed Tamil
    activist seeking to promote Tamil separatism within Sri Lanka, it  will
    be a question of fact in each case dependent on the Diaspora activities
    carried out by such an individual.

22. I accept the submission made by Mr  Paramjorthy  that  there  had  been
    evidence from a number of sources that was relevant to  the  sur  place
    claim which included a number of photographs (with LTTE flags prominent
    in the background) and oral evidence  from  Mr  X.  There  was  also  a
    membership card for the NLP. In reaching his findings  the  judge  made
    reference to the photographs of the Appellant and that he had  attended
    demonstrations (see paragraph 61). At paragraph  [62]  he  reached  the
    conclusion that he was a "low level volunteer". However  that  arguably
    is not consistent with the written evidence of the witness  Mr  X  (see
    page 144-145) and whom it is said gave  detailed  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal. Beyond the reference at paragraph 61, there was  no  analysis
    of that supporting evidence and why, if he did reject it, that was  the
    case.

23. There was also no reference to the  material  in  the  CIG  which  made
    reference to the ITJP  report  and  that  in  several  cases  witnesses
    mentioned that they or their family members had been  questioned  about
    their participation in anti-government  protest  or  war  commemoration
    events abroad. It goes on  to  state  "some  reported  the  Sri  Lankan
    security forces had showed them,  or  their  families,  photographs  of
    themselves at these protests. This indicates the  Sri  Lankan  security
    forces are monitoring these gatherings  outside  the  country."  (  see
    13.1.2)  This  was  also  relevant  to  the  evidence  sent  from   the
    Appellant's family members which was rejected as "self-serving" but not
    viewed in the light of the guidance.

24. The letters referred to in UB (Sri Lanka) and which were annexed to the
    CIG dated 25 July 2014 (see paragraph 30), states that returnees may be
    questioned on arrival by immigration, CID, SIS and TID  and  that  this
    was normal practice for returnees to be asked about their activities in
    the country they were returning from,  including  whether  it  involved
    activity in any Tamil Diaspora groups.  The  material  also  refers  to
    their being no  known  arrests  based  on  membership  of  one  of  the
    proscribed groups.

25. The more recent CIG  makes  reference  to  the  government  having  de-
    proscribed a number of Tamil groups which may indicate that involvement
    with such organisations is not of itself likely to be seen as a  threat
    to the integrity of the state of Sri Lanka  although  it  is  right  to
    observe that the TGTE still remains a proscribed  organisation  and  as
    Counsel noted in his skeleton argument at [6] it is  still  a  criminal
    offence to be involved with a proscribed organisation.

26. There was no consideration of the risk at the airport or  beyond  that,
    in the light of the material whereby it was stated that  the  Appellant
    may be interviewed on return about their activities in the UK  and  the
    Annex to GJ (and others). Even if he found at [63]  his  activities  in
    the UK were "opportunistic" there was no  assessment  made  as  to  the
    perception of the authorities of his conduct and in the  light  of  his
    activities and membership in the UK.

27. It was also submitted in the grounds ( at paragraph  12)  that   having
    given a sworn statement to the International Centre for Prevention  and
    Prosecution of Genocide about the past activities  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities the Appellant would be at risk on return. He submitted that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge then failed to consider  this  aspect  of
    the Appellant's case in the context of GJ and others (post - Civil War:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG[2013] UKUT 319 where the  Upper  Tribunal  held
    that current categories of persons at risk of  persecution  or  serious
    harm on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or  otherwise
    includes: " individuals who are given evidence to  the  Lessons  Learnt
    and Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri  Lankan  security
    forces, armed forces or the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  in  alleged  war
    crimes. Among those who may have witnessed war crimes during  conflict,
    particularly in the No-Fire zones in May  2009,  only  those  who  have
    already identified themselves by giving such evidence would be known to
    the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they are a real  risk  of
    adverse attention or persecution on returns  potential  or  actual  war
    crimes witnesses."

28. Part of the assessment of risk was that the Appellant would be at  risk
    on return having given a statement to the  ICPPG.  Whilst  the  country
    guidance decision of GJ and others sets out categories of  those  at  a
    real risk of persecution or serious harm which includes individuals who
    had given evidence to the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation  Commission
    the LLRC, this is a wholly different organisation from  the  ICPPG  and
    the Appellant's representatives have provided no evidence that there is
    any connection between them.

29. Whilst I would accept that the judge did not expressly  deal  with  any
    risk based on having given such a statement to the ICPPG as a  discrete
    issue, there was no evidence  before  the  judge  that  concerned  that
    particular organisation and whilst the bundle refers to page  87  as  a
    "document to follow" it has not been produced. Furthermore there is  no
    evidence that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  have  been  provided  with
    information form this organisation nor has it been shown that there  is
    any obvious way for the Sri Lankan authorities to connect any statement
    made to this Appellant. Therefore I find no error in this respect.

30. However I have  set  out  above  the  errors  that  I  have  found  and
    consequently I am satisfied that Mr Paramjorthy's submissions are  made
    out and that the judge's decision is vitiated by an error  of  law  and
    his decision shall be set aside. As to the remaking  of  the  decision,
    both advocates were in agreement that despite its history,  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard. It will be
    necessary to reach findings of credibility and the evidence as a  whole
    and in that respect further medical evidence may be submitted.  In  the
    light of the current diagnosis set out  in  the  report,  consideration
    should be given to the guidance given in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1123.




    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Date: 25th January 2018
