
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01186/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2019                              |On 18 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    P. S.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Jegarajah, Counsel for AASK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, entered the UK illegally and made a
protection claim which was refused on 10 January 2018. The Appellant's
appeal against that decision was heard, and dismissed, by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hands, in a decision promulgated on 20 August 2018.

The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by Upper
Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 3 December 2018 on all the grounds advanced. The
Respondent did not reply to that grant with a Rule 24 response.

The Appellant's case was that he had come to the adverse attention of the
Sri Lankan authorities, as a result of the activities of other family
members, and his own activities. He also argued that his activities in the
UK had given rise to a separate sur place claim.

Before me the Respondent accepts that the Judge's approach to the expert
evidence and to the evidence concerning other family members was flawed
with the result that her findings of fact were unsafe, and, that a hearing
afresh is required. For the Appellant Ms Jegarajah accepts that a fresh
hearing is the only pragmatic course open. I agree. None of the findings of
fact made by the Judge are safe, or can be preserved. In circumstances such
as this, where it would appear that the relevant evidence has not properly
been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law
has been to deprive the parties of the opportunity for their case to be
properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the
Practice Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial
fact finding exercise required is such that having regard to the over-
riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to
the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13
November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than First tier Tribunal Judge Hands, at the North Shields Hearing
    Centre.

    A Tamil interpreter is required.

    The Appellant must file any further background evidence he wishes to
    place before the Tribunal by 5pm 3 May 2019.

    The remitted appeal is suitable for the short warned list. The parties
    should expect the appeal to called on for hearing at short notice after
    7 May 2019.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 15 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
