
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01270/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 July 2016                          |On 10 August 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                    [r m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson of Counsel instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania.   In  a  Rule  24  response  the
    respondent stated that she did not oppose the  appellant's  application
    as it appears the First-tier Tribunal Judge (Judge Quinn) did not  have
    regard to the medical evidence.  It  is  unnecessary  to  say  anything
    other than that I agree with the  parties  that  the  judge  materially
    erred in law.  The judge has not engaged adequately or at all with  the
    medical evidence.  Paragraphs 66-69 are at best  the  beginning  of  an
    explanation for why the judge did not  find  the  medical  evidence  to
    carry any weight.   No  reasons  are  given  for  considering  that  Dr
    Harari's report was unreliable.  Although the judge states at paragraph
    38 that account has been taken of age and vulnerability, his subsequent
    remarks in this and succeeding paragraphs  do  not  inspire  confidence
    that account was in fact taken or that  the  judge  bore  in  mind  the
    relevance to the assessment of the credibility of minors  the  criteria
    set out in paragraph 351 of the Immigration Rules.  It may be  that  at
    a fresh hearing a proper assessment of the medical evidence will  reach
    a similar view,  but  that  is  not  something  I  can  prejudge.   The
    appellant is now 18 but the assessment made of his  claim  historically
    has happened when he was a minor,  as  obviously  have  the  events  he
    recounted, so the age criterion continues to be of  relevance  in  that
    context.

2.   For the above reasons the FtT judge materially erred  in  law  and  its
    decision is set aside.  Pursuant to  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal not to be before
    Judge Quinn.



Signed                                  Date: 8 August 2016

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





