
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01293/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th February 2018                         |On 27th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  Ezzat [Y]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nazir of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Hillis
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 9th March 2017.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt born on [ ] 1967.   He  arrived  in
    the UK and claimed asylum on 17th December 2012.  He was refused.

 3. On 24th January 2017 the Secretary of State refused his present  claim,
    which was made on the basis that he would be persecuted on a return  to
    Egypt as a consequence of having been involved in the purchase of  land
    and construction of a Coptic  church  which  had  brought  him  to  the
    attention of extreme Muslim factions.

 4. The judge disbelieved the Appellant's claim to have  been  involved  in
    the construction of the church and dismissed the appeal.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that  he  had
    been badly let down by his previous representatives who had  failed  to
    provide all of the evidence, upon which  he  sought  to  rely,  to  the
    Tribunal Judge.

 6. Permission was granted on that basis  by  Judge  Francis  who  observed
    that, in order to succeed, the Appellant had to show that his  previous
    representatives were aware of the allegation  of  negligence  and  what
    their response to it was.

 7. The original judge's determination was promulgated on 23rd March  2017.
    The Appellant has provided evidence that he made a complaint to them on
    4th April which he chased up on 3rd May and subsequently  escalated  to
    the legal ombudsman on 9th November 2017.  Evidence of receipt has been
    provided together with confirmation that the  previous  representatives
    have not responded.

 8. In these circumstances Mrs Petterson agreed that the only proper course
    was a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 9. The first instance  decision  is  set  aside  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant has been deprived of his right to a fair hearing, albeit that
    there is no fault on the part of the Immigration Judge, who  could  not
    have been aware of the deficiencies in the documents which were  placed
    before him.

10. Both parties agreed that it would be helpful to have a CMR  hearing  in
    the First-tier before the substantive listing, but that of course is  a
    matter for the Resident Judge.

11. The decision of Judge Hillis is set aside.  The matter will be  reheard
    by a different judge at Bradford.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]                             Date 19 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
