
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01450/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2016                            |On 9 January 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                 miss s S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan of Counsel instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka,  has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge  Devittie  sent  on  25
    August 2016 dismissing her  appeal  against  a  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 5 February 2016 refusing to grant asylum and humanitarian
    protection.  Whilst in granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge  (UTJ)
    Rimington stated that the grounds  were  arguable  on  [the  sur  place
    point] alone, she did not formally restrict  her  grant.   That  is  an
    important matter because in the absence of a formal restriction,  I  am
    not excluded from considering other grounds raised  by  the  appellant.
    One of them, concerning  the  FtT  judge's  treatment  of  the  medical
    evidence, seriously troubles me.

2.   It was  contended  in  the  appellant's  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law in respect of his  assessment  of  the  medical
    reports of Dr Al-Wakeel and Dr Dhumad.  I leave to one side the  matter
    of the judge's treatment of the report  of  Dr  Dhumad  concerning  her
    depression and suicidal ideation, but the report by Dr Al-Wakeel  dated
    20 June 2016 considered that the appellant had scars  "typical  of  the
    events described by the claimant of being intentionally burnt" and that
    "overall [in] my expert opinion I have no doubt that the injuries  were
    caused by being  intentionally  injured"  and  that  "the  most  likely
    explanation"  was  that  she  was  "severely  tortured  as  described".
    According to the Istanbul Protocol hierarchy of degrees of consistency,
    "typical of"  is  the  second  strongest  level  of  consistency  after
    "diagnostic" and higher than "highly consistent".  This medical  report
    took account of all relevant Home Office  documents  in  the  case  and
    exhibits a clear understanding of appropriate methodology.   The  judge
    recognised at para 8(i) that this evidence  "supports  the  appellant's
    account of past  persecution"  but  then  adds  a  description  of  its
    contents which is  plainly  inaccurate.   The  judge  says  that  "[the
    medical evidence] says that the appellant's scarring and her depression
    are consistent with her account of the ill-treatment she claims to have
    suffered at the hands of the authorities".  However, as just noted, the
    report by Dr  Al-Wakeel  found  the  scars  "typical  of"  her  claimed
    causation, which was two levels higher that "consistent".  Further, the
    only evaluative reference made by the judge of this report was at 8(vi)
    which states:

         "In the light of the unsatisfactory features I have  identified,  I
         find that I am unable to attach significant weight to  the  medical
         evidence, to the extent that it supports the appellant's account."


3.   Whilst taken in isolation it  is  possible  to  read  this  passage  as
    meaning to convey that the judge took account of the  medical  evidence
    holistically, the clear disregard shown earlier to the actual  contents
    of Dr Al-Wakeel's report leads me to conclude  that  the  judge  simply
    decided to reject the report because of other  unsatisfactory  features
    in the appellant's evidence.  That  amounted  to  the  classic  Mibanga
    error of compartmentalising the non-medical and medical  evidence:  see
    HH (medical evidence: effect of Mibanga) [2005] UKIAT 00164.

4.   In any event, I also consider that the judge materially  erred  in  law
    in  his  treatment  of  the  appellant's  evidence  of  her  sur  place
    activities in the United Kingdom prior to her return to  Sri  Lanka  in
    April 2014.  The judge's only analysis of these was at  [11]  where  he
    states: "In regard to the appellant's sur  place  activities  I  accept
    that she may have taken part in some LTTE activity in Sri  Lanka".   It
    is difficult to follow what  this  sentence  means,  but,  one  way  or
    another, it says nothing at all about her claimed sur place  activities
    in the UK.  At the very least the judge should have made some reference
    to these when assessing her account of what happened when she  returned
    to Sri Lanka in 2014.

5.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and the nature of his errors necessitates  that  I  set  aside  his
    decision.

6.   I have considered what form my disposal of the appeal should  take.   I
    have decided that the nature of the judge's errors make  it  impossible
    to preserve my findings of fact.  Accordingly, I remit it to the First-
    tier Tribunal not before FtT Judge Devittie.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        [pic]                          Date


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

