
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01970/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th August and 17 October 2016   |On 31 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  H S A E A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Buchanan
    made following a hearing at North Shields on 25th May 2016.





Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Libya, born on  1st  November  1987.   He
    arrived in the UK on 2nd July 2014 on a  student  visa  valid  to  12th
    April 2015.

 3. He claimed asylum on 27th April 2015 on the grounds that, whilst he did
    not raise any specific issues which would put him personally at risk on
    return, he feared being killed by terrorist organisations in Libya.

 4. The respondent noted that the appellant was  an  educated  single  male
    with no significant health problems. He had provided no evidence  which
    indicated that he was of any specific interest to Ansar  al-Sharia.  It
    would be reasonable to expect him to return either to his home town  of
    Benghazi or to relocate in Tripoli.

 5. The Secretary of  State  applied  AT  &  Others  (Article  15c  -  risk
    categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC) and refused the application.

 6. Immigration Judge Buchanan dismissed his appeal.

 7. Unfortunately, as Mr McVeety accepted, the judge erred in relying  upon
    an unreported case, which was not cited at the hearing by either party,
    in reaching his decision. He did not put either side on notice that  he
    was proposing to do so, and thereby deprived them of an opportunity  to
    make representations on it. He did not  argue  that  the  determination
    could safely be preserved.

 8. The judge erred in law in failing to follow the proper  procedure  when
    citing an unreported decision. The decision is set aside.



Resumed Hearing

 9. Prior to the resumed hearing the appellant's representatives enclosed a
    supplementary bundle enclosing material which was not available at  the
    time that the First-tier Tribunal heard the appeal.

10.  Since my decision to set aside was made, the Tribunal has  promulgated
    FA (Libya: Article 15c) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 00413  which  states  that
    the question of whether a person  is  at  Article  15c  risk  in  Libya
    should, until further country guidance, be determined on the  basis  of
    the individual evidence in the case, and it explicitly replaces AT  and
    Others Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318 in respect of assessment of the Article
    15c risk.



Submissions

11. Mr Hussain relied on the latest UK Country Information and  Guidance -
    Libya Report dated June 2016 and submitted that the appellant would  be
    at risk in his home city of Benghazi; he could not reasonably travel to
    any other potential safe haven.

12. Mrs Pettersen acknowledged the difficulties which the  appellant  would
    face but submitted that there was no bar to him living in  Tripoli  and
    he could therefore reasonably relocate there.




Findings and Conclusions

13. The appellant comes from  the  city  of  Benghazi.   According  to  the
    respondent's  own  evidence,  areas  in   and   around   Benghazi   are
    particularly volatile, with a high  number  of  violent  incidents  and
    casualties due to fighting and air attacks.

14. At paragraph 2.3.16  of  her  latest  Country  Information  Report,  it
    specifically states

         "The conditions in these areas,  currently  under  the  control  of
         Islamic groups such as Daesh and Ansar  al  Sharia  are  likely  to
         breach  Article  15c  of  the  QD  though  the  situation   remains
         changeable."

15. The respondent does not accept that the  security  situation  in  other
    parts of Libya has deteriorated to the extent that protection would  be
    required under the Qualifying Directive  throughout  the  country,  but
    there is a clear  acceptance  in  the  CIG  Report  that  the  security
    situation in Benghazi is likely to do so.  Mrs Pettersen did  not  cite
    any information to the contrary.

16. The first issue is whether he could safely travel from either the point
    of his return or, theoretically, from  Benghazi.  The  appellant  is  a
    young male with no known health problems, and it is on that basis  that
    the judgment as to whether it would be unduly harsh for him to relocate
    from his home area, where there is a risk, must be made.

17.  The  CIG  Report  states  that  decision  makers  must  give   careful
    consideration to the reasonableness of internal relocation on a case by
    case basis, including of course where they originate from in Libya  and
    where they will be returning to.

18. At 2.4.1 it states

         "Travel within Libya is restricted by violence and conflict between
         various armed militias and pro-government groups  in  most  of  the
         populated parts of the country.  This is further compounded by road
         blocks and control points manned by conflicting militias, including
         Islamic State/Daesh and other  terrorist  groups.   ...  ...  large
         parts of the country are primarily desert areas with few  towns  or
         inhabitants.  There is  a  lack  of  infrastructure  and  supplies,
         including fuel and transport.  Most airports are closed, or in  the
         control of armed militias.   There  is  a  risk  of  landmines  and
         unexploded ordinance in many areas".

19. The report goes on to describe targeted  violence  by  parties  on  all
    sides of the conflict by armed groups and militias and criminal  groups
    continuing to abduct and forcibly disappear hundreds of civilians.

20. It quotes the  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  for  2016  describing  the
    deepening political and security crisis in Libya, with no end in sight.
     Almost 400,000  people  are  internally  displaced  and  there  is  an
    increasing disruption  to  basic  services,  such  as  power  and  fuel
    supplies.  The report by the UN Support Mission  in  Libya  dated  16th
    November 2015 records all parties to the conflict continuing to  commit
    violations of international human rights  and  humanitarian  law.   The
    violence in Libya has led to hundreds of deaths and  mass  displacement
    with an ongoing  humanitarian  crisis  in  many  areas.   Across  Libya
    warring factions show little regard for a more avoiding  or  minimising
    loss of civilian life.

21. Amnesty International stated, on 17th February 2016

         "The scale of abuse  is  staggering.   Forces  on  all  sides  have
         carried out hundreds of abductions, taken hostages, tortured,  ill-
         treated and summarily killed detainees, and launched indiscriminate
         attacks on  residential  areas  in  some  cases  amounting  to  war
         crimes."

22. The UNHCR, in their position on returns to Libya  dated  October  2015,
    states

         "The current situation in Libya is  characterised  by  a  continued
         lack of rule of law and order, ongoing fighting between rival armed
         groups in many parts  of  the  country  and  daily  assassinations,
         bombings and kidnappings.  Intense fighting between opposing  armed
         groups over control  of  territory,  resources  and  infrastructure
         since May 2014 has resulted in the death of  thousands  of  people,
         including civilians, and led to the displacement  of  over  435,000
         individuals, the destruction of vital infrastructure, disruption of
         basic services and  deteriorating  humanitarian  conditions.   Food
         insecurity has significantly increased and is estimated  to  affect
         1.28 million persons including 175,000 IDPs who are  considered  to
         be the most vulnerable.  The most  severe  cases  are  reported  in
         Benghazi and in the south."

23.  Finally,  the  USSD  Report  of  13th  April  2016  records   militias
    effectively controlling regional movements  through  armed  checkpoints
    with militia checkpoints and those imposed by  Daesh,  Ansar  al-Sharia
    and other extremist organisations impeding movement within the country.



24. Mrs Pettersen made no submission in relation to how the appellant could
    reasonably travel away from his home area to reach Tripoli.

25. The  evidence  which  Mr  Hussain  relied  on  all  emanates  from  the
    respondent. I am satisfied that it shows that there  is  no  reasonable
    way the appellant could travel to a safe  haven  from  the  appellant's
    home area of Benghazi where it is accepted that  an  Article  15c  risk
    exists.

Notice of Decision

26. The original judge erred in law.  His decision has been set aside.   It
    is remade as follows.  The appeal is allowed on the  grounds  that  the
    appellant is entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor               31 October 2016



