
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01664/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4 October 2017                    |On 5 October 2017                     |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [H P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A A Khan, Counsel (instructed by Thompson & Co,
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Pickup on 7 August 2017  against  the  decision  and
         reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Farelly who  had  allowed  the
         Appellant's protection and human rights appeal.  The  decision  and
         reasons was promulgated on 30 March 2016.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of Vietnam.   As  recorded  by  the
         trial judge at [10] of his  decision  and  reasons,  the  Appellant
         accepted that the Respondent had taken  part  in  an  environmental
         protest on 8 May 2016 as well as an earlier demonstration,  as  was
         his account of having been arrested  and  abused.   His  protection
         claim had been refused on the basis that he had  not  been  singled
         out from 200 protesters and would have been  released  earlier  but
         for his refusal to sign a form of  admission.   The  Appellant  had
         claimed  he  was  a  political  activist,  following  his  father's
         footsteps, and had been active politically since his arrival in the
         United Kingdom.   The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not
         "particularly high profile", but  was  active  albeit  at  a  lower
         level.  He was in effect genuine in his  political  commitment  and
         would continue his activities and thus be at real risk  on  return.
         (The country background evidence concerning the lack of freedom and
         government oppression in Vietnam was not in dispute.)

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary  of  State  by
         Judge Pickup because he considered  that  the  judge  had  arguably
         erred by failing to give sufficient reasons for his  decision,  and
         had further erred by relying  on  a  contentious  and  misconceived
         interpretation of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

    4.     Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
         notice contesting that there was a material error of law was  filed
         by the Respondent, dated 20 September 2017.

    Submissions

    5.     Mr Tarlow for the Appellant relied on the grounds of appeal  and
         the grant of permission to appeal.  He submitted  agreed  that  the
         judge's approach had in effect been back to front. HJ (Iran) [2010]
         UKSC 31 was misunderstood.  This  was  an  appeal  about  political
         opinion and the Appellant was of no interest  to  the  authorities.
         Moreover, internal relocation had not been considered at  it  ought
         to have been.   The  onwards  appeal  should  be  allowed  and  the
         original  appeal  reheard  by  another  judge  in  the   First-tier
         Tribunal.

    6.     Mr Khan for the  Respondent  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
         State's appeal was  misconceived  and  should  be  dismissed.   The
         reality as the judge had noted was that there were  no  credibility
         issues to decide.   The  judge  had  to  examine  where  the  facts
         accepted by the Secretary of State took the appeal.  The only issue
         to  decide  was  future  risk,  which  had  been  resolved  in  the
         Respondent's favour with adequate reasons.   The  HJ  (Iran)  query
         took the onwards appeal no further, and could  not  be  a  material
         error of law given the other findings.







    Discussion - error of law

    7.     The tribunal accepts the submissions made by Mr  Khan.   The  HJ
         (Iran) point taken on behalf of the Secretary of State is something
         of a red herring.  The judge was required to determine  the  appeal
         effectively on the basis of agreed facts, as  he  recorded.   There
         was  no  dispute  that  the  current  government  of   Vietnam   is
         oppressive: see [17] of the decision and reasons  where  the  judge
         noted  the  Home  Office  policy,   including   severe   government
         restrictions on political rights  and  a  nationwide  crackdown  on
         human rights activists.  There were no credibility issues as  such.
         Internal relocation did not arise for the judge's decision  as  the
         Respondent was  found  genuine  in  his  commitment  and  so  would
         continue  his  political  activities  and  be  at  risk  throughout
         Vietnam.

    8.     The judge's reference to HJ (Iran) seems to have  been  part  if
         his consideration of whether or not the Appellant would continue to
         engage in political activism.   This  possibly  was  not  an  ideal
         approach.  The reference to HJ (Iran) is confusing and  unnecessary
         and it tended to invite an application for  permission  to  appeal.
         It would have strengthened and clarified the decision if the  judge
         had simply stated that on the basis of the Appellant's past  record
         and his oral  evidence,  he  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  a
         committed activist from an activist family who would  continue  his
         political activities.  Although those activities  were  low  level,
         they were sufficient to establish a real risk on  return.   In  the
         tribunal's judgment, that was what the judge meant, as [21] of  the
         decision shows.

    9.     The tribunal adds that this was a plain case, where the  judge's
         conclusions were almost inevitable, given the concessions  made  by
         the Secretary  of  State  and  the  undisputed  country  background
         evidence.   Any  error  of  law  over  HJ  (Iran)'s  relevance  was
         immaterial.

    DECISION

    The onwards appeal is dismissed

    The original decision and reasons stands unchanged




    Signed Dated 4 October 2017


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


