







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: PA/01453/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th February 2018                     |On 14th February 2018               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lay of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Quinn promulgated on the 9th October  2017  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse his protection claim based on asylum, humanitarian
    protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having  considered  all  of  the  circumstances  I  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.

 4. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 3 October 2015. On that day
    he claimed asylum or  international  protection  at  Heathrow  airport.
    There was an asylum interview on the 23 December  2015.  His  claim  to
    international protection was refused in a detailed, Reasons for Refusal
    Letter dated 26 January 2017.

 5. The appellant appealed against that decision and  the  appeal  appeared
    before Judge Quinn at Hatton Cross on 19 September  2017.  By  decision
    promulgated on 9 October  2017  the  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal. The appellant sought leave to appeal against that decision.  By
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge L Murray dated 29  November  2017
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on all grounds.

 6. Thus the appeal appeared before me in the first instance  to  determine
    whether or not there was a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 7. The grounds of appeal contained some  14  detailed  challenges  to  the
    approach of the judge to the issues in the case. It  is  not  necessary
    rehearse all of the grounds. At the hearing before me the  respondent's
    representative accepted that several of the grounds of  challenge  were
    made out and that by reason thereof it would be difficult to argue that
    there was no material error of law within the decision of the judge.

 8. The appellant's representative had summarised the grounds in a skeleton
    argument which specifically identified the  fact  that  the  judge  had
    failed to take into account specific evidence both as to the bona fides
    of certain witnesses but also as to corroborative evidence relating  to
    the activities of the appellant in Afghanistan  and  the  risk  to  the
    appellant arising out of his actions as an  interpreter  for  the  U.S.
    Army. The evidence included:-

     i) Evidence from an  alleged  military  supervisor  Mr  Okraku,  which
        evidence had details which gave some  corroboration  to  the  claim
        that he was in the U.S. Army  Officer  responsible  for  monitoring
        interpreters and had been  in  Afghanistan.  The  judge  in  making
        conclusions appear to have ignored details in  the  evidence  which
        seemed to confirm Mr Okraku's position.

    ii) Evidence from the appellant's family members, which appeared not to
        have been dealt with at all.

   iii) Photographic evidence of the  appellant  with  U.S.  Army  military
        personnel.

 9. Central to consideration of the appellant's case was whether or not the
    appellant had acted as interpreter for the U.S. Army. It is unclear  on
    the findings of fact made whether or  not  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant was an interpreter or not. Whilst the judge deals  with  some
    of the evidence giving reasons for not accepting that other  facets  of
    the case the judge had not dealt.  It  was  also  unclear  whether  the
    judge had come to any  conclusion  as  to  whether  the  appellant  was
    working as an interpreter and whether it is reasonably likely  that  he
    would be at risk by reason thereof.

10. It having been accepted that there  were  material  errors  within  the
    decision  I  invited  submissions  as  to  how  the  appeal  should  be
    determined. Both parties agreed that the only course open was  for  the
    appeal to be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing
    afresh on all issues. It was felt necessary for findings to be made  on
    the  specific  core  elements  of  the  appellant's  account  and  that
    otherwise proper findings upon the credibility of  the  appellant  were
    necessary in light of all the evidence.

11. Accordingly as it has been accepted by the respondent  that  there  are
    material errors of law in the decision and the parties  are  agreed  on
    the course that this case has to take, I  set  aside  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal and direct that the appeal is to be  heard  afresh.
    The hearing afresh will be in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. I have considered whether any of the findings of fact made by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should be preserved. However as certain elements of
    the evidence have not been considered properly and as such the findings
    on credibility are  brought  into  question,  I  do  not  preserve  any
    findings of fact.

    Notice of Decision

13. I allow the appeal of the appellant to the extent that  the  appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.



Signed





Date 9th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
































