
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01743/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 February 2017                            |On 2 February 2017           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                         MD MOSHIUR ROHMAN CHOWDHURY
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms K Reid of Counsel, instructed by Hunter Stone
Law
For the Respondent:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge  Callow  dismissing  his  appeal  for  protection.  He  is  a
         Bangladeshi national born on 18 January 1980 who arrived here as  a
         student in 2008 and whose  last  period  of  leave  expired  on  24
         October 2014,  having  been  curtailed.  After  the  refusal  of  a
         subsequent application for leave to remain outside  the  rules,  he
         made an asylum application.  His claim is that he has two  brothers
         in Bangladesh who are members of the Jamaat-i-Islami party  and  in
         respect of whom separate arrest warrants were issued on 14  and  31
         July 2016. He maintains that he would be at risk on return  because
         of his interest of the authorities in his brothers. He also  has  a
         brother here and one in the US.


      2. The judge found that the appellant was not a credible witness, that
         his delayed asylum claim undermined his claim  to  be  in  need  to
         international protection and that he was not involved  in  politics
         either here or in Bangladesh, since 2008. He found that  there  was
         no  evidence  from  either  brother  regarding  any  interest   the
         authorities may have in the appellant and that such evidence  could
         easily have been obtained from them. He, therefore, concluded  that
         their political involvement would not impact on the  appellant  and
         that the authorities would have no interest in him.


      3. The appellant challenged the  decision,  essentially  arguing  that
         inadequate reasons were given for the judge's conclusions and  that
         consideration had not  been  given  to  the  'objective'  material.
         Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne  on  14
         November 2016 and the matter now comes before me.


         The Hearing


      4. At the hearing before me on 1 February 2017,  I  heard  submissions
         from the parties. The appellant was in attendance.

      5. Ms Reid submitted that the issue was whether the  judge  had  given
         adequate reasons for his risk assessment. She  argued  that  whilst
         the judge had accepted that the appellant's brothers  were  members
         of Jamaat-i-Islami, he gave no reasons to  support  his  conclusion
         that this would not impact upon the appellant. She referred to page
         129 of the appellant's bundle of country material  as  confirmation
         that the authorities threaten the families of political  activists.
         The respondent was wrong to state in  her  Rule  24  response  that
         there was no evidence of the interest in the brothers as copies  of
         two arrest warrants had been submitted. The judge did not  consider
         these. The appeal should be allowed.

      6. In response, Mr Melvin  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  been
         directed to the page now referred to and it was not for him to have
         to trawl through a 300 plus page bundle to  find  a  section  of  a
         report that may support the appellant's claim.  He  questioned  the
         weight that could be attached  to  the  report  in  any  event.  He
         submitted that the judge was aware of the  warrants  (at  paragraph
         4). The brothers were members of a main stream  party  and  neither
         had supplied any evidence to support  the  appellant's  claim.  The
         judge's findings were adequate. The determination should be upheld.



      7. Ms Reid replied to state that the challenge was  not  just  on  the
         matter of a failure to  consider  the  country  evidence  but  also
         because the judge had wrongly stated that there was no evidence  of
         interest in the brothers when the warrants for  their  arrests  had
         been submitted. She maintained that the findings were  limited  and
         there needed to be substantial fact finding which would require the
         matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

      8. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give.

                   Findings and conclusions

      9. The judge's determination is succinct but that does not necessarily
         mean it is inadequate. No  issue  was  taken  before  me  with  his
         findings on the appellant's own lack of political  profile  so  the
         only issue is whether his finding that the political membership  of
         his two brothers in Bangladesh would not cause an adverse  interest
         in him was properly reasoned.


     10. As already stated, one of the appellant's brothers in  in  the  UK.
         There is no evidence that he has any form of leave and according to
         the appellant's own evidence at interview,  his  brother  has  been
         going through the appeals process  following  the  refusal  of  his
         application based on  long  residence  grounds.  He  maintains  his
         brother has been here  over  ten  years,  even  before  he  himself
         arrived here (at Q. 6 and 141). Another brother is in  the  US.  No
         details about him are provided. The appellant's father passed  away
         when he was a year old. The family he has remaining  in  Bangladesh
         are his mother,  two  further  brothers  in  respect  of  whom  the
         warrants were issued, their wives and children, three  sisters  and
         an uncle and his family. All, except possibly  the  uncle  and  his
         family, live together but the appellant maintains that his brothers
         hide at night to avoid detection by the authorities (Q.30). At  his
         interview the appellant based his claim on being an  active  member
         of the Jamaat-i-Islam (and previously of the  student  wing  -  the
         Shabir Party) along with his brothers. He agreed their  involvement
         was at a low level (Q.113).  He stated that he was advised in  2013
         not  to  return  (Q.36).  Both  warrants  were  issued  after   the
         appellant's interview but shortly prior to the hearing.


     11. This was the context in which the judge had to assess the  risk  to
         the appellant.

     12. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and set out his case at
         length (at paragraphs  4-6).  He  noted  the  submissions  for  the
         appellant during the course of which the only  country  information
         that was relied on was the respondent's own Country Information and
         Guidance for February 2015. There was no reference  by  Counsel  to
         page 129 of the bundle, which was subsequently heavily relied on in
         the grounds. Mr Melvin  is  right  to  say  that  if  this  was  an
         important part of the appellant's case, it should have been brought
         to the judge's attention either by way of a schedule  of  essential
         reading or in submissions. The reference at page 129 is an  extract
         from a report by Odhikar of June 2016. There is no  information  on
         their credentials of  impartiality.  I  was  not  referred  to  any
         particular paragraph but presume the reliance is on a  sentence  at
         paragraph  42  which  states  that  the  government  uses  its  law
         enforcement agencies against its political  opponents  and  arrests
         and harasses the leaders and activists, "even family members". This
         allegation is unsourced. There is no reference  to  any  supporting
         material. If the arrest of the wife of  the  leader  of  the  Dhaka
         Metropolitan Unit, mentioned in the  preceding  paragraph,  is  the
         basis  for  this  allegation,  I  would  note  that  there  is   no
         description of what the DMU is and also note that the person sought
         occupied a high rank within it.  I fail to  see  how  that  analogy
         could impact upon the risk to the appellant, which no doubt is  why
         this was not brought to the judge's attention.


     13. The judge makes it plain that he has considered all the evidence in
         the round (at paragraph 14). He was not required  to  itemise  this
         material. Having considered  that  evidence  and  having  given  it
         anxious scrutiny (ibid), the judge proceeded to make his findings.

     14. The appellant was  not  found  to  be  credible.  His  late  asylum
         application was found to undermine his credibility and he was found
         to have been inactive in politics since 2008. It is right that  the
         judge  did  accept  that  the  two  brothers  in   Bangladesh   are
         politically active. The criticism focuses on what  he  then  found:
         "...this membership and their activity is of no concern  or  impact
         in so far as the appellant is concerned..."  It  is  maintained  no
         reasons are provided for this conclusion. That  is  incorrect.  The
         judge found that the appellant had no political profile.  He  noted
         that none of the brothers had provided any evidence suggesting that
         the appellant would be at risk on account of their activities.  Had
         there been attempts to locate him or to had  enquiries  made  about
         him, it is reasonable to expect the appellant would  have  provided
         statements from his brother(s) to that effect. Further,  had  there
         been interest in the appellant's brothers in the UK and the US,  it
         is reasonable to expect the appellant would have  adduced  evidence
         to support that. The judge was entitled to note such evidence would
         have been easily obtained. In its absence and in the absence of any
         reference to, or reliance on, country material which would  support
         the appellant's claim, the judge was entitled to find as he did.


     15. I did not understand Ms Reid's criticism of the judge with  respect
         to his alleged failure to appreciate that the brothers had provided
         evidence of the interest of the authorities in them in the form  of
         arrest warrants. I cannot see anything  in  that  paragraph  17  to
         suggest that this is what the judge said. What  he  said  was  that
         there was no evidence from the brothers of any interest on the part
         of the authorities in the appellant. That  is  a  wholly  different
         matter. The judge was not required to make any specific findings on
         the warrants. He was not assessing  the  risk  to  the  appellant's
         brothers but to the appellant and in the absence of any evidence to
         show that family members of low level opposition party members  (as
         the appellant himself accepted his brothers were) are persecuted by
         the authorities, the issue of warrants  for  the  brothers  do  not
         impact upon the appellant.  It  is  of  course  of  note  that  the
         brothers whom  it  is  claimed  are  directly  at  risk  remain  in
         Bangladesh with other members of the  family  and  it  is  not  the
         appellant's evidence  that  any  other  family  members  have  been
         persecuted by the  government.  The  judge's  conclusion  that  the
         appellant was not  at  risk  for  the  grounds  claimed  is  wholly
         sustainable. Whilst I accept that  his  findings  could  have  been
         somewhat more detailed, they are sufficient to show why the  appeal
         was dismissed.

     16. Decision

     17. The decision does not contain any error of law and is upheld.

     18. The appeal is dismissed.



    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 1 February 2017





