
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/01476/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 March 2019                          |On 13 March 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   mrs E N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Dieu, Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 5 November 2018, Judge Walker of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) allowed the appeal  of  the  respondent  (hereafter  the
    claimant)  against  the  decision  of  the  appellant  (hereafter   the
    Secretary of State or SSHD)  made  on  16  January  2018  refusing  her
    protection claim.  The claimant is a national of  Afghanistan  of  Sikh
    origin.  She had originally  claimed  asylum  as  a  dependent  of  her
    husband.  His application had been refused  on  3  June  2015  and  his
    appeal heard and dismissed on 5  March  2016,  the  judge  being  Judge
    Coaster.  She had then applied for  asylum  in  her  own  right  on  18
    February 2017, with her husband as a dependent.

2.   The SSHD's grounds take aim at what the judge stated at paragraph 49:

         "There can be  no  such  thing  as  Devaseelan  in  spirit  as  was
         suggested to me by  the  respondent  because  it  is  an  essential
         element of that case that the protagonists  in  the  case  are  the
         same.   This  appellant  did  not  have   representation   or   the
         opportunity to present her case in the appeal which came before  IJ
         Coaster.  Further I am satisfied by  the  comments  made  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Finch that the appellant's husband's solicitors  had
         not acted on his instructions and I also note the comments made  by
         Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch  that  there  were  elements  of  the
         appellant's husband's case which could have been put in front of IK
         Coaster but were not."

3.   They contend that the judge's finding that Devaseelan  principles  have
    no application failed to adhere to the guidance given by the  Court  of
    Appeal in AA (Somalia) [2007] EWCA Civ 1040 regarding the treatment  of
    family members where there is an overlapping of the factual matrix.  In
    a Rule 24 Reply the claimant's representatives aver  that  the  judge's
    treatment of Devaseelan principles was  in  fact  consistent  with  the
    guidance given in AA (Somalia) wherein it was said  that  it  was  "the
    fundamental obligations of the judge independently to decide the second
    case on its own individual merits".

4.   I  am  grateful  for  the  excellent  submissions  I  heard  from  both
    representatives.

5.   The first  sentence  of  paragraph  49  is  poorly  expressed.   It  is
    difficult at first sight to understand what  the  judge  meant  by  the
    "spirit" of Devaseelan. (It is also unclear  who  the  judge  meant  to
    refer to by use of the term  "protagonist";  I  assumed  he  meant  the
    appellant, but Mr Mills suggested he meant the actors of  persecution).
     Mr Mills very fairly disclosed that the note made  by  the  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing recorded his submission that although Devaseelan
    could not be "literally" applied to the claimant's case,  it  could  be
    applied "in spirit".

6.   In any event, it is clear  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  hold  that
    Devaseelan principles had no application.  She was not  helped  perhaps
    by the submissions made by the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  who,
    despite citing AA (Somalia) appears not to have understood the ratio of
    the majority decision.  Nevertheless, it is settled law that Devaseelan
    principles can apply  by  extension  even  when  the  case  concerns  a
    different appellant so long as there is a significant factual  overlap:
    see (AA (Somalia)).

7.   Mr Dieu sought to submit that there was "not  enough  factual  overlap"
    because in this appeal the claimant was the appellant and  her  husband
    merely a dependant and the factual matrix was very  different,  relying
    on the claimant's (his wife's) hitherto unmentioned difficulties at the
    hands of males of the local  Muslim  community.   Mr  Dieu's  arguments
    certainly establish significant  differences  between  the  two  asylum
    claims, but it cannot fairly  be  said  that  these  negated  the  very
    substantial points of overlap, both appeals involving the same  husband
    and wife and the same claim to  being  Sikhs  facing  serious  societal
    discrimination in the same area of Kabul.  Mr Mills is  clearly  right,
    therefore, to say,  that  the  judge  should  have  applied  Devaseelan
    principles.

8.   However, for the above error to warrant my setting aside the  decision,
    I would have to be satisfied it was material.  Despite Mr  Mill's  very
    well-presented arguments, I am not persuaded that it was.

9.   In the first place had the judge  applied  Devaseelan  principles,  she
    would have been aware that in cases such as the  claimant's  where  its
    principles are applied by extension, there  is  a  particular  need  to
    apply them  using  a  "flexible  approach"  (see  paragraph  62  of  AA
    (Somalia)).  Second, she would have had to bear in mind  Carnwath  LJ's
    observations at paragraphs 70, which indicate that in cases such as the
    claimant's there may be good reason to be "more readily  persuaded"  to
    revisit previous finidngs:

         "70. Secondly,  in  applying  the  guidelines  to  cases  involving
             different  claimants,  there  may  be  a   valid   distinction
             depending on whether the previous decision was in favour of or
             against the Secretary of State.  The difference  is  that  the
             Secretary of State was a direct part to  the  first  decision,
             whereas the claimant was not.  It is one thing to  restrict  a
             party from relitigating the same issue, but another to  impose
             the same restriction on someone who, although involved in  the
             previous case, perhaps as a witness, was not formally a party.
              This is particularly relevant to the tribunal's comments,  in
             Devaseelan, on what might be "good reasons" for reopening  the
             first decision.  It suggested that such cases would  be  rare.
             It referred, for example,  to  the  "increasing  tendency"  to
             blame   representatives   for   unfavourable   decisions    by
             Adjudicators, commenting:


                  "An Adjudicator should be very slow to  conclude  that  an
                  appeal before  another  Adjudicator  has  been  materially
                  affected by a representative's error or incompetence ...".


             I understand the force of  those  comments  where  the  second
             appeal is by the same claimant, but less so where it is  by  a
             different party, even if closely connected.  Although I  would
             not exclude the  Devaseelan  principles  in  such  cases  (for
             example, the hypothetical series of cases involving  the  same
             family, cited in TK), the second tribunal may be more  readily
             persuaded that there is "good reason" to revisit  the  earlier
             decision."

10.  Second, on the judge's findings, not challenged in the SSHD's  grounds,
    this was a case in which there were good reasons why  the  fresh  claim
    had been advanced on a different basis, notwithstanding that  at  first
    sight all that was involved was a swapping of roles  as  appellant  and
    dependent by the husband and wife.  At paragraph 50 the judge found:

         "The appellant did not respond appropriately to the One Stop notice
         which was served on her.  However, I accept  her  explanation  that
         she had relied on her husband's claim to gain  her  asylum  because
         she had by then been lying by omission to her husband and had  been
         doing so for a considerable time.  If she could avoid  telling  him
         then this would mean that she would not have to confess her lie  to
         him.  I find  her  explanation  for  the  lie  that  she  had  been
         assaulted whilst out with her brother-in-law and who had  not  been
         able to prevent the assault on her and had therefore begged her not
         to tell the appellant's husband because it  was  a  matter  of  the
         brother-in-law's pride to be entirely plausible.  I note that  even
         when she was being given advised by her solicitor she was reluctant
         to say what had happened and the solicitor had been obliged to give
         her  advice  in  confidence  from  her  husband.   I   accept   the
         appellant's account of how she and her family were obliged to  live
         their lives in  Afghanistan  because  it  is  consistent  with  the
         objective evidence that I have read.  As a family they lived  under
         considerable pressure.  Part of the  objective  of  the  harassment
         that they experienced was not only to make them feel threatened but
         also to belittle them especially the women and children where their
         menfolk could not protect them.  This not only assaulted the  women
         but diminished the men in their own eyes.  It is perfectly credible
         that the appellant would not have wanted to expose her  brother  in
         law to this and also would not have  wanted  to  have  exposed  her
         husband to it because he no doubt would also have felt powerless to
         protect his wife in the circumstances in which they were living."

11.  In substance, the judge's acceptance that the claimant  had  had  valid
    reasons for failing to raise her own experiences before  Judge  Coaster
    demonstrate that there were valid reasons to depart from  the  original
    judge's findings.

12.  Mr Mills submits that had the judge applied Devaseelan principles,  she
    would have been obliged to treat the claimant's  evidence  "with  great
    circumspection", and  to  recognise  that  she  could  not  assess  the
    claimant's credibility de novo.  I  have  two  difficulties  with  this
    submission.  One difficulty is that the SSHD's grounds rely  solely  on
    the   failure   to   apply   Devaseelan    guidelines    without    any
    particularisation as to how it is considered this had  compromised  the
    judge's assessment of credibility.  If the SSHD intended  to  challenge
    the judge's  positive  credibility  findings,  that  should  have  been
    identified either as a separate ground or as a particularisation of the
    only ground of challenge.

13.  The other difficulty is that I cannot see any  lack  of  circumspection
    in the judge's treatment of the claimant's evidence and the reasons why
    he had not mentioned her own problems at  the  original  hearing.   The
    fact that the judge required an explanation for this failure  and  only
    went on to accept her  account  because  she  was  satisfied  that  the
    explanation was satisfactory, demonstrates that  she  did  not,  as  Mr
    Mills submits, treat her evidence "from scratch" or de novo.

14.  Mr Mills submits that even if I  took  the  view  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to find the claimant's account credible, that did not  justify
    departure from the  previous  judge's  findings  regarding  the  likely
    educational circumstances of the children if returned.  Here  I  am  in
    agreement with Mr Dieu.  Once the judge decided  to  consider  the  new
    evidence presented by the claimant, she necessarily had to consider the
    issue of the children's educational circumstances on the basis of a new
    factual scenario - one in which she and the children  had  already  met
    with particular problems in Kabul.  At paragraphs 52-53 the  judge  set
    out the full particulars:

         "52. Whether or not the  claims  with  regard  to  the  appellant's
             children's education  differ  to  those  claims  made  by  the
             appellant's husband in his  appeal  the  fact  remains  on  my
             findings above that this family had  more  cause  for  concern
             than was apparent when the appellant's  husband's  appeal  was
             heard.  This is because  the  anxiety  for  her  own  and  her
             children's future safety caused to the appellant as  a  result
             of the assaults on her means that she would be more likely  to
             avoid exposing her children to the risk presented to  them  of
             being  away  from  their  parents'  direct  care  whilst  they
             attended school.  In addition the likelihood of  the  children
             being  harassed  and  assaulted  would  be  greater   in   the
             appellant's consideration because of the assaults on  her.   I
             note that the appellant herself had not been  able  to  attend
             school largely because of the fear that she would be assaulted
             and as a result she had barely any education at all.


         53.  Attendance at school is more than  simply  being  afforded  an
             education.  School children learn to  socialise  with  others,
             how to cope in a system where their needs are  competing  with
             those of their fellow pupils and how to function in a society.
              The proposal that the children should be educated in a closed
             home, closed because they would be too frightened to go out or
             at least because their parents with the knowledge of the  risk
             that they may face outside their home would be too anxious  to
             allow them to go outside their home, deprives the children  of
             the opportunities that attending school presents.  Of  course,
             it could be said that the children would be able to  gain  the
             necessary experience by attending the Gurdwara  but  I  accept
             the appellant's evidence as to the  diminishing  size  of  the
             Gurdwara and the now  extremely  limited  ability  for  it  to
             supply support to their members.  Her evidence on  this  point
             is entirely consistent with the objective evidence that I have
             seen.  In any event I am satisfied by the  evidence  that  the
             appellant gave that enquiries made on her behalf and on behalf
             of her husband have revealed that her other family members who
             lived in their home in Kabul have fled and that their home  is
             now occupied by strangers.  This means that the  support  that
             the family had received from her brother-in-law is  no  longer
             available to her and her husband.  It also  means  that  there
             would be no money available to pay for private tutoring of the
             children.  I accept the appellant's evidence that her  husband
             had never worked and I am satisfied that the appellant and her
             family will  not  have  any  support  in  Afghanistan.   I  am
             satisfied  that  as  an  unskilled,  Sikh  man  with  no  work
             experience in Afghanistan he  is  unlikely  to  be  able  find
             employment."

15.  For the above reasons I conclude that, even though the judge  erred  in
    rejecting Devaseelan  guidelines  as  having  any  application  to  the
    claimant's case, this  error  was  not  material  as  the  judge's  own
    findings and reasoning furnished valid  reasons  for  revisiting  those
    findings and reaching independent findings.

16.  Accordingly the decision of the FtT Judge must stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 11 March 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
