
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01010/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 22 May 2017                        |On 24 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     aa
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Burdock of Counsel instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. AA is a citizen of Afghanistan and his date of birth is [ ]  1999.   He
    made an application for asylum and this was refused by  the  Respondent
    on 18 January 2017.  The Appellant's claim  was  based  on  his  father
    activities.  His evidence was  that  his  father  was  a  lorry  driver
    delivering food to NATO forces based in Ghazni and as a result of  this
    he was beaten up by the Taliban. He was released and resumed work.   He
    was then, according to the Appellant taken again by the  Taleban  along
    with the Appellant. They were tortured and then released. The Appellant
    fled Afghanistan.


 2. The claim was rejected by the Respondent. It was briefly dealt  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter.  The Respondent,  at  paragraph  20,  noted
    that the Appellant was unable to provide any details regarding the name
    of the company which employed his father, the location of the  company,
    the nature of it and whether the company had an administrative  office.
    It was for this reason the Respondent rejected the  Appellant's  claim.
    There was no further analysis of the details of the claim.

3.   The Appellant appealed against the decision of the Respondent  and  his
    appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Maka following
    a hearing on 2 March 2017.  The decision is dated 9  March  2017.   The
    Appellant was granted  permission  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald on 3 April 2017.

4.   The Appellant attended the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  when
    he was aged 17. He was aged 16 when he arrived in the  UK.   Under  the
    heading  of  'preliminary  issue'  the  judge  recorded  that   Counsel
    representing the Appellant sought a direction that the Appellant should
    not be called  or  cross-examined  since  he  had  produced  a  witness
    statement and had been substantively interviewed. The judge's attention
    was drawn to question 175 of the interview where it was noted that  the
    Appellant was crying. Counsel reminded the judge that  the  Appellant's
    age was not in dispute.  The Presenting Officer stated that she did not
    have many questions to ask the Appellant.  Nevertheless she stated that
    cross-examination was necessary and the  Appellant  was  cross-examined
    and he relied on a witness statement at the  hearing  dated  12  August
    2016.

5.   The findings of the judge are found at paragraphs 42 onwards:

         "42. I have carefully considered all the evidence before me and  in
             particular paid full regard to  the  oral  evidence  that  was
             given before me at the hearing and which is set  out  in  part
             within this determination.  I have also  carefully  considered
             the documents and the submissions made to me.


         43.  I have paid due regard to the Appellant's age at the  time  of
             the events and given  due  consideration  to  giving  him  the
             benefit of the doubt.  I have also assessed and  paid  greater
             attention to the objective evidence  in  question  bearing  in
             mind the Appellant was  still  a  minor  at  the  time.   When
             considering the benefit of the doubt I have  taken  cognisance
             of KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 00552 (IAC).


         44.  I accept the Appellant is a  national  of  Afghanistan  and  I
             accept he is a minor.  I do not however accept the Appellant's
             father was a delivery driver working for a company  associated
             with NATO.  I do not accept this for a number of  reasons.   I
             have read and re-read the Appellant's  interview  and  witness
             statements carefully.  I find the Appellant knew  very  little
             about his father's job and employment.  He did  not  know  the
             name of the company his father worked for (Q99) or  what  kind
             of company it was (Q100).  He  did  not  know  who  owned  the
             company (Q105), how many people were there (Q106) and  whether
             his father travelled with someone or alone (Q117).  I do  find
             this plausible given his father had been delivering food as  a
             lorry driver for 4-5 years (Q98).  I note the  Appellant  even
             on his own date of birth was aged at least 10-11 at the  time.
             I do not accept as plausible he would not know the name of his
             father's company or more detail about it given the  period  of
             time his father had been delivering fruit to NATO forces.


         45.  I have  considered  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  age  and
             Counsel's helpful submission that there were NATO forces based
             in Ghazni at the time.  This makes it all the more implausible
             the Appellant could not tell me these important details  about
             his father's job.  I note the Appellant was able to  give  the
             interviewing officer a lot of  information  about  Afghanistan
             including currency (Qs  60-61),  famous  landmarks  (Q67)  and
             neighbouring  cities  and  countries  (Q67  and   75).    This
             information would only be known by a child who was well versed
             in the geography and set up of his country.  I do not find  it
             plausible the  Appellant  would  do  so  well  in  remembering
             details about landmarks in Kabul and in other cities (Q67) but
             could not remember the name of his father's company.


         46.  I have also noted the inconsistent information  given  by  the
             Appellant in his accounts.  In his witness statement  he  said
             his father was arrested one and a half months before  he  fled
             Afghanistan.   He  was  delivering  food  in  Ghazni  and  was
             detained for 3 days in an unknown place where he  was  beaten.
             After his release he continued working.


         47.  In his asylum interview, he said  his  father  was  beaten  up
             severely (Q131) with scars and signs on  his  hands  and  body
             (Q132).  He was on his way to Ghazni when he was taken  (Q130)
             and not in Ghazni, which he said in  his  statement.   He  was
             kept for 3 days by the Taliban (Q134).  After his release,  he
             said his father joined back to work (Q140).  I do not find  it
             plausible that someone beaten severely with scars and signs on
             their hands and  body  would  be  able  to  go  back  to  work
             immediately upon release.


         48.  In his statement, the Appellant said some 2 weeks later he and
             his brother Abdul, along with their father were  all  arrested
             at home.  In his  interview,  he  initially  said  the  second
             arrest was a few days after his  father's  release  Q140)  and
             later on said it was between 15-20  days  after  his  father's
             release (Q142).  That is not 2 weeks.   He  said  only  the  3
             males present were taken (Q156) but made  no  mention  of  his
             other brother, who was also present (Q148).  In his  statement
             he said he was made to walk a few minutes before being put  in
             a vehicle and  being  driven  for  around  an  hour.   In  his
             interview, he was driven for a while around  one  to  one  and
             half hours and then made to walk for a 'long  walk'  (Qs  153-
             155).  This is not the same as what he  said  in  his  witness
             statement.  I am satisfied the only  reason  there  are  these
             discrepancies is because the incidents did not happen.   I  do
             not accept this is anything to do with the Appellant's age  or
             vulnerability given his witness statement was submitted before
             his asylum interview.


         49.  I also note the Appellant's time line just does  not  add  up.
             If his father's first persecution  was  one  and  half  months
             before he left and he was detained for 3 days and  then  15-20
             days later the Taleban came back and  detained  the  Appellant
             for a further 3 days that would at best amount to 26 days (3 +
             20 +3).  At Q174, the Appellant said his  father  was  stopped
             again 3-4 days after coming home (after  the  second  release)
             and that was the point at which after 2 to 3 days he  arranged
             for the Appellant to leave the country.  Even  on  a  generous
             analysis this is not one and half months prior to leaving  the
             country.


         50.  Besides these discrepancies, I do  not  find  the  Appellant's
             account plausible as a whole.  I do  not  accept  the  Taleban
             with their ruthless streak would allow the Appellant's  father
             to be released with the help of village elders and  the  allow
             him to work for another 15-20 days before they  go  and  visit
             him again at home knowing full well he had disobeyed them  and
             knowing where he lived.  I do  not  accept  as  plausible  nor
             reasonably likely the Taleban would then take him away  again,
             torture him, the Appellant and his brother  and  then  release
             his father again after some 3-4 days later.  This is even more
             implausible considering his father was a 'traitor' by  working
             with NATO and by marrying  a  Shia  thereby  being  called  an
             infidel or disbeliever (Q173).


         51.  Given the Appellant's father had disobeyed the Taleban  (on  2
             occasions) and given his background  of marrying a Shia woman,
             I do not find it plausible the Taleban would then want him  to
             join them or work for them being a disbeliever.  I do not find
             it  plausible  he  would  then  be  threatened  (after  a  3rd
             encounter - Q174).  I also do not find it plausible his  first
             concern is to get the Appellant out rather than  his  other  2
             brothers (including his brother Abdul who was  also  tortured)
             and himself or the rest of the family.  The  threat  from  the
             Taleban was to his father and not to the Appellant."


6.   For the purposes of this decision I do not intend to deal with all  the
    grounds but I will deal with two issues raised in ground 3  and  ground
    4. The judge did not  accept  that  it  would  be  plausible  that  the
    Appellant would not know the name of the company employing  his  father
    and he engaged with the issue raised in the Reasons for Refusal  Letter
    at paragraphs 44 and 45 of the decision.  However,  the  judge  made  a
    significant number of adverse credibility findings that were not raised
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter or  indeed  at  the  hearing  by  the
    Respondent.

7.   Whilst it is for the Appellant to present his case and  the  burden  of
    proof rests on him and being represented it is reasonable to expect his
    representative to identify inconsistencies in is account and to  engage
    with them, what concerns me here is that the issues taken by the  judge
    may involve a misreading of the evidence or  taking  answers  that  the
    Appellant gave in his interview  out  of  context.   At  paragraph  4.2
    (ground 3), it is argued that the judge did not take proper account  of
    all the evidence in respect of the  finding  at  paragraph  47  of  the
    decision where the judge found that it  would  not  be  plausible  that
    someone beaten severely with scars and signs on their  hands  and  body
    would be able to go back to work immediately upon release.

8.   I have considered what the  Appellant  said  about  the  issue  in  his
    asylum interview in answer to questions 140 and 142 and it is  fair  to
    say that the Appellant does not state  at  any  time  that  his  father
    returned to work immediately after his release and I do not find it was
    a reasonable inference for the judge to conclude.

9.   In relation to paragraph 4.3 (ground 3) this relates to the finding  of
    the judge at paragraph 48 relating to the second time  the  Appellant's
    father was apprehended by the Taleban (this time  with  the  Appellant)
    and the judge concludes that the evidence given  by  the  Appellant  is
    discrepant.  The judge made reference to the  Appellant's  evidence  in
    his witness statement that two weeks after the release of his father he
    was arrested, and the judge compared this to what the Appellant said in
    his interview.  Initially he said that he was arrested a few days after
    his father's release in answer to question 140 and later he said it was
    between fifteen to twenty days after his father's release in answer  to
    question 142.  However it is correct to say that in answer to  question
    142 the Appellant stated "roughly I would say between 15-20  days"  and
    the judge's finding takes the answer out of context.

10.  It is asserted at ground 4 that the judge made a material  misdirection
    in relation to the findings at paragraph 45 and the  presence  of  NATO
    forces.  Whilst it is a matter for the judge what weight to  attach  to
    the evidence, the finding that the fact that NATO forces  were  present
    in Ghazni at the material time undermines the Appellant's evidence  (as
    opposed to having corroborative value)  is  inadequately  reasoned  and
    premised on the Appellant having  forgotten  the  relevant  information
    about his father's employment, whilst his evidence was that his  father
    did not tell him the name of the company.  There are a number of  other
    issues raised in the grounds, but in my view, the cumulative impact  of
    the above errors are such that it is not necessary  for  me  to  engage
    with each and every ground.

11.    I set aside the decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal.   The
    matter will be heard afresh. No findings are preserved.



Notice of Decision

12.  The decision of the FtT is set aside. The matter  is  remitted  to  the
    FtT for a fresh hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 23 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

