
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01351/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2018                            |On 7 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AOO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Malik of Westminster Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  we  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (AOO).  A failure to comply  with
    this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State,  we  shall  for
    convenience refer to the parties as they appeared before the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Burma of Rohingya ethnicity who
    was born on [ ] 1982.  He claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom
    in 1993.  He first made an application for leave to remain outside  the
    Immigration Rules on 21 April 2008 but this was refused on  21  January
    2010.

 4.  On  5  November  2010,  the  appellant  claimed  asylum  having   been
    encountered during an immigration enforcement exercise.  That claim was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 3 December 2010 and his appeal was
    dismissed on 10 June 2010.  He was subsequently refused  permission  to
    appeal by both the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal  and  he
    became appeal rights exhausted on 3 June 2011.

 5. The appellant made further submissions  on  13  November  2012.   Those
    related to his continued claim for asylum and  humanitarian  protection
    on the basis that he was at risk on  return  to  Burma  as  a  Rohingya
    Muslim.  In addition, he relied upon Art 8 and his relationship with  a
    British citizen, Ms W.

 6. On 19 January 2017, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    international protection claim.  In addition, the  Secretary  of  State
    dismissed the appellant's claim, based primarily upon his  relationship
    with Ms W, under the relevant Immigration Rule and Art  8  outside  the
    Rules.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   Judge  Price,  who
    heard the appellant's  appeal,  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding
    against him in respect of his international protection claim.  She  was
    not satisfied that he was at risk of persecution as a  Rohingya  Muslim
    on return to Burma.  Judge Price dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on
    that basis.

 8. Judge Price went  on  to  consider  the  appellant's  claim  under  the
    relevant Rules and Art 8.  She found that the appellant had  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with Ms W, that there were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to the appellant and  Ms  W  continuing  their  family  life
    outside the UK, and that  their  circumstances  outweighed  the  public
    interest.  As a consequence, Judge Price allowed the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal principally on the basis that the judge's adverse  credibility
    finding  in  relation  to  the  appellant  was  inconsistent  with  her
    acceptance that the relationship between the appellant and Ms W  was  a
    genuine one.

10. On 8 September 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bird)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

11. The appellant did not file a Rule 24 response.

The Submissions

12. Before us, Ms Petterson, who represented the Secretary of State, relied
    upon the grounds and submitted that the  judge's  positive  finding  in
    relation to the genuineness of the relationship between  the  appellant
    and Ms W was inconsistent  with  her  adverse  credibility  finding  in
    relation to the appellant.

13. Ms Petterson also relied upon the  grounds  to  the  extent  that  they
    contend that  the  judge  failed  adequately  to  consider  the  public
    interest under s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (the "NIA Act 2002").

14. Mr Malik, who represented the appellant, submitted that the  judge  had
    been entitled to accept Ms W's evidence that the  relationship  between
    her and the appellant was a  genuine  one.   He  submitted  that  Ms  W
    believed the appellant to be genuine.  However, Mr Malik  acknowledged,
    in response to questions from the panel, that it was difficult to  find
    in the judgment any reasons why the judge accepted Ms W's  evidence  as
    to the genuineness of the relationship  (on  both  sides)  despite  the
    adverse credibility finding made in relation to the appellant.

15. Mr Malik also placed before us a skeleton argument but  that,  largely,
    seeks to argue the merits of the appellant's claim under Art 8  if  the
    relationship were, in fact, a genuine one.

Discussion

16. It is clear to us that the judge erred in law in reaching her  positive
    factual finding that the relationship between the appellant and Ms W is
    a  "genuine  and  subsisting"  one.   It  is   perhaps   obvious,   but
    nevertheless merits restating,  that  in  order  to  establish  that  a
    relationship is a  "genuine  and  subsisting"  one,  a  judge  must  be
    satisfied  that  both  parties   are   genuinely   committed   to   the
    relationship.

17. In this appeal, the judge made a strong adverse credibility finding  in
    relation to the appellant.  At para 33 she stated:

         "I do not find the Appellant to be a credible witness.  I take into
         account the adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  two  previous
         Immigration Judges".

18. The judge went on however to find Ms W to be a  reliable  and  credible
    witness.  At para 33, the judge said this:

         "By comparison I find Ms [W] to be a reliable  witness.   She  gave
         clear and detailed responses to the questions put to her.   I  find
         her evidence credible".

19. The judge did not,  however,  consider  all  of  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and Ms W to coincide.  In  relation  to  the  appellant,  the
    judge noted at para 33:

         "In addition, the Appellant's evidence differed significantly  from
         that of Ms [W's] regarding the timing of their  cohabitation.   The
         Appellant stated that it was a few days after they met, his partner
         stated it was approximately 5-6 weeks.  Further, the Appellant  was
         vague in response to cross examination  about  recent  photographs.
         Initially he stated his partner does not like to  have  photographs
         taken, and then stated that he could not find recent photographs".

20. Having comprehensively disbelieved the appellant, including identifying
    inconsistencies  in  his  evidence  with  that  of  Ms  W  about  their
    relationship, the judge nevertheless found that the relationship was  a
    "genuine and subsisting" one, in the sense  that  both  Ms  W  and  the
    appellant were genuinely in a relationship akin to marriage.

21. In our judgment, although the judge was entitled to accept Ms W's  view
    as to her belief in the genuineness of the appellant and his commitment
    to their relationship, the judge simply  failed  to  grapple  with  the
    issue of how her evidence (necessarily her belief about the appellant's
    genuineness) could overcome the judge's clear and unchallenged  finding
    that the appellant was not a witness of  truth.   Without  engaging  in
    that process, the judge was not entitled,  in  effect,  to  accept  the
    appellant's  evidence  and  to  find  that  he  was  genuinely   in   a
    relationship akin to marriage.  In the course of  his  submissions,  Mr
    Malik accepted that the judge  had  failed  to  give  reasons  why  she
    accepted that the appellant was to be believed  on  this  single  issue
    alone.   He  was,  in  our  judgment,  right  to  do  so.    In   those
    circumstances, we are satisfied that the judge erred  in  law  and  her
    decision in respect of Art 8 must be set aside.

22. Although Judge Price's decision to dismiss the appeal on the  basis  of
    asylum grounds is not challenged and must stand, we remit the appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal in order that the decision in respect of Art  8
    can be re-made.  The appeal is to be heard by a judge other than  Judge
    Price.  None of the judge's findings in respect of Art 8 are preserved.





                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                       6 March 2018

