
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01543/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    S M M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Benitez, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the First-tier Tribunal has made a similar order and
    there is invariably a concern in protection cases that publicity  might
    create a risk that would not otherwise exist.

 2. This is an appeal brought against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary
    of State refusing him  asylum.   The  appeal  has  been  challenged  by
    detailed grounds prepared by Mr James Collins of Counsel, who could not
    appear before the First-tier Tribunal Judge but who, if I may  say  so,
    has set out with commendable brevity and clarity his criticisms of  its
    decision.

 3. The point that particularly concerns me and is of itself sufficient  to
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is that the judge has
    made adverse findings contrary to points  that  were  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State.  These are encapsulated at grounds 7  and  8  where
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  criticised  because   the   judge
    criticised the appellant for not producing evidence that he  had  lived
    in Kenya when the Secretary of State accepted  that  he  had  lived  in
    Kenya.

 4. Of course the judge is  not  obliged  to  accept  any  finding  by  the
    Secretary of State but it is dangerous to depart from a finding of  the
    Secretary  of  State  without  giving  the  appellant  notice  of  that
    intention.  That did not happen here and it is quite clear to  me  that
    although the decision might be seen as a sound decision if it is looked
    at in isolation it is not legally sustainable because it  takes  points
    against the appellant that ought not to  have  been  in  issue  without
    giving notice.

 5. Nothing can be saved.  This is a decision that has to be set aside  and
    the case has to be determined again in the First-tier Tribunal  because
    the appellant is entitled to legally  sound  findings  of  fact.   That
    therefore is my decision.

    Notice of Decision

 6. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I allow the appeal to the  extent
    that I set aside its decision and direct that the appeal be heard again
    in the First-tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 November 2016               |





