
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/01166/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2nd June 2017                           |On 19th June 2017                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                    N I F
                        (aNONYMITY DIRECTION is made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Thirumaney, instructed by Shervins Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Devittie dismissing her claim for asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
    protection under the European Convention.

 2. The appellant is a national of Eritrea born on 21st  January  1985  and
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 16th September 2016 with a visit visa.
     She claimed asylum on 15th December 2016 as fearing persecution on the
    basis of her imputed political opinion.  She is exempted from  military
    service on medical grounds.  She was  employed  in  Kuwait  on  a  work
    permit from 2008 onwards and on 1st January she  travelled  to  Eritrea
    from Kuwait to visit her family and asserts she was detained  with  her
    brother on 10th January 2015, held for one night and  questioned  about
    her brother's activities.

 3. She was released on condition  that  she  would  not  leave  Keren   in
    Eritrea and was requested to report  daily.   She  did  so  until  11th
    February 2015 but then became unwell.  She developed a close friendship
    with one of the officers in charge of the office where she reported and
    he expressed his frustration at the prolonged national service and  was
    desperate to flee Eritrea.  She  therefore  collaborated  with  him  in
    leaving the country illegally via Sudan.  He assisted her by  returning
    her passport which had been seized by the authorities and with the help
    of an agent engaged by her father.  From Sudan she  took  a  flight  to
    Kuwait where she resumed her employment.  On 16th  September  2015  she
    entered the United Kingdom with a return ticket on a holiday  to  visit
    her sister.  On 10th October 2015 she was notified by her employer that
    her employment was being summarily terminated and that they would  make
    arrangements for her to return to Eritrea and she would  no  longer  be
    entitled to a work permit.

 4. She claimed asylum on 25th November 2015 and no longer  has  status  in
    Kuwait.  She claims that she would be, on return to Eritrea, persecuted
    because she had breached the conditions of her release from custody and
    had left the country illegally.  Furthermore she had  been  politically
    active against the Eritrean authorities in her Facebook activities  and
    her posts had interacted with various anti-Eritrean organisations.

 5. The grounds for permission to appeal were as follows and I set them out
    as presented by Ms Thirumaney in her oral submissions.

 6. Ground (i) the judge had applied a higher standard of proof  than  that
    required to be applied in asylum claims.  In  particular  at  paragraph
    9.1.(iv) the judge had stated

         "In my view the probabilities support the conclusion that the  fact
         that her alleged illegal exit would give her a basis for an  asylum
         claim is a matter that would most certainly have exercised her mind
         when she arrived in the United Kingdom and even when she  took  the
         decision to apply for a visa".

 7. It was submitted that the judge had therefore  applied  this  incorrect
    standard  of  probabilities  throughout  the  determination.   It   was
    submitted that the judge had dealt with the asylum  claim  as  a  whole
    applying the incorrect standard of proof and not the "reasonable degree
    of likelihood which is the lower standard applicable".

 8. Ground (ii), the judge's rejection of the core part of the  appellant's
    claim which was her detention was fundamentally flawed.  The judge  had
    stated at 9.(i)

         "She had just arrived in Eritrea, so on what possible basis one may
         ask  was  she  supposed  to  know  the  details  of  her  brother's
         activities'

    It  was  submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  in  disbelieving  the
    appellant's detention was flawed and the representative submitted  that
    the assessment was  unreasonable  because  the  authorities  would  not
    inform the appellant as to their  line  of  inquiries  that  they  were
    pursuing in an investigation".

    The appellant's statement at  paragraph  12  identified  that  she  was
    questioned to ascertain whether she knew anything about her brother and
    forced to report. Her interview record identified at question  37  that
    she was not given reasons for the arrest but "they kept asking about my
    brother's activities and what I know and what he was  doing".   It  was
    submitted that the judge's findings in rejecting the core part  of  the
    appellant's  claim  was  contrary  to  the  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant.  It clearly stated that the authority  interrogated  her  to
    obtain information about her brother's political activities and ordered
    her to report and not to leave Keren or Eritrea.  The only person in  a
    position to answer regarding the Eritrean inquiries  was  the  Eritrean
    authorities themselves.  The evidence provided  was  that  the  brother
    would speak about politics and was not happy with  the  government  and
    the indefinite slavery service.

 9. Ground (iii) was in relation to the circumstances  of  the  appellant's
    asylum claim.   The  judge  dealt  with  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to her illegal exit and the termination of her employment in a
    cursory manner.  The Home Office in their refusal at court accepted the
    appellant was credible in respect of her employment and the termination
    of her employment.  The decision did not explain why  the  judge  found
    against the appellant in respect of the  circumstances  of  her  asylum
    claim in the UK.  The determination was confusing and contrary  to  the
    evidence presented on a  material  matter  and  there  was  a  lack  of
    clarity.

10. Ground (iv), there were a  lack  of  findings  as  to  the  appellant's
    father's detention in Eritrea.  The appellant gave details  in  respect
    of the father's detention in Eritrea  after  the  appellant  failed  to
    report but this was not considered at  all.   At  paragraph  9  of  the
    appellant's statement she stated that after she  failed  to  report  on
    12th February 2015 the police  raided  her  house  and  questioned  her
    father about her whereabouts.  The father was detained  by  the  police
    for a month and he denied having any knowledge about her.   The  father
    was afraid to pass information over the phone as he was afraid that the
    phone was bugged.  Contact had been reduced so that she did  not  cause
    him further problem.

11. Ground (v), there were a lack of findings  on  the  appellant's  travel
    documents and illegal exit from Eritrea.  The judge  failed  to  attach
    any weight at all to the  various  documentary  evidence  submitted  to
    prove the appellant travelled illegally out of Eritrea in February 2015
    and resume work with an employer on a later date since she was detained
    in Eritrea.  The appellant explained that she  had  no  choice  but  to
    claim asylum as her employment was terminated.  She  provided  detailed
    evidence in respect of her travels and the tickets and travel itinerary
    were pivotal evidence presented by the appellant to prove her entry and
    illegal exit out of Eritrea and  which  confirm  that  she  delayed  in
    reporting back to work in Kuwait by a month since she was  detained  in
    Eritrea.

12. Ground (vi), the judge's  consideration  of  the  appellant's  Facebook
    activities is flawed and the judge failed  to  consider  the  following
    factors presented in respect of her Facebook.  The judge discarded  the
    appellant's evidence merely due to a slight difference in the spelling.
     The spelling may differ but the sound of the name  was  still  similar
    and her photos were all over her Facebook account and all over  posting
    in her Facebook account and the postings related to  the  Human  Rights
    situation in Eritrea.  The Facebook was the demonstration that she  was
    against regime and critical of all  the  unfairness  and  human  rights
    abuses.   She had shared posts with many anti-Eritrean regime  websites
    such as Asmarino and Assenna.

13. In submissions Ms Thirumaney emphasised that the judge  had  applied  a
    higher standard of proof and  the  assessment  had  not  shown  anxious
    scrutiny.   The  judge  had  not  taken  into  account  the  background
    evidence.  The only body  in  the  position  to  answer  the  questions
    regarding  the  Eritrean  authorities  was  the  Eritrean   authorities
    themselves.  In relation to the sequence  of  events  the  Home  Office
    letter had accepted the employment of the appellant in Kuwait and  that
    she was unable to return.  The judge's findings lacked clarity.   There
    was a lack of findings in relation to the appellant leaving Eritrea  in
    January 2015 and the appellant had presented her travel itinerary.  She
    was detained on 10th January and there were details of her  fleeing  to
    Sudan which were crucial pieces of evidence and had shown she  had  not
    pre-planned claim.  The appellant had previously been in the UK in 2013
    but had not claimed  asylum  at  that  point.   The  judge  had  placed
    insufficient weight on that matter.

14. Nowhere had the judge considered the father's detention.  The  Facebook
    activity had only been dealt with cursorily.  Albeit that her name  was
    spelt incorrectly there were photographs and postings;  the  judge  had
    not considered the Facebook activity.

15. Mr Nath in response confirmed that the judge had  applied  the  correct
    standard of proof and  this  was  clear  from  the  determination.   In
    relation to the questioning the judge was entitled to make the findings
    that he did.  It was a finding about the appellant's statement and  the
    findings on aspects of the Eritrean authorities' views was open to him.



16. In relation to the third ground there was  a  clear  treatment  of  the
    sequence of events at 9.(iii) and nothing in it was  unclear.   It  had
    systematically set out  the  evidence  and  9.(iv)  was  a  credibility
    finding.  The judge clearly found that the appellant was  complicit  in
    relation to the termination of the employment.

17. The judge had addressed the flight itinerary and had looked at all  the
    evidence when coming to his conclusions.

18. The lack of reference to detention of the father was covered by  virtue
    of the judge having looked at the evidence in the round.  The judge had
    considered the core aspects of the claim and rejected them.  The  judge
    had not ignored the issue of the brother and had taken it into account.



19. In relation to the Facebook activity the judge had merely  stated  that
    there was a misspelling and that was a full answer to the criticism.

Conclusions

20. I will deal with each of the criticisms of the  determination  as  they
    are made in my conclusions.

21. It is quite clear that the judge referred to the country guidance of MO
    (illegal exit  risk  on  return)  Eritrea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00190   at
    paragraph  7,  identifying  that  it  has  become  more  difficult  for
    Eritreans to obtain lawful exit from  Eritrea.   The  judge  was  fully
    aware having cited from the head note  that  the  Eritrean  authorities
    continue to envisage lawful exit as being  possible  only  for  certain
    categories  of  people.   He  also  recorded  that  the  appellant  had
    confirmed that she  was  exempted  from  military  service  on  medical
    grounds.  The judge did note that at paragraph (v)  of  the  head  note
    that

         "Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum seekers  as
         such are not generally at real risk of persecution or serious  harm
         on return on present evidence the great majority  of  such  persons
         are likely to be perceived as having left illegally and  this  fact
         save for very limited exceptions will mean that on return they face
         a real risk of persecution or serious harm".

22. However on reading the decision as a whole the judge did not accept her
    claimed arrest,  and  did  not  accept  that  she  had  therefore  left
    illegally.

23. In relation to  ground  (i)  the  judge  clearly  directed  himself  at
    paragraph 7, stating "in considering this appeal I bear in mind that it
    is for the appellant to establish that there is a reasonable degree  of
    likelihood that she would suffer persecution for a Convention reason if
    she is returned to Eritrea".

24. At paragraph 91 the judge declared that he had applied  close  scrutiny
    to the evidence of the appellant and  found  that  there  were  factors
    which were sufficiently significant in his view to "seriously undermine
    the core of her evidence".  It should be noted that  the  core  of  the
    appellant's evidence was that she  was  detained  in  Eritrea  and  had
    exited illegally.  That is clearly something that  the  judge  did  not
    accept and for which he gave sound reasons and it is  evident  that  he
    applied the correct standard of proof.  Although the judge referred  to
    "the probabilities when referring to  the  illegal  exit  at  paragraph
    9.(iv)",  to my mind this is merely shorthand for the  clear  direction
    that the judge gave himself a matter of paragraphs before applying  it.
    I am not persuaded that there was incorrect application of the  burden
    of proof. The judge was clear that the  claim  was  fabricated  on  the
    totality of the evidence.

25. In response  ground (ii), that the judge's rejection of the  core  part
    of the appellant's  claim  was  fundamentally  flawed,  the  judge  was
    clearly aware of the evidence of the appellant as he set out  the  oral
    evidence at paragraph 5(i) to (ii).  The judge noted that her claim was
    that the sole reason  for  her  arrest  was  the  authorities  wish  to
    question her to obtain details about  her  brother's  exact  activities
    (she had undertaken none  herself)  and  the  judge  at  the  close  of
    paragraph 9.1.(i) made a series of questions  to  be  answered.   Those
    questions may be irrelevant but  the  judge  rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence for the reasons given at 9.1.(ii) which  was  that  in  cross-
    examination the appellant's evidence

         "As to what she was questioned about in relation to  her  brother's
         activities I found to be entirely unsatisfactory.  She  was  unable
         to give any detail as to what it is that was  the  subject  of  the
         authorities' inquiry and adverse interest in her  brother.   Surely
         it cannot be the case that they arrested her to  ask  if  she  knew
         anything adverse about her brother's activities, without having any
         specific inquiry to pursue".

26. Although the second part of that paragraph would seem to be superfluous
    and comment by the judge as to  the  appellant  whether  the  appellant
    professed to have  knowledge  or  not,  the  fact  is  that  the  judge
    criticised the appellant's account of her detention and the questioning
    that  she  underwent  at  the  hands  of   the   Eritrean   authorities
    specifically noting that she was unable to detail any specific  inquiry
    at all.  This the judge found not credible and this was a finding which
    was entirely open to him.  This section repays careful reading  because
    on first blush it would appear that the judge is merely  rejecting  the
    appellant's evidence on the basis that the Eritrean  authorities  would
    arrest, detain and  question  her.   That,  however,  is  not  the  key
    criticism made by the judge of the appellant's evidence, more that  she
    was clearly  unable  to  give  details  as  to  her  questioning.   The
    references to her statement in all the interviews do not in  fact  take
    the matter further and elicit the detail which was not forthcoming  and
    thus supporting of her credibility.

27. It was this account  of  the  appellant's  detention  which  the  judge
    clearly found seminal in his rejection of her claim.  It was not merely
    the purpose of the Eritrean authorities reason for the detention, which
    the judge clearly understood, but as I state the detail therein.

28. In relation to ground (iii) and the criticism of the judge's  appraisal
    of the background information and relating to her employment, that  the
    appellant had travelled to the UK in the past and was in employment for
    Kuwait for seven years did  not  necessarily  mean  that  she  was  not
    prepared to fabricate a claim for asylum.  There may  be  many  reasons
    for the  work  terminating  in  Kuwait.   The  judge  set  out  why  he
    considered the 'coincidences' to be unbelievable, not least the  timing
    of her application to visit the UK if she knew she had  exited  Eritrea
    illegally.  The decision is clear in this respect and the judge did not
    accept the account the  appellant  gave  because  of  the  timings  and
    coincidences as well as the context of the evidence.

29. The judge did accept that termination of her  employment  had  occurred
    but did not accept that the appellant was not  complicit  in  order  to
    strengthen the basis of her claim and after  rehearsing  the  evidence.
    The judge did dispute the reason for the  termination  and  that  is  a
    credibility finding, which as Mr Nath pointed out is open to the  judge
    and which he came to on a general review of the evidence. It cannot  be
    said in relation to the judge's findings of the sequences of events  at
    9.(iii) that they were outwith the findings of the judge who found them
    "striking  and  convenient  coincidences".   Nor  is  this  lacking  in
    clarity; the judge set out  why  he  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    explanation for or interpretation of the facts as they were presented.

30. As Mr Nath pointed out it is a clear sequence of events and is set  out
    systematically.

31. Ground (iv) was a challenge that the judge had failed to  consider  the
    detention of the father.  The judge clearly considered the evidence  in
    the round and considered the core of  the  appellant's  claim.   It  is
    significant that although the appellant claimed that she was in limited
    contact with her father, there was no witness  statement  on  file  and
    nothing more than  the  appellant's  general  assertions,  rather  than
    specific evidence.  I find that albeit the judge failed to mention  the
    detention of the father this was not a material error  of  law  in  the
    light of the overall findings made.

32. Ground (v) in relation to the  lack  of  findings  on  the  appellant's
    travel itinerary, the judge confirmed at paragraph 8 that the appellant
    had indeed produced travel tickets to Eritrea as well as of her  flight
    from Sudan to Kuwait.  The judge  at  paragraph  8  clearly  noted  the
    submissions of  the  appellant's  representatives  such  that  she  had
    delayed in her return to Kuwait from Eritrea and of her trip  to  Sudan
    and her travel itinerary and identified that he would bear this in mind
    when assessing the credibility of the evidence.  That is what he did in
    the examination of the evidence in paragraphs 9 and 10.

33. It is clear that the judge at 9.(v) found that the appellant  chose  to
    leave Eritrea when she was in possession  of  a  valid  passport.   The
    judge specifically found that the appellant's  evidence  that  she  was
    able to retrieve her passport through collaboration with an official to
    whom she was reporting was evidence which was wholly contrived and that
    she had not left Eritrea illegally.

34. The judge did specifically address the issue of  the  flight  itinerary
    and stated that he was satisfied having regard to the "totality of  the
    evidence that the appellant was not arrested and that  this  aspect  of
    her claim was fabricated".  It followed therefore, as  he  found,  that
    her claim to have left illegally was also a fabrication.  "She  was  in
    possession of a valid passport, there was no adverse  interest  by  the
    authorities in her and she had no reason therefore to leave Eritrea  in
    the manner that she claimed".

35. Indeed  that  someone  has  a  flight  itinerary  via  Sudan  does  not
    necessarily reveal its purpose, and the flight evidence was taken  into
    account.  As identified earlier in  the  decision  the  judge  did  not
    accept that the former employer  and  the  appellant  were  not  acting
    together.

36. The judge overall has given  an  adequacy  of  reasons  and  as  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC) sets out

      'Although there is a legal duty to give a  brief  explanation  of  the
      conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is  determined,
      those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a  whole  makes
      sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.. '

      That is the case here.

37. In response to the final ground (vi) and the findings  in  relation  to
    the Facebook the judge c at 10(vii) stated that he did not accept  that
    the Facebook page had come to the attention of the authorities  and  as
    pointed out in the reasons for refusal letter the Facebook page did not
    correctly spell her name.  The appellant maintains that her name  could
    be identified  nonetheless.   The  judge  did  not  accept  that.   The
    spelling is axiomatic in locating someone under Facebook and this  does
    not connect the appellant with her true name.  The argument in relation
    to pronunciation goes nowhere.  The judge's findings  in  this  respect
    were therefore adequate on whether or not the appellant has posted anti-
    authority information.

38. As the judge pointed out she personally did not express  any  views  on
    that page and she has not previously been the subject  of  any  adverse
    interest in Eritrea and did not have a  profile  that  the  authorities
    would have an interest in.

39. On a careful reading of this determination  I  am  not  satisfied  that
    there is any material error of law and the decision shall stand.
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family. This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed           Helen Rimington             Date 16th June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
