
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01165/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 February 2018                       |On 09 March 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     D G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel, instructed by Tuckers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against a decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Talbot (the judge), promulgated on 25 May 2017, by which
    he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  That appeal was in
    fact a rehearing following a decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  set
    aside a previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit.

 2. In essence the Appellant's claim had always been put on the basis  that
    his family was engaged in a blood feud in Albania and that he would  be
    at risk on return to that country as a result.

The judge's decision

 3. The judge makes a number of adverse credibility findings.   In  summary
    these are as follows.  The Appellant had been  vague  in  describing  a
    trip out of Albania in 2014 to  Italy,  France  and  Germany.   He  had
    failed to explain why his passport did not include re-entry stamps when
    he allegedly went back to his  country  in  2014.   The  Appellant  had
    previously lied in respect of one  element  of  his  protection  claim,
    seeking to blame this on a previous solicitor.

 4. By virtue of the adverse credibility  findings  and  on  the  basis  of
    evidence adduced by the Respondent on the day of the hearing (emanating
    from the British Embassy in Tirana), the judge found that the Appellant
    had in fact left Albania in February 2014 and had never  returned.   In
    turn, this put a large hole in his protection claim given that  he  had
    asserted to have been in Albania in 2015 when the blood feud  was  said
    to have been triggered.

 5. In addition, the judge found that the Appellant's father had been  able
    to live safely in Albania and that his brother  had  returned  to  that
    country on several occasions without experiencing problems.  Therefore,
    although the judge accepted that  there  had  been  a  protracted  land
    dispute between the Appellant's family and another,  it  was  concluded
    that there was no live blood feud.  Article 8 is dealt with briefly and
    is said not to assist the Appellant.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The application for permission was initially refused by the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and then by the Upper Tribunal.  A  judicial  review  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's refusal of permission was lodged and Mr Justice Walker
    granted permission on 16 October 2017.

 7. In his decision he stated that he was particularly concerned  that  the
    First-tier may have failed to deal with crucial arguments  advanced  on
    the Appellant's behalf at the hearing. In addition, he  referred  to  a
    particular document (to which I will return  below)  that  appeared  to
    support the Appellant's claim to have been in  Albania  in  2015.   The
    judge commented that this document did not appear to  have  been  dealt
    with at all, or at least  not  adequately  addressed  at  the  hearing.
    Following the grant  of  permission  a  Master  in  the  Queen's  Bench
    Division  quashed  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to   refuse
    permission to  appeal.   Subsequent  to  this  Vice-President  Ockelton
    granted permission to appeal. In this way the matter came before me.

    The hearing before me

 8. Ms Akinbolu referred to the document mentioned by Mr Justice Walker  in
    his grant of permission  in  the  judicial  review  proceedings.   This
    document is contained at page 80 of the Appellant's original bundle. It
    purports  to  be  a  certificate  from  an  educational   establishment
    confirming the Appellant's  attendance  on  a  course  in  the  country
    between 2014 and 2015. It was submitted that the  document  had  simply
    not been dealt with by the judge.  He  clearly  found  the  Appellant's
    credibility to be significantly damaged on the basis that he  had  been
    out of the country when he said he had been  within  it.   The  judge's
    failure to deal with the document at page 80 was a material error.

 9. Ms Akinbolu submitted that the  judge's  findings  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's father and brother were erroneous, as was his conclusion on
    the issue of protection, particularly in light of the country  guidance
    in EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC). In  respect  of
    the evidence surrounding the trip to Italy,  France  and  Germany,  the
    judge had failed to take account of the Appellant's young  age  at  the
    time.

10. As regards the stamps  in  the  passport  and  the  document  from  the
    Embassy, Ms Akinbolu submitted that this evidence  had  to  be  weighed
    against that contained in page 80 of the bundle.  The  judge  had  only
    had regard to the Embassy evidence  and  had  said  nothing  about  the
    Appellant's educational certificate.

11. Mr Kotas made the point that the  Appellant's  representative  had  not
    sought an adjournment at the hearing before the judge even  though  the
    evidence from the Embassy had only been provided on the day.  There was
    no evidence from the Appellant's  side  as  to  the  practices  of  the
    Albanian authorities in respect of stamping  passports  upon  re-entry.
    The judge was entitled to take into account those factors that he did.

12. In respect of the document at page 80,  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the
    judge was aware of it (there was reference  to  this  document  in  the
    Record of Proceedings).  This was the only  evidence  coming  from  the
    Appellant's side.  Mr Kotas commented that the document itself  was  of
    fairly poor quality.  It was said that on any view the judge was  bound
    to have rejected the value of the document even  if  he  had  expressly
    dealt with it in his decision.  In other words,  the  failure  to  deal
    with the document was immaterial. Mr  Kotas  also  submitted  that  the
    other matters taken into account by the judge,  such  as  the  father's
    presence in Albania and the brother's visits, were matters to which  he
    was entitled to have regard and place weight upon.

13. In reply Ms Akinbolu accepted that no adjournment had been  sought  but
    observed that the document at page 80 was the Appellant's  evidence  as
    to his presence in Albania in 2015, and that this fell to be  expressly
    considered in addition to the evidence coming from the British Embassy.

14. At the end of submissions I reserved my  decision  on  whether  or  not
    there were material errors of law in the judge's decision.

Decision on error of law

15. This has not been an easy case to decide.  I have of course  looked  at
    the judge's decision as a whole.  I have also borne in mind that judges
    are not expected to deal with each and every  aspect  of  the  evidence
    placed before them.

16. Here, there are certain matters in respect of which  I  find  that  the
    judge has not erred.  In particular, the judge  was  entitled  to  take
    into account the older brother's visits to Albania, the fact  that  the
    brother has had his own passport stamped on re-entry, and, perhaps only
    just, that the father had remained living in the  family  home  without
    having experienced any particular difficulties.

17. However, there  is,  I  conclude,  a  material  error  in  the  judge's
    assessment of the evidence.  He has failed to address  the  certificate
    from the Olof Palme International Centre at page 80 of the  Appellant's
    original bundle.  That document was  clearly  brought  to  the  judge's
    attention, as is clear from the Record of Proceedings.   On  its  face,
    the document appears to place the Appellant in Albania between May 2014
    and March 2015. This of course is in contrast to the  judge's  findings
    that the Appellant left the country in February 2014, never to  return.
    That finding by the judge was based on a number of  factors  and  these
    may have been open to the judge to take into  account  as  part  of  an
    overall assessment.

18. Having said that, the assessment  also  required  him  to  address  the
    document at page 80.  It was clearly a potentially material  aspect  of
    the evidence adduced by the Appellant.  In the face of the  last-minute
    evidence  from  the  Embassy,  that  document  took  on  a   particular
    significance (at least potentially).

19. The central problem is that the judge has simply failed to address this
    evidence in any way.

20. Mr Kotas submits that this failure is immaterial because the judge was,
    on any view, bound to find  as  he  ultimately  did,  namely  that  the
    Appellant did in fact leave Albania finally in February 2014.

21. I disagree.  It is true that the factors  against  the  Appellant  were
    fairly strong.  On the  other  side  of  the  scales,  the  certificate
    appears to come  from  a  genuine  source  and  appears  to  place  the
    Appellant in Albania between  2014  and  2015.   There  is  nothing  so
    obviously suspicious about the document that it is clear that no weight
    could ever be placed upon it.  In my view it simply cannot be said that
    the judge was bound to have reached the conclusion that he did even  if
    the relevant document had been expressly dealt with in the decision.

22. The failure is material, not simply on the  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    whereabouts between 2014 and 2015, but also because the judge has quite
    clearly relied upon his  finding  on  the  Appellant's  whereabouts  as
    significantly  undermining  the  protection  claim  as  a  whole   (see
    paragraphs 21, 22 and 27).  Therefore, it cannot be said that the issue
    of the Appellant's whereabouts is self-contained or otherwise of little
    importance to the outcome of the appeal as a whole.

23. In this regard I would observe that there is merit to  the  Appellant's
    challenge to the judge's conclusion that  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection in respect of blood feuds in Albania.  On the  face  of  it,
    this conclusion does appear to run contrary to the guidance set out  in
    EH.

24. For the reasons set out above and with a  degree  of  reluctance  given
    this appeal's history, I conclude that there is a material error of law
    in the judge's decision and I set it aside.

Disposal

25. I canvassed the question of what should happen with this case if I were
    to conclude that there were material errors of law.  There were factors
    for and against remittal.  Neither representative  had  a  particularly
    strong view one way or another.

26. I bear in mind the understandable desire on  the  Appellant's  part  to
    have his case finally determined expeditiously and the fact  that  this
    case has already been looked at  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  two
    occasions. On the other hand, this appeal clearly involves  significant
    credibility issues, none of which had been conceded by  the  Respondent
    before me.

27. Taking matters as a whole and having regard to paragraph  17.2  of  the
    Practice Statement, I have decided to remit this case to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a complete rehearing in respect of the protection claim.

28. It was agreed before me that Article 8 was not being pursued.

29. There are no  preserved  findings  of  fact.   I  will  issue  relevant
    directions to the First-tier Tribunal, below.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed:    [pic]                     Dated: 7 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor







Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

 1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  no  preserved
    findings of fact;

 2) The remitted appeal shall not be heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    Talbot and Herbert;

 3) Article 8 is no longer being pursued;

 4) In respect of the protection claim findings will have  to  be  made  in
    respect of, amongst other matters,

 i) whether the Appellant returned to Albania after leaving the country  in
    February 2014,

ii) the existence of a land dispute between the Appellant's family and  the
    opposing family,

iii) whether this dispute turned into a blood feud at any stage,

iv) the ability of the Appellant's father to live in the  family  home  and
    the Appellant's brother to visit Albania on a number of occasions since
    the feud was allegedly instigated,

 v) whether the Appellant himself is now a genuine target in respect of the
    alleged feud;

vi) whether, if the Appellant is a  target,  he  could  receive  sufficient
    state protection and/or internally relocate.
