


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/01070/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 September 2017            |On 2 October 2017               |
|Prepared on 27 September 2017   |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    M. K.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Solicitor, IAC Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant claimed asylum on 23 June 2015, having entered the
           UK lawfully as a student in September 2011. That application was
           refused on 19 January 2016,  although  she  was  granted  twelve
           months discretionary leave to remain in order to  allow  her  to
           give evidence against her ex-husband at his trial  upon  charges
           of rape and assault. He was acquitted  by  a  jury  of  all  the
           charges on 6 September 2016.
        2. The Appellant's upgrade appeal to the Tribunal was heard  on  14
           December 2016 and it was dismissed by  decision  of  First  tier
           Tribunal Judge Monaghan promulgated on 6 January 2017.
        3. The Appellant was granted permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal on 9 May 2017 by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson.  The
           Respondent filed a Rule 24 notice on 25 May 2017 in response  to
           that grant of permission, opposing it.  Thus  the  matter  comes
           before me.


      Error of Law?
        4. When the appeal was called on for  hearing  Ms  Rogers  accepted
           that the key issue was whether the Appellant could reasonably be
           expected to internally relocate to avoid the risk of  harm  that
           the Judge had accepted on the lower standard of proof  that  she
           faced from her ex-husband and members of his family.
        5. Neither  representative  had  brought  copies  of  the  relevant
           current country guidance decision for the hearing,  but  when  I
           obtained them, Ms Rogers accepted that AR & NH (lesbians)  India
           CG [2016] UKUT 66 did not assist the Appellant's case. It is  of
           concern that neither party appears to have brought that decision
           to the attention of the Judge, who makes no reference to  it  in
           his own decision.
        6. It was accepted by Ms Rogers that the Appellant did not claim to
           face a risk of harm from her own family, and that her  claim  to
           have been rejected  by  her  own  family  as  a  result  of  the
           breakdown of her marriage had been  rejected  by  the  Judge  as
           untrue. The grounds of the application for permission offered no
           challenge to that finding of fact.
        7. Although Ms Rogers advanced  before  me  an  argument  that  the
           Appellant as a woman would be unable to access any redress  from
           the legal system in India, and as a  woman  would  automatically
           lose custody of her child in favour of her ex-husband,  she  was
           unable to identify any evidence that was placed before the Judge
           that would substantiate that argument. Once I had  gone  through
           the evidence that had been filed on behalf of the Appellant  for
           the hearing before the FtT, she accepted that the evidence  that
           had been relied upon consisted solely of  material  relevant  to
           the manner in which Indian society viewed, and responded to, the
           problems of  marital  rape  and  domestic  violence.  I  am  not
           satisfied that the current country guidance decisions for  India
           offer any material support for that argument either, and  indeed
           Ms Rogers, accepted that they did not.
        8. It is not suggested that the Judge made any material mistake  in
           his analysis of the Appellant's  circumstances  upon  return  to
           India [57]. As he noted she has worked in the past in India as a
           tutor, and she now has the benefit of both a UK degree, and work
           experience in the UK. No doubt her fluency in English  is   much
           improved as a result of the length  of  time  she  has  studied,
           worked and lived in the UK. It was entirely open to the Judge to
           conclude on the evidence before  him  that  notwithstanding  the
           fact that she would be a young single woman with a child she was
           equipped to find suitable well paid employment that would  allow
           her to support herself and her child, were she to locate herself
           in one of the major cities in India. On his  findings  she  also
           had the support of her family available to her, and it was up to
           her whether she availed  herself  of  that.  That  approach  was
           entirely consistent with the guidance to be found  in  AR  &  NH
           even if that decision was not itself referred to by the Judge.
        9. The Appellant's ex-husband is said to be in the UK, although  he
           is not understood to have any  immigration  status  in  the  UK.
           Recently (and certainly since the promulgation  of  the  Judge's
           decision) it is said by Ms  Rogers  that  he  has  now  made  an
           application to the Family Court for contact with his  son.  That
           was information that was not before the Judge, and indeed  there
           is still no evidence to that effect, as opposed  to  Ms  Rogers'
           current instructions. The Judge cannot be criticised for failing
           to deal with this information, since he did not have it, and  it
           discloses no error of law in his decision.
       10. Even if there has now been made an  application  to  the  Family
           Court for contact to the Appellant's son, that fact would not of
           itself prevent the removal of the Appellant and her  child  from
           the UK by the Respondent. As set out above the  current  country
           guidance upon India offers no support for the  proposition  that
           the Appellant would be denied access to justice in India through
           the Indian legal system in the event of an attempt being made in
           the future by  her  ex-husband  to  obtain  either  contact,  or
           custody, of their child.
       11. In the circumstances it is plain that the  grounds  identify  no
           arguable material error of law. The Judge's decision to  dismiss
           the appeal must therefore stand.

   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  6
      January 2017 did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 27 September 2017


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 27 September 2017
