
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01915/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 May 2016                            | On 6 June 2016                  |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Davison of Counsel, instructed by Aston Bond
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Quinn promulgated on 21 March 2016 in which he dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    grant asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum case I have made an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds of application contend that the judge did  not  detail  in
    the decision why the appellant's explanations on  a  number  of  points
    were not accepted.  In particular the appellant had  explained  why  he
    did not claim asylum in other countries as  he  was  under  the  strict
    control of an agent.  He had explained that the work carried out by him
    for the military base did not  generate  paperwork.   In  addition  the
    judge had speculated that the Taliban might have secured  the  rear  of
    the premises, ignoring the fact that the incident occurred at night and
    hence his ability to flee over the roof tops.  Other points are taken.


    Plainly the judge was bound to have regard to all the explanations  put
    forward by the appellant and if he wished to reject  that  evidence  to
    give reasons for doing so. From information given in the grounds, it is
    arguable that he did not do so and on that basis there is  an  arguable
    error of law and permission to appeal is granted."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I  announced  that  I  found  that  the
    decision involved the making of a material error of law,  and  that  my
    full reasons would follow.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Davison relied on the grounds of appeal.  He  referred  me  to  the
    findings of credibility  and  fact,  paragraphs  [24]  onwards  of  the
    decision.  In paragraph [24] the judge had found that the Appellant had
    not suggested that  he  was  at  risk  of  harm  from  the  Taliban  in
    Afghanistan or Pakistan when he applied to enter the United Kingdom  on
    7 February 2014.  I was then referred to paragraph [40] where the judge
    states: "The Appellant states that the first threat he received was  on
    6th September 2014."  It was submitted that the judge had  on  the  one
    hand found against the Appellant for failing to mention in  an  earlier
    application that he was at any risk of harm, yet the judge acknowledges
    that the first threat the Appellant claimed to have received  was  some
    eight months after the application.  These findings were  not  coherent
    or logical.


 6. In paragraph [25] the judge referred to the fact that the Appellant had
    passed through a number of safe countries.  The judge then  states:  "I
    could take account  of  the  fact  that  he  had  passed  through  safe
    countries", but he does not state whether or not he is finding  against
    the  Appellant  for  this.   It  was  unclear  whether  the  section  8
    credibility point had been considered.


 7. I was referred to paragraph [28].   The  Appellant  had  explained  the
    difficulty in obtaining documents, but no account  had  been  taken  of
    this.  In paragraph  [30]  the  judge  accepted  that  there  would  be
    difficulties for the Appellant in verifying some of the information and
    found that the Respondent would have  slightly  better  success  in  so
    doing.  However the judge  then  threw  it  back  onto  the  Appellant,
    stating that the onus was on him to establish his case, and holding  it
    against him that he had not obtained this information.


 8. I was referred to paragraphs [33] and [34]  regarding  the  Appellant's
    job title.  Submissions had been made  at  the  hearing  regarding  the
    Appellant's job.  The Appellant's  work  of  procurement  had  involved
    interpretation as it involved him speaking to the local people  as  his
    American colleagues were unable to speak to them.  Although he was  not
    an  interpreter,  and   his   employment   contract   did   not   state
    "interpreter", his job involved a level of interpreting.  There was  no
    reference to this in the decision.


 9. I was referred to paragraph [39] where the judge  states  that  it  was
    "possible" that the Taliban did know where the Appellant  was  working.
    He submitted that if it  was  possible  then  there  was  a  reasonable
    likelihood.  I was referred to paragraph [43] where the judge said that
    the letters could have been produced  on  the  internet,  but  made  no
    finding as to whether or not they had been.   He  submitted  that  this
    was an example of an issue which had been left hanging.


10. In summary Mr. Davison submitted that there were many contradictions in
    the decision.  Very rarely had the judge come down on one side  or  the
    other with any degree of certainty.  There was no logical thread to the
    decision, and inadequate reasons  had  been  given  for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's explanations.


11. In response Mr. Kandola relied on the Rule 24 response.  The judge  had
    doubted the Appellant's credibility for the reasons given.  He did  not
    need to consider relocation at all as he had not found the Appellant to
    be credible.  He accepted that the Rule 24 response was  wrong  insofar
    as it was not  accepted  or  maintained  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellant would be returned to Pakistan.


12. In relation to internal relocation Mr. Davison submitted that,  if  the
    Appellant had been accepted as working as an interpreter, the case  law
    on interpreters would be relevant.  His job title  stated  "procurement
    officer" but the actual role that he took on was very much like that of
    an interpreter.  The  Respondent  had  accepted  that  he  had  been  a
    procurement officer and what this entailed had been glossed over in the
    determination by the judge.  It would become hard for the Respondent to
    argue that internal relocation was possible if the Appellant were found
    to have been an interpreter.


Error of Law


13. The judge's findings of credibility and fact start at  paragraph  [24].
    Findings regarding the documentary evidence are at paragraphs  [43]  to
    [53].  I have carefully considered these paragraphs, and  I  find  that
    the decision is not logically  coherent,  nor  is  it  clear  from  the
    decision what the judge's findings are.   I  was  referred  to  various
    examples of this lack of clarity  by  Mr.  Davison  (see  above).   For
    example, in paragraph [24] the judge finds that the Appellant  had  not
    mentioned in an earlier application that he was at any  risk  of  harm.
    However, it is clear from paragraph [40] that the application was  made
    eight months prior to the first threat that the  Appellant  claimed  to
    have received.  The judge appears to have taken against  the  Appellant
    for his failure to mention earlier that he was at risk, but in fact the
    Appellant's claim was that the problems had not started at this point.


14. The findings in relation to where the Appellant was living are  working
    are not at all clear.  In paragraph [31]  the  judge  states  that  the
    Respondent had accepted that the Appellant had worked for a  number  of
    international funded projects in Afghanistan.   He  finds  that,  given
    that the Respondent accepted this, it was not likely that the Appellant
    had been living in Pakistan since 2006.  In paragraph  [49]  the  judge
    states  that  the  Appellant  had  been  inconsistent   regarding   his
    addresses.  In paragraph [50] he states  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    stated that he was living in Afghanistan, but that he would have had to
    have been living there to be working there.  He states "This cast doubt
    upon whether he was actually working as he said".


15. Despite these statements regarding alleged inconsistencies, there is no
    clear finding as to when and where the Appellant was living and,  given
    that the judge states that the Respondent accepted that  the  Appellant
    was working for the international funded projects, it is unclear why he
    judge finds  in  paragraph  [50]  that  there  is  doubt  cast  on  the
    Appellant's claim to have been working as he said.  The judge has  made
    no findings as to what the Appellant was actually doing,  or  where  he
    was living, and when. The findings  on  these  central  issues  of  the
    Appellant's location and employment are inadequate and unclear.


16. Further, as submitted by Mr. Davison, there  is  no  reference  to  the
    explanation given by the Appellant for the  fact  that  there  were  no
    letters  from  "US  Aid"  and  "US  Army  Kitchen".   The  failure   to
    acknowledge that the Appellant had explained in some detail  why  there
    would be no such letters, and the failure to give reasons for why  this
    failure to provide documents was taken against him, is an error of law.
     This is especially the case given  the  judge's  acknowledgement  that
    there would  be  difficulties  for  the  Appellant  in  verifying  this
    information, and that it would have been easier for the  Respondent  to
    do so.


17. Taking the decision as a whole, it is very difficult to establish  what
    the judge's findings are in relation to issues which go to the core  of
    the Appellant's  claim.   The  issue  of  whether  or  not  he  was  an
    interpreter is addressed in paragraphs [32] to [35], yet  there  is  no
    clear  finding  as  to  what  his   role   involved.    There   is   no
    acknowledgement of the submissions  made  before  the  judge  that  the
    Appellant's procurement officer role  took  on  the  appearance  of  an
    interpreter.  I find that, given the significance of whether or not the
    Appellant worked as an interpreter, the reasoning in paragraphs [32] to
    [35] is inadequate.


18. Throughout the decision the judge uses phrases such as "I did not think
    that he was", "it is possible that", and "I could take account  of  the
    fact that he had passed through various countries".   I find that these
    phrases are indicative of a lack of clear and reasoned findings.


19. I find that the judge has failed to give adequate reasons  for  why  he
    rejected the Appellant's explanations.  He has failed to make clear and
    adequate findings on core issues of the Appellant's claim.  The  appeal
    rested on the Appellant's credibility, but the credibility findings are
    inadequately reasoned.  I find that this amounts to a material error of
    law.


20. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision


21. I find that the decision involves the making of a material error of law
    and I set the decision aside.


22. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 6 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

