
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01964/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                                    | |
|Decision & Reasons Promulgated                                      | |
|on 21st November 2018                                      on 11th  | |
|November 2018                                                       | |
|                                                                    | |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     T N
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms X Vengoechea, Advocate, instructed by Neil
                    Barnes, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Kempton dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
    grounds.

 2. The appellant is a national of Vietnam.  She claims to fear serious
    harm from her violent and abusive husband, and from people to whom he
    owes money to pay for his gambling and drinking.  She also claims to
    have experienced discrimination in Vietnam because her father was a
    supporter of the French colonial authorities.  While in the UK the
    appellant has been diagnosed with depression and she has suicidal
    ideation.

 3. The respondent accepted that the appellant had been abused by her
    husband.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that any
    discrimination by the authorities the appellant might have experienced
    did not prevent her from earning a living.  The authorities did not
    prevent the appellant, who is a Catholic, from attending church
    services, although her husband attempted to do so.

 4. The question the judge was accordingly required to address was whether
    the appellant would be able to relocate within Vietnam to avoid harm
    from her husband or his creditors.  In this regard one obstacle raised
    by the appellant was that her husband has her family registration book.
     Without this she claimed she would not be able to find work or
    accommodation and would not be able to access government services.  The
    judge found, however, that the appellant could relocate to another area
    and obtain temporary residence.  The judge further stated, at paragraph
    44, that "the UK authorities require to obtain suitable assurances from
    the Vietnamese authorities that the appellant can have a residence
    permit, whether it is temporary or otherwise, as well as suitable
    accommodation, which will offer her suitable protection from any
    potential attacks from her husband or loan sharks."

 5. The grant of permission to appeal notes that it was accepted that the
    appellant was a victim of domestic violence.  The Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal arguably erred on two grounds.  The first of these was
    that the judge failed to make clear findings on the reasonableness of
    internal relocation, including findings on whether the appellant's
    husband was able to find her when she had attempted to relocate in the
    past and was violent towards her in forcing her to return.  The second
    ground concerned the judge's finding seemingly made at paragraph 44,
    quoted above, that unless assurances were received from the Vietnamese
    authorities the appellant could not be safely returned.

 6. At the hearing before me Ms Vengoechea relied on the application for
    permission to appeal and asked that the appeal be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  For the respondent, Mr Govan referred to some of the
    background to the appeal.  There had been an earlier appeal, now
    withdrawn, relying primarily on the political and religious aspects of
    the appellant's claim.  When the appellant gave evidence in the earlier
    appeal the issues of domestic violence and psychological wellbeing
    became prominent.  There was an adjournment for medical evidence.
    Subsequently a new decision letter was issued by the respondent to take
    account of internal relocation in response to the appellant's claim
    that she had twice left her husband and been traced by him and forced
    to return.

 7. Mr Govan referred to paragraph 26 of the judge's decision, where the
    judge noted the appellant's claim that she had twice been traced by her
    husband but that the respondent did not believe this.  The judge did
    not make a finding on this issue and did not take it into account when
    considering relocation.  Mr Govan conceded that on this point there was
    force in the grounds of appeal.

 8. I accept that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by
    failing to make a finding on whether the appellant was traced by her
    husband and forced to return on two occasions when she attempted to
    leave him.  A finding on this issue was required for the judge to make
    a properly reasoned decision on the viability of internal relocation.
    The judge further erred by not taking any finding on this into account
    when considering internal relocation.  As a result the judge's decision
    is flawed and should be set aside.  Because the error relates directly
    to the failure to make a necessary finding on credibility the appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement.  The appeal should be
    reheard before a differently constituted tribunal with no findings
    preserved.

 9. Although it is not necessary for me to decide the point, I am also
    concerned by the judge's statement at paragraph 44 that the respondent
    should seek assurances from the Vietnamese authorities in relation to
    certain practical aspects of internal relocation.  It was for the Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal to decide on the basis of the available
    evidence whether internal relocation was a viable and reasonable
    alternative to international protection.  It was not appropriate for
    the judge in her decision to seek to delegate aspects of this inquiry
    to others.

    Conclusions

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
    making of an error of law.

11. The decision is set aside.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing before a
    differently constituted tribunal with no findings made by the previous
    tribunal preserved.

Anonymity

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a direction for anonymity.  In
order to preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is decided
this direction will remain in place.


M E Deans
                      6th December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
