
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01472/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th July 2016                             |On 2nd August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Ahmed AlshimmARI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Haleema Naz


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    O'Hanlon made following a hearing at Bradford on 8th June 2016.

Background

 2. The claimant says that he in an uncertificated Bidoon from  Kuwait  but
    was believed by the Secretary of State to be an Iraqi national.

 3. At the hearing before the judge, the  claimant  accepted  that  he  had
    given false information in Greece and had not given correct information
    in his screening interview.  In particular  the  judge  recorded  that,
    according to the Secretary of State, he had a fingerprint match with an
    application for an Iraqi passport and US visa which  the  claimant  had
    never mentioned.  He acknowledged that the claimant's sister  had  been
    accepted as the wife of an undocumented Bidoon but it  did  not  follow
    that she was such herself.

 4.  On  the  other  hand,  the  claimant  relied  upon  linguistic  origin
    identification which confirmed  that  he  belonged  to  a  Gulf  Arabic
    linguistic community supporting the suggestion that he was from Kuwait.
     He had also given detailed  knowledge  of  Kuwait  generally  and  the
    specific area in which  he  said  that  he  had  lived  in  his  asylum
    interview.  There was also the evidence of his sister who supported his
    claim.

 5. The judge found in the claimant's favour and, applying the case  of  BA
    and Others (Bidoons Stateless Risk of  Persecution)  Kuwait  CG  [2004]
    UKIAT 00256, allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had failed to give adequate consideration to the issue of the
    passport.  He must have either attended the US Embassy  in  Baghdad  to
    submit his visa application or to have been able to rely  on  an  agent
    within the US Embassy to allow him to avoid personal involvement.   The
    US visa issuing authorities in Baghdad are  highly  security  conscious
    and it would not have been possible for an agent to attend an interview
    in his place unless there was complicity.  There was no record  in  the
    determination to confirm  that  this  formed  a  part  of  the  judge's
    reasoning.  In  view  of  the  other  significant  adverse  credibility
    findings, the judge  was  required  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for
    accepting that the claimant must have received assistance from  someone
    within the US Embassy when the application was made in 2013.

 7. Permission to appeal was given by Judge Grant on 7th July 2016 for  the
    reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

 8. Mrs Pettersen relied on  her  grounds  and  submitted  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence before the judge to  establish  that  he  was  an
    undocumented Bidoon as claimed.

 9. Miss Naz submitted that she had provided  objective  evidence  to  show
    that many Iraqi passports were  fraudulently  obtained.   She  observed
    that, although the Presenting Officer at the hearing said that  he  had
    requested a fraud check to be made  on  this  particular  passport,  no
    further information had ever been given by the respondent and  no  copy
    of the passport had been produced.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    application for a visa had been granted and indeed it could  have  been
    refused because the passport was fake.

Findings and Conclusions

10. This is an attempt by the Secretary of State to re-argue her case.  The
    judge took into account all of the  relevant  evidence,  including  the
    evidence in relation to the passport, but in  the  absence  of  further
    information, it could not be determinative of the issue.  Against  that
    he had clear evidence of the claimant's knowledge of  Kuwait.   He  was
    entitled to observe that his ability to give directions from  one  area
    to another was suggestive of a degree  and  depth  of  knowledge  which
    could not be acquired by learning  without  having  spent  considerable
    time in the area referred to.  There was also the linguistic evidence.

11. Most importantly the judge heard  live  evidence  from  the  claimant's
    sister. It was open to him to conclude,  having  heard  that  evidence,
    that she was a credible witness.  The  judge  acknowledged  that  there
    were credibility issues in the claimant's evidence  but  was  perfectly
    entitled to find that they had been outweighed by other factors.  There
    is no error of law in that decision.

Notice of Decision

The judge did not err in law and his decision stands.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed[pic]                             Date 1 August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
