
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01646/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2016                  |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                  IMRAN [A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs N Khan, Buckingham Legal Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He appealed to a judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against  the  respondent's  decision  refusing  his
    asylum claim.  The appellant  claimed  to  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Pakistan on account of his homosexuality. There was a concession by the
    Presenting Officer, noted by the judge at paragraph 22 of her decision,
    that if the appellant were found to be credible  as  to  his  sexuality
    then asylum should be granted. The  judge  however  did  not  find  the
    appellant to be credible and as a consequence dismissed the appeal.

2.   Permission to appeal against this decision was sought, and was  granted
    by a First-tier Judge on the basis that  the  timing  of  a  particular
    point had not been considered, it was arguably not  clear  whether  the
    judge rejected the evidence of the witnesses in their entirety and as a
    consequence  the  decision  was  unarguably  unsafe.   The   respondent
    subsequently put in a Rule 24 reply arguing that the judge had directed
    herself appropriately and the matter raised in  the  grounds  were  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

3.   In her submissions Mrs Khan argued that it was clear that the  evidence
    of the witnesses and the appellant was not inconsistent.  There  was  a
    variation but they were not far apart.  It  was  unclear  to  what  the
    judge referred.  The reasoning was  inadequate.  There  were  also  the
    judge's doubts about the letter from the support organisation and there
    were issues about the appellant speaking without an interpreter to  the
    different parties and it was argued that he needed an  interpreter  and
    had not had one at the hearing.

4.    In  his  submissions  Mr  Tufan  argued  that  the  determination  was
    comprehensive and the evidence had all been considered. There had  been
    a significant section 8 issue bearing in  mind  the  failure  to  claim
    asylum until late in the day. The evidence of the  witnesses  had  been
    taken into account and also the evidence of ELOP.  It was open  to  the
    judge to find the discrepancies that she did.   It was perplexing  that
    he should say that discrepant answers were due to not understanding the
    questions, as he had come to the United Kingdom to do  advanced  study.
    There was no material error of law in the decision.

5.   By way of reply Mrs Khan argued that although the appellant spoke  good
    English the judge might have underestimated the degree of  scrutiny  in
    the court room. It was not argued that the discrepancies  were  due  to
    the lack of  an  interpreter  but  the  judge  had  not  set  out  what
    inconsistent answers were  given,  for  example,  with  regard  to  the
    relationship with Mr Khan, the evidence had been found to be discrepant
    but it was really just a little more information given by one of  them.
    The judge had not given  reasons  for  finding  discrepancies  and  the
    evidence had therefore not been  considered  adequately  which  led  to
    unfairness issues concerning the consideration of the evidence.

6.   I reserved my decision.

7.   The appellant came to the United Kingdom in July 2008 as a  student.  A
    subsequent human rights application was made  and  refused  in  January
    2015 and a subsequent appeal was dismissed.   The asylum claim was made
    on 8 September 2015.

8.   The appellant claimed that he had become aware of his sexuality from  a
    young age and referred to a relationship in his teens and attendance at
    gay nightclubs and going on gay dating internet sites when he  went  to
    college at the age of 18.  After he came to the United Kingdom  he  had
    two gay relationships, one in 2011 and another one in 2012.  Thereafter
    he had a major argument with his father in or around August 2014 around
    the time when his latest Tier 4 Student visa was expiring.  He told his
    father he was gay and did not wish to marry and this upset  his  father
    who went to  a  solicitor  and  made  an  affidavit  disinheriting  the
    appellant under his will and then published  an  advertisement  in  the
    paper announcing the appellant's disinheritance in an Urdu newspaper in
    Pakistan.

9.   As a consequence  of  being  upset  at  this  the  appellant  told  his
    longstanding friend, Mr Bashir, about the family argument and also told
    his friend and landlord Mr Usman.  As a consequence Mr Usman, realising
    that the appellant was no longer being funded  by  his  father,  agreed
    that he could live in the boxroom of his house free of charge and could
    eat with him and his wife, again, free of charge.  The  appellant  said
    that after August 2014 he became openly gay, attending  the  Gay  Pride
    festival in Birmingham in May 2015 and joining Stonewall in April 2015.
     He met Mr Khan in a gay nightclub in February 2016 and subsequently an
    arrangement was made and as it became clear that Mr  Khan  was  looking
    for accommodation to rent that he would move into Mr  Usman's  property
    and together with the appellant shared both the room that the appellant
    had been  given and also Mr Khan's room together.

10.  Mr Khan in evidence confirmed that he was gay and  had  refugee  status
    in the United Kingdom because of his sexual orientation.  He said  that
    he would support the appellant financially if the appellant  asked  him
    for money.  He said that he and the appellant got on well together  but
    were not committed to each other and they saw other  people.   Mr  Khan
    wanted to take his  time  about  building  the  relationship  with  the
    appellant but there was a strong bond between them at the moment.

11.  Mr Usman's evidence was that he either realised the appellant  was  gay
    at a small party held at his home in July 2014 or realised in September
    2014 when the appellant todl him about his  problems  with  his  father
    just after he had told his family in Pakistan  that  he  was  gay.   As
    regards the role he saw Mr Khan as playing in the appellant's  life  Mr
    Usman said that "they are kind of together".  He was not sure how  deep
    their relationship was, but they occasionally shared moments  together.
    He had not given the appellant  immigration  advice  about  lodging  an
    application for further leave to remain in August 2014 but had told him
    to go to a solicitor because he  understood  the  appellant  was  being
    forced to marry someone on return to Pakistan.

12.  The third witness was Mr  Bashir  who  had  known  the  appellant  from
    January 2010 and was aware that he was  under  pressure  to  return  to
    Pakistan and get married.  He had always suspected  the  appellant  was
    gay but the appellant had only disclosed this to him in 2014.

13.  The judge expressed concern at the fact  that  although  the  appellant
    was aware of his sexuality since before he left Pakistan, it  took  him
    seven years to claim asylum.  She accepted that he had not met Mr  Khan
    until well after his claim for asylum had been made and around the time
    of the refusal.  She noted that Mr Khan's description  of  meeting  the
    appellant and moving in and the domestic  arrangements  in  Mr  Usman's
    house seemed to match much of what the appellant had said except in one
    crucial respect.

14.  The appellant in evidence had described Mr Khan as his partner  whereas
    Mr Khan said they had the share of two rooms  and  were  not  committed
    entirely to each other and saw other people and said in respect of  the
    appellant "I like him a lot".  When pushed in cross-examination he  had
    only stated later on that he did have a sexual  relationship  with  the
    appellant and they had gone to LGBT groups and  clubs  together.   This
    the judge regarded as contrasting with the  appellant's  oral  evidence
    and witness statements in which he had failed to mention Mr Khan.   She
    would have thought  that  if  this  had  been  a  relationship  of  any
    significance the appellant would have mentioned  that  in  the  witness
    statement, at least that of 25 July 2016.  She concluded  that  it  was
    not a relationship of any significance.

15.  With regard to the evidence of Mr Usman,  the  appellant  said  at  his
    asylum interview that Mr Usman had told him to apply  for  the  further
    leave to remain application in 2014.  Mr Usman  would  have  known  the
    significance of admitting to being gay, with his Pakistani  background,
    the judge considered, and yet he still encouraged the appellant to make
    a human rights to make a human rights  application  without  mentioning
    this crucial fact.

16.  He was asked about this in the interview and said:

         "Because at that time I had no idea because  my  family  completely
         cut off with me and I was in a  depression  and  at  time  he  just
         advised me to do something like that,  I  believe  he  didn't  know
         about this. That's why he advised me.  And all this  happened  very
         quickly too, I didn't have enough time to ...".

17.  The judge regarded this answer as being entirely  inadequate.   He  was
    then asked why when in his further leave to remain application  he  was
    asked whether there were any exceptional circumstances why he could not
    return to Pakistan and he had said it was because he would be destitute
    he had not mentioned his sexuality and said at that time he had no idea
    what he had to do and he just wanted to remain lawfully in  the  United
    Kingdom and was too shy to mention  it,  and  he  had  grown  up  in  a
    conservative culture in Pakistan and could not say these things openly.
     The judge commented that, however, the appellant  had  told  Mr  Usman
    around that point that he was in fact gay and so  it  had  been  openly
    said.

18.  The judge noted that in oral evidence Mr  Usman  denied  ever  advising
    the appellant to apply for further leave to remain  and  said  that  at
    most he thought it was appropriate that the appellant get a lawyer.  He
    had not given the appellant any immigration advice but  suggested  that
    he check out all his  options.  He  had  searched  on  Google  for  the
    appellant's options because he was trying to help and accepted that one
    of those options might have been to claim  asylum.   Also  he  did  not
    mention the appellant coming out at a small party at Mr UIsman's  house
    but said that he was told by the appellant some time in August that  he
    was gay.

19.  As regards Mr Bashir, the judge found his evidence to be  inconsistent.
     She said that it appeared from Mr Bashir's statement that he was  only
    told of the appellant's sexuality around August or September 2014.   Up
    to that point the appellant's sexuality was never disclosed. He  denied
    having suspected the appellant was gay in 2010 and then said he did not
    know and the suspicion gradually  dawned  on  him.   He  suspected  the
    appellant of being gay at the end of 2010.

20.  I have set out above the grounds of challenge and the submissions  that
    were made on both sides with regard to the decision.

21.  The judge found that there were considerable discrepancies both  within
    and between the evidence of the witnesses.  She had the impression that
    one of them was imperfectly learning their script and this seemed to be
    obvious even during cursory cross-examination.  He considered that  the
    matter of the appellant attending Gay Pride  events  and  joining  LGBT
    groups were all significantly after he had decided to claim asylum.

22.  As regards the letter from ELOP (East London's Lesbian and Gay  Centre)
    dated 7 July 2016, it indicated that the appellant first contacted  the
    group on 5 April 2016 and the judge set out some of the points made  in
    that letter including the fact that the appellant had has  some  casual
    experiences with other men after rejection by his family  but  recently
    he had not engaged in this which he regarded as  entirely  contrary  to
    the evidence provided by the appellant, Mr Khan and Mr Usman.  He  also
    did not understand why the appellant's father should have  thoughtfully
    provided an English translation of his affidavit and what  the  purpose
    of sending it to the appellant was.

23.  On  balance  I  consider  that  the  judge's  findings  are  flawed  as
    contended. I think that the points made in the grounds are  sound.   In
    particular, as noted by the judge  who  granted  permission,  there  is
    arguable merit in the point that the judge made no comment on the  fact
    that it was only after the family argument that the appellant needed to
    seek international protection and that is relevant  to  the  section  8
    issue.  It is also not  clear  to  what  extent  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses was not regarded as credible.

24.  The judge concluded at paragraph 30 by saying that limited  weight  had
    to be placed on much of the witnesses' accounts.  In my view a  clearer
    conclusion than that needed to be reached.  As  Mrs  Khan  has  argued,
    matters of discrepancy between for example the appellant and Mr Khan is
    a matter of variation and degree rather than being  clearly  different.
    It is relevant to note that Mr Khan ultimately accepted that they had a
    sexual relationship, and Mr Usman agreed that one  of  the  options  he
    searched on Google for the appellant might have been  to claim  asylum.
    I think the judge was right to observe that there are discrepancies  in
    the evidence, but I consider that clearer findings need to be  made  on
    the conclusions to be drawn from those discrepancies as well as to  the
    extent to which they are discrepancies of materiality.

Notice of Decision

25.  Given that these matters go  to  the  heart  of  the  decision,  it  is
    appropriate for the matter to be reheard  in  its  entirety  and  as  a
    consequence for it to be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal rather than
    being remade in the Upper Tribunal.

26.  Accordingly the appeal is allowed to the extent that it is to  go  back
    for full rehearing before a judge other than Judge Mozolowski at Taylor
    House.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

