
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01876/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2018                           |On 12 January 2018            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     SA
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

    1.   The appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Devlin dated 18 May 2017, in which he dismissed  her
         appeal against a decision dated  8  February  2017  to  refuse  her
         protection claim.

Summary of claim

    2.   The appellant, a citizen of Iraq from the Kurdish Autonomous  Area
         ('KAA'),  fears  that  she  will  be  targeted  for  'honour-based'
         violence from  her  family  for  reasons  relating  to  a  previous
         relationship and refusing to accede to their choice  of  a  marital
         partner, together with her pregnancy out of wedlock in the UK.

    3.   The appellant also submits that she should be permitted to  remain
         on the basis of Article 8 of the ECHR in light of her  relationship
         with a British citizen partner in the UK.  At the date of the First-
         tier Tribunal hearing she was pregnant.  Since then she  has  given
         birth to a British citizen child.

First-tier Tribunal decision

    3.   The First-tier Tribunal decision is very detailed and lengthy.  It
         comprises 371 paragraphs over 50 pages and  is  carefully  drafted.
         Judge Devlin did not accept  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
         account as to what happened to her in the KAA or her journey to the
         UK.  He also considered that as a single, pregnant women, she would
         not be at real risk of serious harm in the KAA  and  dismissed  her
         appeal on protection and human rights grounds.

Grounds of appeal

    4.   In wide ranging grounds of appeal, it is submitted  on  behalf  of
         the  appellant  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   findings:   are
         pendantic and overly critical of peripheral matters; place emphasis
         upon inconsistencies that are more apparent than real and not well-
         founded; are unsupported by the country background evidence  as  to
         the prevalence of 'honour-based' violence in the KAA.

    5.   When granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Black
         described  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision   as   "inordinately
         lengthy".  The claim is a relatively straightforward  one  and  the
         decision is undoubtedly very lengthy indeed.  However, the question
         for me is whether it contains a material error of law.

    6.   At the hearing before me Mr  Gayle  relied  upon  his  grounds  of
         appeal and Mr McVeety relied upon a rule 24 notice.  After  hearing
         from both representatives, I reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
         provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

    7.   I now turn to consider the grounds of appeal argued before me.

Approach to answers provided at interview

    8.   The grounds criticising the credibility findings are largely based
         upon discrepancies identified between what the  appellant  said  at
         the screening interview and what she said after this.

    9.   Whilst the name and procedure  for  the  screening  interview  has
         changed over time and it is now more formally described as 'initial
         contact and asylum registration form', asylum  applicants  continue
         to take part in a screening interview at the time or shortly  after
         the asylum claim is made.  In YL (SEF) China  [2004]  UKIAT  00145,
         the Upper Tribunal set  out  a  number  of  observations  regarding
         screening interviews (which remain apt), and said this at [19]:

             "When a person seeks  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  he  is
             usually made the subject of a 'screening  interview'  (called,
             perhaps rather confusingly a "Statement of Evidence Form - SEF
             Screening-). The purpose of that is to establish  the  general
             nature of the claimant's case so that the Home Office official
             can decide how best to process it. It is  concerned  with  the
             country of origin, means of travel, circumstances  of  arrival
             in the United Kingdom, preferred language  and  other  matters
             that might help the Secretary of State  understand  the  case.
             Asylum seekers are  still  expected  to  tell  the  truth  and
             answers given in screening interviews can be  compared  fairly
             with answers given later. However, it  has  to  be  remembered
             that a screening interview is not done to establish in  detail
             the reasons a person gives to support her claim for asylum. It
             would not normally be appropriate for the Secretary  of  State
             to ask  supplementary  questions  or  to  entertain  elaborate
             answers and an inaccurate summary by an  interviewing  officer
             at that  stage  would  be  excusable.  Further  the  screening
             interview may well be conducted  when  the  asylum  seeker  is
             tired after a long journey. These things have to be considered
             when any inconsistencies between the screening  interview  and
             the later case are evaluated."

    10.  Such an approach is consistent with  the  UNHCR  Handbook  on  the
         Procedures  and  Criteria  in  Determining  Refugee  Status   which
         includes the following:

             "190. It should be recalled  that  an  applicant  for  refugee
             status is normally in a particularly vulnerable situation.  He
             finds himself in  an  alien  environment  and  may  experience
             serious  difficulties,   technical   and   psychological,   in
             submitting his case to the authorities of a  foreign  country,
             often in a  language  not  his  own.  His  application  should
             therefore  be  examined  within  the  framework  of  specially
             established  procedures  by  qualified  personnel  having  the
             necessary knowledge and experience, and an understanding of an
             applicant's particular difficulties and needs.

             ...

             199. While an initial interview  should  normally  suffice  to
             bring an applicant's story to light, it may be  necessary  for
             the examiner to clarify any apparent  inconsistencies  and  to
             resolve any contradictions in a further interview, and to find
             an explanation for any  misrepresentation  or  concealment  of
             material facts. Untrue statements  by  themselves  are  not  a
             reason for refusal of refugee status and it is the  examiner's
             responsibility to evaluate such statements in the light of all
             the circumstances of the case.

             200. An examination in depth of the different methods of fact-
             finding is outside the scope of the present Handbook.  It  may
             be mentioned, however, that basic  information  is  frequently
             given,  in  the  first  instance,  by  completing  a  standard
             questionnaire. Such basic information  will  normally  not  be
             sufficient to enable the examiner to reach a decision, and one
             or more personal interviews  will  be  required.  It  will  be
             necessary for the examiner  to  gain  the  confidence  of  the
             applicant in order to assist the latter in putting forward his
             case and in fully explaining his  opinions  and  feelings.  In
             creating such a climate of confidence it is, of course, of the
             utmost importance that  the  applicant's  statements  will  be
             treated as confidential and that he be so informed."

    11.  The initial interview referenced at para 199 of the Handbook would
         be akin to the detailed  asylum  interview  ('AI')  that  generally
         takes place at a later date and well after the screening  interview
         or 'initial contact and asylum registration form', more akin to the
         standard questionnaire at para 200 of the Handbook.

    12.  In KD (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1384, Moses  LJ  observed
         at [8]:

             "No authority is needed for the proposition that  one  seeking
             refugee status is not expected, when first arriving, fully  to
             set out his claim  to  asylum,  although  asylum  seekers  are
             expected to tell the truth and discrepancies can  legitimately
             be deployed in the assessment of credibility (see  YL  (China)
             [2004] UKIAT 00145 at paragraph 19). But in the instant appeal
             the Immigration Judge was entitled to place  weight  upon  the
             absence of any reference to detention  and  ill-treatment  but
             one month before the appellant left Sri Lanka and the  absence
             of any reference to the trigger for the series of events which
             were said to give rise to a well-founded fear  of  persecution
             in the future, namely, the discovery of weapons in a truck  he
             had rented out."

    13.  In the appellant's case, the screening interview took place  on  8
         September 2016 at 4pm, after she brought herself to  the  attention
         of the authorities that morning having arrived in the UK  illegally
         by lorry that day.  Whilst it is correct that the applicant is told
         at the beginning of the screening interview that questions must  be
         answered "fully and truthfully", this follows a very  long  passage
         of five paragraphs  explaining  the  process  in  formulaic  terms.
         Questions are then asked relating to personal details and identity,
         health/special needs, travel and third  country,  basis  of  asylum
         claim, criminality and security. At  4.1  under  'basis  of  asylum
         claim' the question reads as follows (emphasis  reproduced  as  set
         out in the document):

             "Please BRIEFLY explain ALL of  the  reasons  why  you  cannot
             return to your home country?

             Where applicable ask:

             What do you fear will happen to you on  return  to  your  home
             country?

             Who do you fear?

             Why do you fear them?

             When did this happen?"

    14.  At [194] the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  "due  weight"
         should be given to matters the appellant said or omitted  from  the
         screening interview.  In so doing the First-tier Tribunal failed to
         place the screening interview in its proper context and erroneously
         treated it as a definitive document in relation to  which  complete
         accuracy was to be expected.  No real consideration  was  given  to
         the fact that the appellant had been travelling by lorry  for  many
         days at the behest of an agent and as  a  fatigued  and  bewildered
         woman in the UK for the  first  time  may  not  have  done  herself
         justice within the narrow confines of the screening interview.

    15.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant failed to mention
         a core aspect of her claim in response to the question  at  4.1  of
         the screening interview.  Her full response is as follows:

             "I have a family problem in Iraq.  I was in love with  someone
             my family did not like but they told me  they  would  kill  me
             that's why I left.  If I return they will kill me".

    16.  At Q132 AI, that took place on 25 September  2016,  the  appellant
         clarified that her family would not allow her to marry the  man  of
         her choice and expected her to marry a  different  man  much  older
         than her.  At [99] and [100],  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
         that the appellant might reasonably  have  been  expected  to  have
         mentioned  the  forced  marriage  fear  from  the  outset,  at  the
         screening interview, because this was a significant  event  leading
         to her departure from the KAA.

    17.  The appellant explained within the AI and  her  witness  statement
         that she did not mention  the  forced  marriage  at  the  screening
         interview because she was told that she should not go  into  detail
         and she had explained why she left in brief terms,  as  instructed,
         as "family problems".  It is important  to  note  that  the  forced
         marriage issue only arose in the context of the family disapproving
         of her relationship with another man i.e. she wished to  marry  one
         man and in response her family wanted her to marry  a  considerably
         older man, and the two matters were clearly linked  and  accurately
         summarised  as  "family  problems".   Given  the  context  of   the
         screening interview,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
         considering it "implausible" at [115] that  the  appellant  omitted
         the forced marriage issue from  the  screening  interview  response
         because she was asked to only briefly set out her claim, and  erred
         in law in concluding at [119] that this was  sufficient  to  render
         the appellant's credibility "suspect".

    18.  At [109] the First-tier Tribunal acknowledged that the response to
         3.3, an outline of the journey to the UK, may have been longer than
         the response  to  4.1  because  a  number  of  follow-up  questions
         appearing in italics may have been asked.  The First-tier  Tribunal
         failed to take into account that it is entirely  unclear  what,  if
         any, follow-up questions  were  asked  in  relation  to  4.1.   The
         appellant clearly was  not  asked  "when  did  this  happen".   The
         position in KD (Sri Lanka) (supra) can be distinguished.   In  that
         case the appellant wholly failed  to  make  any  reference  to  the
         trigger for the series of events which were said to  give  rise  to
         his fears.  By contrast, this appellant made clear reference to the
         trigger for her fears:  family  problems  caused  by  her  family's
         disapproval of the relationship she wished to have.

    19.  Adverse inferences  were  also  drawn  regarding  the  appellant's
         account of  her  journey  between  Iraq  and  the  UK,  because  of
         inconsistencies between at 3.3 of the screening interview and  what
         was later said at the AI.  It is of significance that this  journey
         was made illegally overland by lorry.  It would be  very  difficult
         for the dates for the time spent in various countries en  route  to
         be precise.  Indeed, the  potential  for  mistakes  with  dates  is
         demonstrated by the answer to Q153: this records the date she  left
         Iraq to be 28 September  2016  when  she  was  in  the  UK  from  8
         September 2016.  The First-tier Tribunal also made a mistake of its
         own at [144] by recording the date  of  the  appellant's  statement
         incorrectly (2013 provided instead of 2017).

    20.  Further for reasons set out at  [135]  to  [176],  the  First-tier
         Tribunal rejected the appellant's claim that she was  misunderstood
         on peripheral matters (time spent in Turkey en route, who paid  the
         agent for the journey, time spent  in  France  en  route)  entirely
         unrelated to the substance of her claim, at the screening interview
         without considering that the interview was not read back to her and
         she was not given an opportunity to correct mistakes.

    21.  The conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  its  general
         approach to the screening interview is supported by the  First-tier
         Tribunal's surprising findings in relation to a CID note apparently
         drafted earlier in the day of the screening interview.  This states
         that the appellant was "booked" in and  the  interview  started  at
         8.25 and finished at 8.30 on 8 September 2016.   This  note  states
         that "the subject has come to the UK as she loved  a  boy  but  her
         father and brothers refused him and threatened to kill  her".   The
         First-tier Tribunal drew adverse inferences from this  because  the
         appellant later said that her father  had  died.   The  appellant's
         explanation that she did not and would not  have  referred  to  her
         father is rejected by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  number  of
         reasons that are difficult to follow.  Contrary to what is said  at
         [50] the appellant did set out in her statement what she said  when
         she was booked in.  The CID note simply records what is believed to
         have been said prior to the commencement of the formal process  and
         given the absence of any evidence as to its accuracy, little weight
         should  have  been  attached  to  it.   The   First-tier   Tribunal
         considered it justified to attach weight to the contents of the CID
         note notwithstanding the weaknesses identified at [51] on the basis
         that the appellant said her father died in 2003 in the AI, and 2013
         in the statement.  Yet, no consideration has been given to  whether
         the appellant should be given the benefit of the  doubt  that  this
         was simply a typo or mistranslation.

    22.  Similarly, the First-tier Tribunal's disinclination  to  give  the
         appellant the benefit of the  doubt  on  even  the  most  minor  of
         matters, is demonstrated  in  the  approach  to  a  correction  the
         appellant made during the course of the AI.  At Q60 she  was  asked
         whether her mobile phone was 'contract' or 'pay as you go' and  she
         responded that "in Kurdistan they are all contracted". At  Q61  she
         was asked "so if it was a contract phone was there any mail sent to
         your address about this phone?".  Her response was "No I bought  it
         and every time I need credit I would buy this.   Sorry  it  is  the
         other way around there is no such thing as contract in  Kurdistan".
         Judge Devlin concluded at  [67]  that:  "clearly,  the  appellant's
         answer to Q60 of the asylum interview,  cannot  stand  consistently
         with her answer at Q61".  This finding is factually  incorrect  and
         perverse.   When  the  responses  are  read   together   they   are
         consistent.  The appellant has made a simple mistake  by  the  time
         she is being asked a question for the  60th  time  and  immediately
         corrects that mistake when a follow-up question  is  asked.   Given
         the immediate clarification, it was perverse to regard this  as  an
         inconsistent answer, in relation to which  her  simple  explanation
         that she made a mistake was  rejected  at  [70]  to  [75],  and  in
         relation to which the First-tier Tribunal was not prepared to  give
         the appellant the benefit of the doubt ([192]-[193]).

Credibility findings generally

    23.  I acknowledge that the First-tier Tribunal provided other  reasons
         for rejecting the appellant's account - see for example the summary
         at [195].  However, when reaching his  conclusions  on  credibility
         from [188], he took into account and at [194] gave "due weight"  to
         matters  that  did  not  necessarily  reflect  adversely  upon  the
         appellant's credibility for the reasons I have set out  above.   It
         is difficult to separate the findings infected by an error  of  law
         from other findings.

    24.  In addition, the First-tier Tribunal acted  procedurally  unfairly
         when considering the failure  to  provide  corroborative  evidence.
         The First-tier Tribunal directed  itself  to  the  absence  of  any
         requirement for corroboration of asylum claims but  found  that  an
         absence of documentary evidence which might reasonably be expected,
         may impact upon the weight to be attached to the oral  evidence  at
         [198].  The conclusion that the  appellant  might  reasonably  have
         expected to have produced a document from her cousin confirming her
         account of events [200] was not based upon any  submission  on  the
         part of  the  SSHD.    Indeed,  both  representatives  checked  and
         confirmed that at no stage during her interviews or at the  hearing
         was the appellant invited to provide an explanation for her failure
         to obtain evidence from her cousin.  The  appellant  was  therefore
         not put  on  notice  that  such  corroborating  evidence  would  be
         important or was expected.  She was given no opportunity to  obtain
         it or explain why she could not obtain it.  In these circumstances,
         it was procedurally unfair  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  draw
         adverse inferences from the failure to  provide  this  evidence  at
         [202].

Country background evidence

    25.  My findings that the credibility  assessment  is  flawed  for  the
         reasons outlined above is sufficient for the  decision  to  be  set
         aside and remade de novo. For this reason, I address the First-tier
         Tribunal's assessment of the country background evidence  in  brief
         terms.  The First-tier Tribunal concluded at [281] that that  there
         are insufficiently  strong  grounds  to  depart  from  the  country
         guidance in RG (Sufficiency of Protection-Honour Killings-KAA) Iraq
         CG [2002] UKIAT 05788 to the effect that honour killings are  taken
         very seriously in the KAA, and the PUK /KDP are able and willing to
         protect those in fear of reprisals.  In so  doing,  the  First-tier
         Tribunal failed to take into account relevant evidence.

    26.  Although the First-tier  Tribunal  considered  a  Minority  Rights
         Group International  (UK)  Ceasefire  Centre  for  Civilian  Rights
         report 'Lost Women of Iraq: Family based violence during the  armed
         conflict' dated November 2015 at [240] to [257]  and  therefore  in
         considerable detail, it failed to consider the  large  estimate  on
         the part of the UN for the number of women said to be  the  victims
         of 'honour-based' violence at pg 22: 50 each month.  This  is  said
         to be an underestimate as cases are not properly recorded and self-
         immolation is not necessarily included.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
         has not reconciled its conclusion that the authorities are  willing
         and able to offer protection with the number of  victims  being  so
         high.

    27.  In addition, the First-tier Tribunal's analysis  of  the  evidence
         relevant to shelters in the KAA at [255] to [256] is  difficult  to
         follow.  The point made in the Minority Rights report  and  the  US
         Country Report for 2016  is  that  the  shelters  emphasise  family
         reconciliation and this plays an important role in women  returning
         to dangerous situations and for that reason there are serious flaws
         in the shelter system.  These  serious  flaws  remain  even  absent
         evidence that women are directly  coerced  into  returning  to  the
         families or are excluded from shelters.

Conclusion

    28.  For the reasons set out above, the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
         contains material errors of law.

    29.  I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision,  I  have  decided  that
         this is an appropriate case to remit to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
         This is because completely fresh findings of fact  in  relation  to
         evidence from the appellant is necessary.

Decision

    30.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
         material error of law and I set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
11 January 2018
