
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01141/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th April 2017                       |On 05th September 2017            |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     SSK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S Chaudhry, Boudie Jackson Canter (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr. G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Malik promulgated on 23rd November 2016.  The underlying decision  that
    was the subject of the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")
    was the decision of the respondent dated 18th January  2016  to  refuse
    the appellant's protection claim.


 2. An anonymity  order  was  made  by  the  FtT.   As  the  case  involves
    protection issues, and children, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that
    order, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269). I also make an anonymity  order.  Unless  the
    Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these
    proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


 3. The appellant is an Afghan national.  The appellant's claim is based on
    his fear that if returned to Afghanistan he,  his  wife  and  children,
    would face mistreatment due to their religion.  The appellant fears the
    Taliban. In her decision of 18th January 2016, the respondent  accepted
    that the appellant is an Afghan national and of the  Sikh  faith.   The
    respondent rejected the appellant's account of the disappearance of his
    brother, and of the attempted kidnap of the appellant by Taliban.


 4. At the hearing before the FtT, the appellant gave evidence and  he  was
    cross examined.  A summary of the  appellant's  claim  is  set  out  at
    paragraph [8] of the decision of the FtT.  At paragraphs  [9]  to  [16]
    the Judge sets out the appellant's evidence  in  chief.   The  evidence
    that he gave when cross-examined is set out at paragraphs [17] to  [21]
    of the Judge's decision.  The  Judge  notes  that  the  respondent  has
    accepted that the appellant is from Afghanistan and a follower  of  the
    Sikh faith, at paragraph [25] of her decision.   The  Judge's  findings
    are to be found at paragraph 26 of her decision.  The Judge  found  the
    appellant's account  to  lack  credibility.   The  Judge  rejected  the
    appellant's account of the disappearance of  his  brother  and  of  the
    appellant being targeted by the Taliban, both in Kandahar and in Kabul.
     At paragraph [26(v)], the Judge found  that  the  appellant's  parents
    have not fled Afghanistan as claimed, but remain there.


 5. Notwithstanding the adverse credibility findings, the Judge went on  to
    consider the risk on  return  by  reference  to  the  Country  Guidance
    decision of TG and Others  (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2015] UKUT 00595.  The Judge found;


 a. The appellant would have access to the shop, land and  house  that  the
    family own  in  Afghanistan.  The  appellant's  parents  are  still  in
    Afghanistan, and would be able to assist him and his family on  return.
    The assets could be used should  the  appellant  wish  to  relocate  to
    another part of the country and restart  a  business,  in  addition  to
    whatever limited support may be available from the Gudwara; [28]


 b. There is no evidence that  the  appellant  and  his  family  could  not
    worship at the Gudwara in Kabul, where the  appellant  claims  he  took
    sanctuary.  There are government sponsored schools for Sikh children in
    Kabul and Nangarhar where they can get elementary education  and  there
    is nothing to suggest the appellant would not be able to secure  places
    for his children on return to Kabul.


 6. The Judge concludes at paragraph [30]:


         "In the circumstances of his case, there is no evidence to  suggest
         the appellant, his wife and children  have  previously  encountered
         persecution or ill-treatment due to their religion, such  that  the
         Convention is engaged, other than the claimed events, which for the
         reasons given above I find not to be credible; nor are they  unable
         to relocate due any  medical  conditions  and  having  endured  the
         appellant claims an extensive journey  to  the  UK,  there  are  no
         reasons before me to suggest they could not  relocate  to  Kabul  -
         they having on the  appellant's  account  already  done  so  before
         coming to the UK - where there is a Sikh community and  where  they
         can utilise the resources they have left behind in  Afghanistan  to
         re-establish themselves. For these reasons I find it would  not  be
         unreasonable nor unduly harsh to expect them to do so."


 7. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.  First, the Judge  failed
    to have proper regard to the evidence as to  the  appellant's  parents,
    and apply the guidance set out in the Country Guidance decision  of  TG
    and Others.  Second, the Judge failed to have regard  to  the  guidance
    set out in  the  Country  Guidance  decision  of  TG  and  Others  when
    considering whether the appellant's children would have access  to  any
    form of education upon return.  The Judge presumes  that  the  children
    can be admitted to one  of  two  schools  in  Kabul,  without  properly
    considering the discrimination  that  the  appellant's  children  would
    face.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Shimmin on 19th  December
    2016.  In doing so, the Judge noted it is arguable that the Judge erred
    in law in making adverse credibility findings which do  not  take  full
    consideration of the background evidence/country guidance for Sikhs  in
    Afghanistan, the Judge has made findings which are not supported by the
    evidence, and the Judge has erred in failing to make a full  assessment
    in respect of the appellant's two children and the country  information
    on children, their schooling  and  armed  conflict.  The  matter  comes
    before me to consider whether the decision  of  the  FtT  involved  the
    making of a material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


 9. In the grounds of appeal the appellant contends that the FtT Judge  has
    presumed that the appellant's parents  are  still  in  Afghanistan  and
    failed to have due regard to appellant's  evidence  that  he  has  lost
    contact with his family. Before me, Mr Chaudhry initially submitted the
    Judge has given no reasons for  her  assumption  that  the  appellant's
    parents remain in Afghanistan.  I referred him to paragraph [26(v)]  of
    the decision in which the Judge sets out her reasons  for  her  finding
    that the appellant's parents have not fled Afghanistan as claimed,  but
    remain there. Mr Chaudhry, rightly in my judgment,  accepted  that  the
    Judge has provided adequate reasons for her finding.


10. However, Mr Chaudhry submits that in reaching her credibility findings,
    the Judge  failed  to  consider  whether  the  appellant's  account  is
    consistent with the objective evidence as to the treatments of Sikhs in
    Afghanistan and their declining numbers.  He  submits  that  these  are
    matters that infect the Judge's credibility findings generally, and her
    application of the guidance in TG and  Others.  The  appellant  submits
    that at paragraph [89] of TG and Others, the Upper Tribunal  recognised
    that if a Hindu or Sikh has a business and property, there is a risk of
    being subjected to demands for money by way  of  extortion  by  corrupt
    individuals and in extreme circumstances, the person may  be  subjected
    to further, more serious threats or  acts  of  violence.  Although  the
    Tribunal noted that such incidents are rare now, that  is  because  the
    most valuable properties are seen to have already been taken away  from
    Sikhs.


11. He submits that notwithstanding the adverse credibility findings  made,
    in determining the risk upon return, a  fact  sensitive  assessment  is
    required. He submits that the Judge failed to properly carry out a fact
    sensitive assessment as to whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate elsewhere in  Afghanistan  by  reference  to  the
    factors identified in TG and others.


12. Mr Chaudhry submits the appellant would have no independent income, and
    has a wife and  two  children  to  support,  both  of  whom  are  at  a
    vulnerable age.  He submits that although the Judge notes at  paragraph
    [29] of her decision, the objective evidence that there  are  very  few
    Sikh or Hindus educated, because bullying is  high  against  Sikh/Hindu
    children, the Judge simply concludes  that  there  is  no  evidence  to
    suggest the appellant would not  be  able  to  secure  places  for  his
    children on return to Kabul.   He submits that that is  to  ignore  the
    fact that the appellant is from Kandahar and in order for his  children
    to access education, even if that were possible, would  mean  that  the
    family would have to internally relocate  to  Kabul.   He  submits  the
    Judge failed to consider the  likely  financial  circumstances  of  the
    appellant on return, his ability to  access  basic  accommodation,  and
    whether the appellant will be able to access appropriate education  for
    his children in light of  the  discrimination  faced  and  shortage  of
    adequate education facilities.


13. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response dated 26th January 2017  in
    which the respondent submitted that the appeal is opposed.  Before  me,
    Mr Harrison relied upon the Rule 24 response and submits that the Judge
    has made explicit findings before addressing the country  guidance  and
    applying that guidance to the facts as found by the Judge.  He  submits
    that the Judge has provided adequate reasons for the findings  made  by
    her, and those findings were open to her on the  evidence.  He  submits
    that the Judge has set out why she finds the  appellants  claim  to  be
    incredible, and it was open to the Judge to  find  that  the  appellant
    would  have  assets  and  property  available  to  him  on  return   to
    Afghanistan. The  appellant  has  previously  been  able,  on  his  own
    account, to access support from a Gudwara in Kabul,  and  there  is  no
    reason to believe that he could not seek short term support from there,
    in the future.


Error of Law


14. The FtT Judge made adverse credibility findings against the  appellant.
    It appears from the decision of the FtT that the appellant's claim  was
    internally  consistent.   The  Judge   does   not   identify   internal
    inconsistencies in the accounts given by the appellant, but rejects the
    account because she did not consider the account given to be  credible,
    that is, the  account  is  implausible.   However,  there  are  various
    caveats to be considered before a claim is so  rejected.   It  is  well
    established  that  repressive  regimes  may  act  in  a  way  that   is
    unpredictable and so whether an account is  implausible  can  often  be
    assessed by reference to what is available by way of objective evidence
    and in particular, country guidance decisions.


15. In TG and others, the Upper Tribunal noted that  some  members  of  the
    Sikh and Hindu communities in Afghanistan continue to suffer harassment
    at the hands of Muslim zealots. At paragraphs [87] to [89],  the  Upper
    Tribunal state:


         "87. We accept that some members of the Sikh and Hindu community in
         Afghanistan may continue to suffer harassment and discrimination at
         the hand of  Muslim  zealots.   Such  acts  include  name  calling,
         spitting, the throwing of stones and rocks,  threats  and  acts  of
         violence. On occasions in the past, such acts have  been  far  more
         serious and included abductions for ransom or to forced  conversion
         to Islam, seizure of land properties and killings.


         88.  The frustration felt by members of  these  religious  minority
         groups, according to the evidence,  appears  to  be  based  upon  a
         combination of a weariness of discrimination and lack  of  economic
         opportunities.  Such anxiety was said to be increasing in light  of
         the prospect of the withdrawal of foreign troops  from  Afghanistan
         by the end of 2014 [Appendix A. Item 2]. An article written  on  15
         April 2009, five years ago, records complaints by  members  of  the
         Sikh community that despite the guarantee for the  safeguarding  of
         their religious and social rights in the  Afghan  constitution  and
         laws the behaviour of their Muslim countrymen is  not  satisfactory
         [Appendix A. Item 34]. A named Sikh woman who is also a  member  of
         the AIHRC maintains that it  is  due  to  these  reasons  that  the
         migration of Afghan Sikhs and Hindus abroad has  not  yet  stopped.
         This feeling is reinforced by a  recorded  comment  made  by  Avtar
         Singh, stated to be a well-known Sikh figure in Afghanistan  and  a
         member of the  Afghan  Senate  (Misharano  Jirha)  who  noted  that
         although in the recent years the social life of  Sikhs  and  Hindus
         has  improved  there  still  remain  numerous  problems  for  these
         religious minorities and that Sikh religious sites which have  been
         destroyed during the  civil  war  had  not  yet  been  restored  or
         reconstructed [Appendix A. Item 34].


         89.  It is clear that a Hindu or Sikh Afghan male  is  able  to  go
         about his day-to-day business although he may from time to time  be
         the subject to verbal abuse and harassment. If he  has  a  business
         and property there is a risk of  being  subjected  to  demands  for
         money by way of extortion by corrupt  individuals  and  in  extreme
         circumstances may be subjected to further more serious  threats  or
         acts of violence.  Such incidents are rare now as the most valuable
         properties are seen to have already been  taken  away  from  Sikhs.
         Whether such events or combination of these events and other  forms
         of discrimination amount to  persecution  such  as  to  entitle  an
         individual  to  a  grant  of  international  protection   is   fact
         sensitive,  and  will  depend  upon  the  individual's   particular
         characteristics, wealth and background."


16. The Upper Tribunal in TG and others noted, at [89],  that  for  a  Sikh
    Afghan male that has a business and property, there is a risk of  being
    subjected  to  demands  for  money  by  way  of  extortion  by  corrupt
    individuals and in extreme circumstances may be  subjected  to  further
    more serious threats or acts of violence.  In reaching her  credibility
    findings,  and  whether  the  account  advanced  by  the  appellant  is
    plausible, the Judge does not appear to  have  considered  whether  the
    background material is capable of lending any support to  what  appears
    to have been an internally consistent account.  In  my  judgement,  the
    failure to consider whether the  account  given  by  the  appellant  is
    plausible by reference to known objective material, discloses an  error
    of law that is material to the outcome of the appeal.  It may  be  that
    there are internal inconsistencies  in  the  account  advanced  by  the
    appellant but  if  that  was  the  basis  of  the  adverse  credibility
    findings, that is not apparent from a careful reading of the  decision.
    I do not know whether reference to the objective  material  would  have
    made any difference to the credibility findings made by the Judge.


17. In any event, it has been accepted that the appellant is an Afghan Sikh
    and the question is whether he, his wife and their children would  face
    a real risk of persecution in their home area, and  if  so  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect him and his family to  relocate  within
    Afghanistan.  Assuming for a moment that the decision of the FtT should
    be read such that having rejected  the  appellant's  account  as  being
    incredible, the FtT Judge found that the appellant and his family could
    return to Kandahar, at paragraphs [28] to [29] of her decision, the FtT
    Judge appears to conflate the circumstances as they will be upon return
    to Kandahar, with what might be  possible  if  the  appellant  and  his
    family were to relocate to Kabul.


18. At paragraph [28] of her decision, the Judge appears  to  proceed  upon
    the basis that the appellant, his wife and  their  children  would  not
    face a real risk of persecution in their home area.  That is  Kandahar.
    She reaches that conclusion following the adverse credibility  findings
    that she has made, and on the basis that the shop, house and land  that
    the appellant's father owns, remain in Afghanistan. The Judge concludes
    that the appellant's parents, who she found are  still  in  Afghanistan
    would be able to assist the appellant and his family  on  return.   She
    noted that the assets could be  used,  should  the  appellant  wish  to
    relocate to another part of the country.  Paragraph  [29]  the  Judge's
    assessment of the appellant's ability to worship at a Gudwara, and  the
    children's access to education is based entirely upon what is available
    in Kabul, rather than Kandahar.  From a careful reading of the  Judge's
    findings and conclusions, in my judgement the Judge did not  adequately
    address the two separate issues.  That is, whether  the  appellant  and
    his family would face a real risk of persecution in  their  home  area,
    and if so whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him and his family
    to relocate within Afghanistan.  In TG and others, the  Upper  Tribunal
    confirmed that whether it is reasonable to expect a member of the  Sikh
    or Hindu  communities  to  relocate  is  a  fact  sensitive  assessment
    requiring a number of relevant factors to be considered.  The  Tribunal
    noted that given  their  particular  circumstances  and  the  declining
    numbers, the practicability of settling elsewhere for  members  of  the
    Sikh and Hindu communities must be carefully considered, and that those
    without access to an independent income are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
    reasonably relocate because of  depleted  support  mechanisms.   In  my
    judgement, the careful assessment urged, has not been  carried  out  by
    the FtT.


19. It follows that the decision of the FtT must be set aside.  As  to  the
    disposal of the appeal, Mr Harrison submits that as the credibility  of
    the appellant is something that is at the heart  of  this  appeal,  the
    appropriate course is to remit the matter back to the FtT  for  hearing
    de novo.  I have decided that it is appropriate to  remit  this  appeal
    back to the First-tier Tribunal, having taken  into  account  paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement  of  25th  September
    2012.  In my view, the nature and extent of any  judicial  fact-finding
    necessary will be extensive. The parties will be advised of the date of
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


20. The appeal is allowed and the appeal is remitted the FtT  for  a  fresh
    hearing of the appeal with no findings preserved.


21. I have made an anonymity direction.



Signed                                  Date          28th July 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia










TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

There can be no fee award.


Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

