
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01639/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th June 2019                    |On 28 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                     Y I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on 26th March 1986, is a citizen of  Albania.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Collins of Counsel.  The Respondent was
    represented by Mr Walker, a Senior Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for asylum and that application  had
    been refused by the Respondent on 6th February 2019.  She had  appealed
    that decision and her appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    Kelly and Dunne sitting as a panel at  Bradford  on  21st  March  2019.
    They had dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 3. Application for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and granted on 14th May 2019 by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the basis that the panel  arguably  did  not  correctly  or  adequately
    direct itself in respect of the country guidance decision in TD and  AD
    CG [2016] UKUT 00092.  Directions were issued for  the  Upper  Tribunal
    firstly to decide whether an error of law had been made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the matter comes before me in accordance  with  those
    directions.

Decision

 4. Mr Walker fairly and properly accepted that a material error of law had
    been made by the judges in their failure to properly consider the  case
    of TD and AD CG [2016] UKUT 00092 when considering the  potential  risk
    on return to the Appellant of being  re-trafficked  and  any  potential
    relocation  and  other  features;  particularly   given   the   general
    acceptance of the Appellant's credibility and her  case  that  she  had
    indeed been the victim of trafficking.

 5. A material error of law was made by the panel in this case  and  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and direct that the  case
    be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal  not  before  either  Judges
    Kelly or Dunne.

 6. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


