
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01356/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10th November 2017                     |On 20th November 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr Bikramjit Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Legal Representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wilsher, promulgated 26th April  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 9th  March  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born on  15th  May
    1974.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in  June  2003,  clandestinely,
    and he claimed asylum the following day.  There was a  Dublin  transfer
    request to Germany thereafter.  The claim  was  not  decided,  but  the
    Appellant absconded until 2010, when  his  lawyer  had  made  a  legacy
    application.  He was invited for interview.  This did not  take  place.
    He was refused on non-compliance grounds  on  11th  October  2015.   He
    appealed this and succeeded on procedural grounds on  3rd  March  2015.
    He was interviewed on 17th April 2015.  His asylum claim was refused on
    26th January 2017.  Judge Richard heard the appeal against that refusal
    decision on 9th March 2017.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge succinctly summarised the Appellant's claim.  This  was  that
    the Appellant lived in a village in India.  He had been  the  supporter
    of a local political party, by the name of Akali Dal, but had  paid  no
    role in the party of any significance and did not have  any  particular
    knowledge of its  policies.   In  the  summer  of  2001,  he  had  been
    assaulted by a member of the  rival,  Congolese  Party,  and  taken  to
    hospital.  The judge found no reason to doubt this claim (see paragraph
    5).  However, he went on to then say that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    evidence before him to suggest that  the  Appellant  would  be  of  any
    continuing interest  to  political  rivals  in  India  now.   His  oral
    evidence was that the police took him to the hospital and ensured  that
    he received treatment.  He was not charged with any offence.  He had no
    outstanding warrant for his arrest.  The incident "was a random act  of
    violence by a political thug" (paragraph 5).  It was  held  that,  "the
    evidence therefore does  not  disclose  anything  like  persecution  as
    required by the relevant case law..." (paragraph 5).

 4. The judge then went on to give consideration of the Appellant's Article
    8 claim.  He made two findings.  First, that the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE which contains the essential  thrust  of
    the Article  8  claims  on  a  domestic  basis,  because  although  the
    Appellant had been in the UK for  fourteen  years,  half  of  this  was
    entirely  unauthorised,  and  the  relevant  Rule  requires  that   the
    Appellant of his age should have spent twenty years in the UK, which he
    had not done, in order to meet the Rules.  Second, that there  were  no
    "very significant obstacles to the  applicant's  integration  into  the
    country to which he would have to go", as an alternative basis  to  the
    requirements in paragraph 276ADE.  He had not lost all  ties  with  his
    family in India.  He had family members there.  There was no reason for
    him to have lost contact  with  anyone  in  India.   Moreover,  "modern
    communications  devices  and  the  internet"  were  available  to   the
    Appellant.  The Appellant claimed that due to lack of money he had  not
    been able to speak with anybody in India, but the judge  rejected  this
    given the low cost of communications technology (see paragraph 6).

 5. In his decision, the judge went on to hold that the Appellant had  been
    living with various people in Leicester, "but there is nothing in  this
    material to  suggest  a  private  life  which  is  of  such  depth  and
    importance to the Appellant that there  is  any  possibility  that  his
    removal would be disproportionate" (paragraph 7).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application were wide ranging, being drafted by  Charles
    Simmons Solicitors, on the Appellant's behalf, beginning with the  fact
    that the judge was wrong to have rejected  the  asylum  claim,  on  the
    basis that the judge overlooked the fact that the Appellant's attackers
    were never caught or charged (see  paragraph  4),  and  ending  with  a
    complaint that the judge had misconstrued the assessment of  Article  8
    by setting too high a threshold for the Appellant to satisfy.

 8. On 31st August 2017, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that
    the judge had arguably failed  to  give  proper  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's claim to Article 8,  as  there  was  no  reference  to  the
    burden and standard of proof regarding Article 8 and no  indication  in
    the body of the decision  that  the  judge  had  applied  the  "Razgar"
    principles.

 9. On 24th  September  2017,  a  Rule  24  response  was  entered  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State.   This  was  to  the  following  effect.
    First, the judge clearly set out the standard of proof at paragraph  4.
    There was nothing in the judge's assessment to indicate a high standard
    of proof had been applied to Article 8.  Second, the  Appellant  relied
    purely on a private life claim under Article 8 but at  paragraph  6  of
    the determination the judge comprehensively set out why  the  Appellant
    could not succeed under paragraph 276ADE(vi).  Third, at  paragraph  7,
    the judge clearly found that the removal was  not  disproportionate  as
    there was insufficient evidence to warrant allowing the appeal  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing before me on 10th November 2017, there was no attendance
    by the Appellant's legal representatives. Charles  Simmons  Solicitors,
    had sent in a Bundle dated 1 November 2017  the  cover  page  of  which
    stated that, "Our client will provide oral evidence at the Hearing  and
    we kindly request that a Punjabi interpreter be made available for  our
    client's assistance." However, this was an 'error of law' Hearing,  and
    not one where the Appellant was going to be called upon to  give  'oral
    evidence'.  No Interpreter was available at the Hearing. At the outset,
    therefore, I asked the Appellant if he  wished  to  say  anything  with
    respect to the 'error of law' issue before the Tribunal,  and  he  said
    that, "I have nothing to say", in English.  I noted that at the hearing
    before Judge Wilsher, on 9th March 2017, the Appellant had appeared  in
    person only, and there was a  Punjabi  interpreter  available  for  the
    Appellant's use, and utilised by Judge Wilsher (see paragraph  3),  but
    that was the occasion when the Appellant had to give evidence, and  his
    credibility assessment had to  be  made  by  the  judge.   The  present
    hearing was on a 'error of law' basis only.  The solicitors had written
    in to say that the Appellant would give 'oral evidence' which  was  not
    the function of this Tribunal to entertain at this stage  (although  it
    might be at a later stage if appropriate).

11. Given that this was a case, Mr Bates, appearing as Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, on behalf of the Respondent, agreed that  he  would
    confine himself solely  to  the  written  grounds  of  application,  by
    Charles Simmons Solicitors, and the determination of those grounds,  by
    the Tribunal, granting permission.

12. On this basis, Mr Bates made the  following  submissions.   First,  the
    statement that the judge was wrong to  have  rejected  the  Appellant's
    protection claim on the basis that he could seek police protection, was
    unsound given that the  Appellant's  attackers  were  never  caught  or
    charged.  Mr Bates submitted that there was a functioning police  force
    in India, and in the Punjab, to which the Appellant  could  return  to.
    He had, after all, been taken to the hospital by the police authorities
    when he alleged that he had been beaten up by a member of the  Congress
    Party.  In any event, however, permission had not been granted on  this
    basis by the Tribunal.

13. Second, the judge was  wrong  to  have  concluded  that  there  was  no
    significant reintegration issues for  the  Appellant,  because  he  had
    built up significant ties in the UK over the period  of  his  residence
    here.  However,  Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the  judge  had  expressly
    addressed this question and had concluded that the Appellant  had  been
    born and bred in India, could speak the language there,  had  not  lost
    all ties with his family, and had been in communication with  them,  so
    that he could reintegrate back into the  country  of  his  origin  (see
    paragraph 6).  Third, the judge had erred in his  assessment  that  the
    Appellant's circumstances were unexceptional.  Mr Bates submitted  that
    the judge had not concluded that the Appellant did not have  a  private
    life  in  the  UK,  but  had  only  concluded  that,  given   all   the
    circumstances highlighted at paragraphs 5 to 7  of  the  determination,
    that there were no exceptional circumstances that he could  rely  upon.
    The suggestion that it was in any  event  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant to return after a period of fourteen years in the UK was not,
    without further basis in fact, sufficient for an Appellant to  win  the
    appeal.

14. Finally, as far as Article 8 was concerned, it was not  the  case  that
    the judge had looked  at  the  "Razgar"  principles,  because,  he  had
    concluded that Article 8 had been engaged, but that the decision was in
    accordance  with  the  law  and  it  was   legitimate,   as   well   as
    proportionate, for the Secretary of  State  to  conclude  as  she  did,
    because "there is nothing in this material to suggest  a  private  life
    which is of such depth and importance to the Appellant  that  there  is
    any possibility  that  his  removal  would  be  disproportionate"  (see
    paragraph 7).  The Appellant was not financially independent.   He  was
    not a person who had lost the use of his Punjabi language.  He had  not
    fully integrated into UK life  here.   No  one  had  attended  to  give
    evidence on his behalf before Judge Wilshire to this effect.





No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

16. First, considering the matter, as I have done, on the basis  of  simply
    the written Grounds of Appeal, and the grant of permission by the First-
    tier Tribunal on 31st August 2017, it is plain that the strongest  part
    of this case was the Appellant's private life rights under  Article  8,
    and whether the judge below had erred in law.  There is nothing in  the
    asylum claim because first, it was a long time ago,  and  secondly  the
    claim to protection was plainly available, and not least given that  it
    was the police authorities that took the Appellant to the hospital, and
    there was no further ill-treatment of the Appellant,  no  offence  with
    which he was charged, and no outstanding warrant for  his  arrest.   As
    far as the Article 8 claim is concerned, it was not the case  that  the
    judge did  not  apply  the  "Razgar"  principles,  because,  the  judge
    concluded that the Appellant's Article 8 rights were engaged, but  that
    the decision was not one that was not legitimate, and not proportionate
    (see paragraph 7).  There was no basis of allowing the  appeal  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

17. Second, as far as  the  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  claim  was
    concerned within the  Immigration  Rules,  the  judge  gave  ample  and
    fulsome reasons  for  why  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed,  having
    absconded for a period of seven years after his arrival  in  2003,  and
    not being  able  to  demonstrate  that  there  were  "very  significant
    obstacles" to the Appellant's integration back into the country of  his
    origin.

18. In respect of both  the  reasons  above,  there  is  nothing  that  the
    Appellant said, or could have said, which either bettered  the  grounds
    of application before this Tribunal, or referred to matters within  the
    judge's determination, such that it could be said that there  had  been
    an error of law.  The judge  was  properly  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusion that he did.  In fact, the  judge  gave  the  Appellant  the
    benefit of the doubt, in accepting that the  Appellant's  "account  was
    broadly consistent and I found no reason to doubt  that  this  incident
    took place" (paragraph 5) when referring  to  his  ill-treatment  as  a
    member of the Akali Dal Party, by a thug belonging to  a  rival  party.
    Ultimately, the Appellant did not succeed both as a matter of  fact  or
    as a matter  of  law  and  the  judge  was  correct  to  come  to  that
    conclusion.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th November 2017
