
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01298/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11th July 2019                    |On 06th August 2019                   |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    m S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Youssefian (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 22nd  September  1964.   The
    Appellant applied for asylum asking to be recognised as a refugee.  His
    claim was based on a purported well-founded fear of persecution in Iran
    on the basis of  his  imputed  political  opinion  and  religion.   His
    application was turned down by Notice of  Refusal  dated  28th  January
    2019.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Skehan sitting at Hatton Cross on 12th March 2019.  Judge
    Skehan anonymised the appeal.  By decision and reasons  promulgated  on
    11th April 2019 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 3. On 24th April 2019 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
     On 31st May 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow granted  permission
    to appeal.  Judge Bristow noted that  the  grounds  asserted  that  the
    judge had erred in her assessment of:-

      a) any future proselytising and evangelising in Iran; and

      b) any risk to the Appellant on return to Iran due to the  Appellant's
         previous conviction there.

    Judge Bristow noted that  the  judge  had  found  it  proved  that  the
    Appellant had genuinely converted from Islam to Christianity  and  also
    found that the Appellant had been convicted of a crime in the 1980s and
    served a sentence of imprisonment.  At paragraph 15 of her decision the
    judge had found it was likely that the Appellant would be questioned on
    return but that he would  not  be  mistreated  and  she  had  found  at
    paragraph 13 that the Appellant would not seek to evangelise or "spread
    the good word" in Iran.  Judge Bristow considered it was arguable  that
    the judge had failed to give consideration or sufficient  consideration
    to the documents  and  that  the  decision  and  reasons  contained  an
    arguable material error of law.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by his  instructed  Counsel
    Mr Youssefian.   Mr  Youssefian  is  familiar  with  this  matter.   He
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is  the  author  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Tarlow.

Submissions/Discussion

 5. Mr Youssefian starts by reminding me (as is  recited  above)  that  the
    judge has accepted firstly that the Appellant is  a  Christian  convert
    and secondly that back in 1982 he spent time  in  prison.   He  submits
    that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  the  way  in  which  he
    assessed the Appellant's likelihood to proselytise in Iran and come  to
    the adverse attention of the authorities and consequently as  a  result
    will be persecuted.  He submits that the key paragraph is to  be  found
    in paragraph 13 of the judge's findings and deliberations.  He  submits
    that in considering whether the Appellant would evangelise in Iran upon
    return the First-tier Tribunal Judge had arguably  failed  to  properly
    focus on the Appellant's conduct in the UK not least given that he  was
    at the very beginning of his faith conversion when in  Iran.   This  is
    something to which the judge makes due reference at paragraph 12 of her
    decision.  Further he submits that the  judge  had  failed  to  make  a
    finding as to whether she accepted that the Appellant had evangelised a
    fellow citizen during his brief  time  in  the  UK  and  contends  that
    whether or not  the  Appellant  has  actually  evangelised  someone  is
    central to his claim as it would form a crucial part of the  assessment
    as to his prospective behaviour in Iran.

 6. Further he considers that the judge's findings at  paragraph  13,  that
    the Appellant's evangelism was an exercise set solely by the church, is
    arguably erroneous in law to disregard and that the judge  ignored  the
    fact that the Appellant chose to join  a  protestant  church  that  had
    evangelism as its centrepiece.  He contends that all that is  necessary
    is for an Appellant to actively seek to evangelise whilst in  Iran  not
    that he would attract public exposure upon return and that his evidence
    is such that he submits it was hard for the judge not to  come  to  the
    conclusion that once in Iran the Appellant would come to the  attention
    of the authorities and proselytise.

 7. Further he contends  that  the  judge  has  made  no  findings  on  the
    Appellant's credibility and failed to take into account the Appellant's
    conduct in the UK.  He asked me to read paragraph 12  of  the  decision
    carefully (which I have done) and submits that it is wrong to  look  at
    the Appellant's conduct in Iran rather than the UK on the basis that he
    already evangelised  a  fellow  citizen  who  had  joined  the  church.
    Further he submits the judge made no findings with regard to the  issue
    of the Appellant's conversion.

 8. Mr Youssefian acknowledges and accepts that converts  can  be  returned
    but submits that the Appellant's actions in the UK  show  that  he  has
    evangelised and that  the  judge  has  not  focused  her  mind  on  his
    activities in the UK and that the distinctions that the judge has  made
    is not one that actually flows.

 9. Secondly Mr Youssefian submits that the Appellant would be at risk upon
    return due to a previous conviction that he had had in the 1980s albeit
    that he notes that at paragraph 17(c)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found that although the Appellant would be questioned  by  the  Iranian
    authorities on return he would not be persecuted.  He acknowledges  the
    law that the Appellant be questioned on return and it will become clear
    that he has converted to Christianity but submits  that  the  error  is
    that nowhere within the decision does the judge refer to the  Appellant
    being an apostate and that apostacy is a crime punishable by death.  He
    submits that this has not been considered by the judge, there has  been
    no proper consideration by the evidence and that there is an inadequacy
    of reasoning.  He refers me to the Secretary of State's own Country and
    Policy Information Note of February 2019  where  it  is  accepted  that
    illegal exit is likely to only be a significant issue  if  the  Iranian
    state has previously manifested an adverse interest in the  person  and
    that given that the  Appellant  had  previously  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities due  to  his  illegal  exit  and  being  a
    deserter that he has once again exited Iran  illegally,  together  with
    the fact that he is now an apostate with a desire  to  proselytise  his
    Christian  faith,  forms   the   Appellant's   well-founded   fear   of
    persecution.  He submits that the judge has failed to provide  adequate
    reasons as  to  why  the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution on return.

10. Finally Mr Youssefian turns to Article 8 and  submits  that  there  has
    been a failure by the judge to have proper regard to  Section  117B  of
    the 2002  Act  and  that  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    Appellant's  proficiency  in  the  English  language,   his   financial
    independence or the nature of his ties and private life and family life
    in the UK.  He submits that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  arguably
    failed to consider the provisions of Section 117 of  the  2002  Act  in
    both form and substance.

11. Mr Tarlow submits that the submissions made by Mr Youssefian amount  to
    little more than disagreement.  He accepts the arguments relate to  the
    question of evangelism and that the Appellant has joined a church.   He
    submits that within a religious community you  will  take  onboard  the
    broad characteristics of that church.  He reminds me that Mr Youssefian
    has accepted that converts can be  returned  and  that  the  judge  has
    focused her mind on the Appellant's activities in the UK and given full
    and clear reasons for reaching her decision.  Mr  Tarlow  asked  me  to
    read the decision thoroughly, submitting that this indicates the manner
    in which the judge has looked at this appeal and has come  to  findings
    which he was perfectly entitled to.  He points out  that  at  paragraph
    17(d) the judge has considered how the Appellant is likely to behave if
    returned to Iran and that the Appellant has claimed to  have  practised
    religion in Iran previously and in a quiet way.  He points out that the
    judge was perfectly entitled to conclude that  there  was  no  conflict
    between the Appellant living quietly and being a  genuine  convert  and
    that because the Appellant was a  member  of  a  church  that  actively
    encouraged evangelism in the UK it did  not  follow  at  all  that  the
    Appellant would decide to follow that particular practice in Iran.   He
    submits that the judge has examined each and every  issue  including  a
    claim under Article 8 and he refers me to paragraphs 18 and 19  of  the
    decision.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. I start by reminding myself that I am not rehearing this matter,  I  am
    merely considering whether or not there are material errors of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   I  am  not  satisfied
    material errors of law are disclosed.  The judge  has  very  thoroughly
    analysed the Appellant's appeal.  She has noted the  Appellant's  claim
    and given substantial consideration to the case law  in  particular  at
    paragraph 8.  Against that background the judge then went on to  recite
    in detail at paragraph 9 to 11 evidence that she heard and at paragraph
    11(b) noted that the executive pastor of the church had given  evidence
    and  that  the  church  depends  on  personal  evangelism  rather  than
    largescale events.

15. Thereafter the judge has made findings.  The judge has noted  that  she
    found the circumstances giving rise to the Appellant's conversion vague
    and difficult to follow and noted the  prospective  reasons  for  that.
    However she concluded that the Appellant had shown a reasonable  degree
    of likelihood that as claimed at date  of  hearing  the  Appellant  had
    genuinely converted to  Christianity  as  claimed.   That  remains  the
    starting point.

16. Thereafter the judge addresses the issues which are the subject of this
    appeal.  At paragraph  13  she  addresses  the  issue  in  relation  to
    evangelism.  I do not recite that paragraph in this decision but I have
    read it.  The judge concluded  that  the  Appellant  had  not  shown  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that he would seek to evangelise and/or
    spread the good word should he return to Iran.  Those are findings that
    she was perfectly entitled to make and ultimately the submissions  made
    on this issue on his behalf by Mr Youssefian amount to little more than
    mere disagreement with the findings of the judge.

17. The judge then goes  on  to  consider  the  issue  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's alleged criminal conviction and previous history.  She does
    this at paragraphs 14 and 15.   She  has  noted  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence therein with  regard  to  these  issues  is  accepted  and  at
    paragraph 15 has  concluded  that  whilst  it  is  likely  he  will  be
    questioned on return it is not likely  that  he  would  be  mistreated.
    Again these are findings that the judge was entitled to make.

18. The judge has then gone on  at  paragraphs  16  and  17  to  give  very
    detailed consideration to the authorities, in particular the provisions
    of FS and Others (Iran -  Christian  Converts)  Iran  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
    00303.  Despite being an old  authority  that  remains  good  law  with
    regard to any suggestion that there is a death penalty  for  conversion
    to Christianity,  albeit  that  I  note  that  there  are  more  recent
    authorities in particular SJ and JM [2008] UKAIT 82.

19. The judge has given very full and consideration to the manner in  which
    she would expect the Appellant to behave  if  returned  to  Iran.   She
    notes that he has provided evidence in  relation  to  living  alongside
    Christians previously and that he has claimed to practise his  religion
    in Iran in a quiet way.  There is no reason she has concluded  that  he
    would do anything different.  She has made  findings  at  paragraph  17
    that she was entitled to.

20. Finally the issue remains as to consideration  under  Article  8.   The
    judge has at paragraphs 18 and 19 given due consideration  therein.   I
    accept that there is no mention therein specifically of Section 117  of
    the 2002 Act.  However the judge has given sufficient consideration  to
    the Appellant's position under Article 8 and the mere failure  to  make
    specific reference to the provisions of Section 117 do not constitute a
    material error of  law  bearing  in  mind  that  the  judge  has  given
    consideration to the Appellant's Article 8 position and done  so  quite
    thoroughly.

21. This is a judge who has carried out a very thorough  analysis  and  has
    made findings that she was entitled  to.   It  is  not  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to go behind those findings providing they are reasoned and do
    not disclose material errors of law.  They do not  for  all  the  above
    reasons.  They are well constructed and thought through.  Of  course  a
    different judge may have come to a different conclusion but this  judge
    has considered all the relevant factors and made findings that she  was
    perfectly entitled to.  In such circumstances the decision discloses no
    material errors of law and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is maintained and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses no  material  errors
of law.  The Appellant's appeal is consequently dismissed and  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and that order is maintained.


Signed                              Date 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
