
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01234/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th November 2016                     |On 21st November 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                    H.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Cole, Solicitor, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity is granted in these proceedings. As a protection claim, it is
appropriate to do so.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  Dearden)  promulgated  on  21st  July  2016,   dismissing   the
    Appellant's appeal against deportation.   The  Appellant's  deportation
    appeal was resisted on a claim that to deport him would be contrary  to
    his refugee convention rights and against his rights  under  Article  3
    and Article 8 ECHR. The FtT found these claims were not  made  out  and
    therefore the Appellant could not bring himself within the exception to
    automatic deportation in Section 33(2) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Iraq (born 7th May 1982).  It is accepted that he is of Kurdish origin,
    coming from Kirkuk region.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  31st
    October 2000 claiming asylum and related protection on  the  same  day.
    That claim was refused by the Respondent. He lodged an appeal which was
    subsequently  heard  on  15th  January  2004.   At  that   point,   the
    Appellant's representatives informed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    that the asylum and related protection aspects of the appeal  were  not
    to be pursued.  The judge at  that  hearing  went  on  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's remaining claim under  Article  8.   The  Appellant  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 3rd June 2004,  but  by  this  time  he  had
    absconded.

 3. The next significant  event  occurred  on  20th  March  2011  when  the
    Appellant was convicted, at Sheffield Crown  Court,  of  wounding  with
    intent to do grievous bodily harm. For this he was sentenced to a  term
    of imprisonment of ten years.  In the light  of  this  conviction,  the
    Respondent  served  upon  him  a  notice  of  liability  to   automatic
    deportation,  dated  30th  September  2011.   The  Appellant  responded
    raising  asylum  grounds.   He  was  subsequently  interviewed  by  the
    Respondent on 15th January 2015; the Secretary  of  State  refused  his
    claims in a decision dated 20th January 2016.  It is his appeal against
    that decision which forms the basis of the present matter.

The FtT Hearing

 4. When the Appellant's appeal came before the FtT,  the  judge  helpfully
    divided the claim into three component parts;

      1) the historic events forming the reasons why the Appellant left Iraq
         in 2000.

      2) an Article 8 claim on the basis of his present relationship with LB
         and her 14 year old son.

      3) an Article 15(c) risk on return to the Appellant.

 5. For the purposes of this decision  no  challenge  is  raised  to  Judge
    Dearden's  fully  reasoned  findings  against  the  Appellant  on   the
    credibility of his historic  claim,  nor  on  the  adverse  credibility
    findings concerning the Article 8 claim. The judge's findings on  those
    matters stand and are to be regarded as final.

 6.  The  sole  challenge  to  the  decision,  centres   on   the   judge's
    consideration of the Article 15(c) risk which the Appellant  claims  he
    would face on a return to Iraq.

 7. The grant of permission succinctly sets out the  issue  before  me  and
    says as follows;

         "1.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Dearden)   dismissed   the
             appellant's appeal against  a  refusal  of  his  international
             protection and human rights claims.

         2.   The Judge rejected the  appellant's  account  and  his  asylum
             claim.  That is not challenged.  He also  rejected  his  claim
             under Art 8 and that is not challenged.  However,  in  respect
             of Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive the Judge accepted
             there was a 15(c) risk in Kirkuk (the appellant's  home  area)
             but that he could internally relocate to Baghdad or the IKR.

         3.   The grounds identify arguable errors by the Judge in  reaching
             that finding without properly considering AA and  the  factors
             relevant to relocation including in making  the  finding  that
             the appellant could obtain a CSID from Kirkuk  simply  because
             he had family there.

         4.   For these reasons, permission to appeal is granted".

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision of Judge
    Dearden discloses a material error requiring the  decision  to  be  set
    aside and re-made.

The UT Hearing

 8. Before me, Mr Cole appeared on behalf of the Appellant; Mr Harrison for
    the Respondent.  Mr Cole's submissions  kept  to  the  grounds  seeking
    permission and relied upon the grant of permission itself. He submitted
    that the matter before me was a narrow and discrete issue.  He referred
    to the judge's decision and said in particular the judge had failed  to
    give reasoned findings on the issue of  whether  the  Appellant  either
    has, or will be able to obtain a CSID.  Further, the judge  has  failed
    to make reasoned findings on whether the Appellant has  family  members
    or friends in Baghdad able to accommodate  him.   The  judge  fails  to
    factor in or make findings on whether the Appellant can find a  Sponsor
    to access a hotel room or rent accommodation in Baghdad.  Further,  the
    judge failed to factor in and give a finding on whether  the  Appellant
    is from a minority community. Taking those  matters  cumulatively,  the
    judge has failed to  engage  with  the  country  guidance  case  of  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).  In these circumstances,
    that amounts to a legal error and the matter should be returned to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for comprehensive findings to  be  made,  following
    the CG guidance in AA.

 9. Mr Harrison, whilst relying on a Rule 24  response,  acknowledged  that
    the issue before me is a narrow one and said  that  if  I  were  to  be
    satisfied that the grounds seeking permission were made  out  then  he,
    too, would ask that the matter be returned to the FtT as that would  be
    the appropriate Tribunal for further fact-finding to be made.   He  did
    mention that the judge had erred  concerning  the  Respondent's  S.  72
    certification, but agreed that there was no cross-challenge raised, and
    in any event, the Respondent had openly conceded the point  before  the
    FtT.

Consideration

10. I find I am satisfied that in an otherwise fully reasoned decision, the
    FtT judge has not shown that he has followed the necessary step by step
    approach to risk on return which is set out in the country guidance  of
    AA (Iraq). I accept that the judge has said with good  reason  that  he
    does not find the Appellant to be a credible witness but nevertheless I
    find he fails to apply the principles set out in AA. Therefore there is
    a failure to show a fully reasoned finding  that  the  Appellant  could
    safely internally relocate to Baghdad or the IKR.  By failing to follow
    the  step  by  step  guidance  in  AA,  the  FtT  has  not  shown  that
    consideration has been given to all the relevant evidence placed before
    it.  So far as that part of the decision is concerned, the error  is  a
    material one and the decision is set aside.

11. The matter will now be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge
    Dearden) for a hearing to take place limited to the Article 15(c)  risk
    on return.  The Appellant will need to attend to give  evidence.   Full
    findings of fact relevant to  that  evidence  will  need  to  be  made,
    following the step by step guidance set out in AA.  It  is  appropriate
    that the First-tier Tribunal re-make the decision.  This was  also  the
    view of both the representatives.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set  aside.   The  appeal  will  be  re-made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  For the avoidance of doubt, there is no challenge  to  the  FtT's
findings on the historic aspect of the Appellant's asylum  claim  and  there
is no challenge to the Article 8 ECHR claim.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     18 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

