
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01047/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 November 2016                        |On 13 December 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |LS                                                |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


                                  Anonymity


I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This  direction
applies to both the applicant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant and her adult son are both  nationals  of  Pakistan  born
    (respectively) on 25 August 1938 and 10 September 1966. They  are  aged
    78 years and 50 years respectively. They had appeals before the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT")  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  against
    decisions of the respondent of 20 January 2016  refusing  their  asylum
    and human rights claims of 11 September 2015.

 2. Their appeals were heard in a combined hearing on 19 August 2016 before
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  O'Brien.  I  shall  refer  to  the
    appellant's son hereafter as her son or the son.

 3. The judge allowed the son's appeal on asylum grounds. He dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds stating, at [47] of his  decision,
    that "there is no evidence that she would be individually persecuted or
    subjected to serious harm if she  returned  to  Pakistan  without  [her
    son]" (my emphasis).

 4. The evidence before the judge was that the appellant was dependent upon
    her son and part of his family unit in Pakistan. The son, his wife  and
    children and the  appellant  fled  Pakistan  together.   The  appellant
    continued to live with the son and his family in the United Kingdom.

 5. The judge allowed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds on the
    basis of Article 8, stating that there was no challenge to her evidence
    that she was wholly dependent on her  son.  He  gave  his  reasons  for
    allowing her appeal on the basis of  Article  8  at  [48]-[49]  of  his
    decision. The respondent has not challenged  the  judge's  decision  to
    allow the appellant's appeal on the basis of Article 8.

The issue

 6. The issue in this case is a narrow  one.  It  relates  to  whether  the
    appellant should have been successful in her appeal on  asylum  grounds
    in line with her son.

 7. Mr Fripp confirmed that it was not suggested  that,  if  the  appellant
    returned to Pakistan, she herself would be persecuted as  a  result  of
    any act directed at her.

 8. The appellant's case may be summarised as follows:

    i)      Notwithstanding the fact that the judge had allowed  the  son's
        appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  he  should  have  presumed  that  the
        appellant, her son and his family would be returning to Pakistan as
        a family unit.

            Mr Fripp submitted that the determination  of  the  Immigration
        Appeal Tribunal ("IAT") in Met Sula  and  dependants  [2002]  UKIAT
        00295 was authority for the proposition, advanced at para  3.20  of
        'Asylum Law and Practice,  second  edition  (2010),  by  Symes  and
        Jorro, that it should be presumed that  all  members  of  a  family
        group would face removal together.

            It should be noted that para 3.20 of Asylum  Law  and  Practice
        relies upon extracts from [82] and [85]  of  the  decision  in  Met
        Sula, as does Mr Fripp in advancing the proposition that the  judge
        should have presumed that  the  appellant  would  be  returning  to
        Pakistan with her son and his wife and children. These extracts are
        in bold at [16] below.

            The decision in Met Sula is attached to  this  decision  as  an
        appendix.

      ii)   If the judge had presumed that the appellant's son and his  wife
        and children would be returning to Pakistan with her, he would  (or
        should) have found that any acts of persecution perpetrated against
        the son would amount to  persecution  of  the  appellant.  In  this
        regard, Mr Fripp  referred  to,  and  relied  upon,  El  Merhabi  v
        Minister of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  [2000]  FCA  42,
        Katrinak v SSHD [2001] EWCA Civ 832 at [23] and FM (FGM)  Sudan  CG
        [2007] UKAIT 00060.

    iii)    Such persecution would  be  for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason
        because a family is a "particular social group" (SSHD v Fornah; K v
        SSHD [2006] UKHL 46) and the persecution of the appellant would  be
        by reason of her membership  of  a  particular  social  group.  The
        ground relied upon, i.e. membership of a particular  social  group,
        need not  be  the  only,  or  even  the  primary,  reason  for  the
        apprehended persecution. It is enough that the ground  relied  upon
        is the effective reason for the persecution.

Relevant factual background

 9. The judge accepted the son's  evidence  that  he  had  given  a  speech
    advocating  increased  religious  tolerance   in   Pakistan   and   the
    establishment of multi-faith prayer rooms in universities. He  accepted
    the son's evidence that he had subsequently experienced problems  which
    included being physically attacked in his office, being  told  that  it
    was known where his children went to  school,  being  shot  at  on  one
    occasion by people on motorbikes whilst he was driving his car  and  on
    another occasion having his moving  car  bracketed  by  two  people  on
    motorcycles who told him he would be killed. His wife was with  him  on
    one occasion and his son on another occasion. The judge  accepted  that
    the son would, if he returned to Pakistan, continue to speak out  about
    religious tolerance.  The judge found that  the  son  would  not  enjoy
    sufficient protection in his home area.  In  his  consideration  of  an
    internal flight alternative, the judge found that  the  son  was  well-
    known academic who  was  physically  distinct.  He  accepted  that  the
    Taliban would come to learn of his return to Pakistan wherever he  went
    and whichever institution  he  worked  for.  He  did  not  consider  it
    reasonable for the son to give up his long  and  successful  career  in
    order to gain anonymity which he considered would in itself  amount  to
    persecution. He therefore found that the son had a well-founded fear of
    persecution in Pakistan on the ground of religion. He therefore allowed
    his appeal on asylum grounds.

10. As stated at [3] above, the judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum grounds stating that there was no evidence  that  she  would  be
    individually persecuted or subjected to serious harm if she returned to
    Pakistan without her son.

11. It is important to note that there was  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant would not herself face any  direct  acts  of
    persecution on account of her relationship with her son. There  was  no
    evidence before the judge to suggest that, even if the appellant's  son
    and his family were to return to Pakistan with the appellant  and  they
    experienced persecution, the appellant  would  herself  experience  any
    acts directed at her. In the account of events  that  had  occurred  in
    Pakistan, there was no mention of  any  acts  having  been  perpetrated
    against the appellant directly notwithstanding that she had lived  with
    the son as part of his family unit. This is the reason why reliance  is
    placed on the argument that any acts of persecution of  her  son  would
    also amount to persecution of the appellant herself.

The decision in Met Sula

12. The case  of  Met  Sula  concerned  an  appeal  under  s.65(1)  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (the "1999 Act") by a man with his wife
    and children as his dependants. They were  all  citizens  of  the  then
    Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is important to note that  the  wife
    and children did not have separate decisions and did not lodge separate
    notices of appeal. The wife had not claimed asylum in  her  own  right.
    The adjudicator, Mr H W Turcan, accepted the wife's evidence  that  she
    had been brutally raped by the Serbs and was a  traumatised  individual
    in respect of whom he said "it would be surprising if the [Secretary of
    State] felt able to conclude that it would be appropriate to return her
    to Kosovo."  Nevertheless, he  proceeded  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

13. Leave to appeal to the IAT was granted  limited  to  the  human  rights
    grounds. Nevertheless, the IAT made some observations  in  relation  to
    the asylum grounds which I shall summarise at this point because  these
    observations provide some clarity to the reasoning deployed by the  IAT
    in relation to the human rights grounds and upon which Mr Fripp relies.



14. In relation to the asylum case, the IAT reasoned as follows:

    i)      Having considered the relevant legislation as  it  then  stood,
          the IAT concluded that, for a person to have a right of appeal  on
          asylum grounds, he or she must have made an asylum claim in his or
          her own  right.  There  could  be   no  asylum  claim  without  an
          individual asylum claim and only a person who has claimed  in  her
          or her own right was entitled to receive a corresponding decision.
          The right of appeal against it is only held by a  person  who  has
          had such a decision ([14]). The then statutory framework  made  it
          clear that the  appeal  right  against  a  claim  for  asylum  was
          dependent upon the making of an individual asylum claim ([8]).

    ii)     If a family member has been included in another person's asylum
          claim as a dependant, the decision that is made in relation to the
          dependant is not  the  same  as  the  decision  made  against  the
          principal applicant. The decision made against  the  dependant  is
          sometimes described as an "in line with" or "derivative" decision.
          ([17]). The then statutory scheme did not provide a person who  is
          a dependant with a right of appeal against the derivative decision
          ([18]).

    iii)    In the case before it,  the  adjudicator  was  correct  not  to
          determine the wife's asylum appeal given that she had not made  an
          asylum claim and there was as yet no decision  against  which  she
          could appeal ([42]).

    iv)     Given his finding that return of  the  appellant's  wife  would
          place her at real risk of serious harm against which  there  would
          be no effective protection,  the  adjudicator  should  have  asked
          whether the principle set out by the Court of Appeal  In  Katrinak
          could have assisted the appellant, i.e. whether the persecution of
          the appellant's wife could itself amount  to  persecution  of  the
          appellant ([44]).

    v)      However, even if the adjudicator had addressed  this  question,
          the IAT  did  not  think  that  his  conclusion  would  have  been
          different ([45]). The IAT gave two reasons at  [46].  First,  that
          the adjudicator's conclusion may have been  that,  notwithstanding
          the situation of his wife,  the  appellant  would  not  experience
          persecution himself. The IAT  considered  that  Katrinak  was  not
          authority for the proposition that, in the case of return of every
          couple, risk of harm to one will inevitably entail risk of harm to
          the other. Whether the return together of the  appellant  and  his
          wife would cause him  as  well  as  her  persecutory  harm  was  a
          question of fact needing further  examination.  However,  the  IAT
          considered (this was the IAT's second  reason)  that  it  was  not
          necessary for it to conduct that examination because it  took  the
          view that there was no applicable Refugee  Convention  reason  for
          any harm that the wife might face in Kosovo because the Serbs were
          no longer in control of Kosovo and thus any ill-treatment that the
          wife might face in Kosovo would not be for  a  Refugee  Convention
          reason (47]).

15. In relation to the human rights ground of appeal, the  IAT's  reasoning
    (insofar as relevant to the issues in this case) may be  summarised  as
    follows:

    i)      In Kehinde (01TH2668), the IAT decided  that,  where  the  only
          appeal before the adjudicator is that of the appellant,  that  did
          not mean that the human rights of his dependants are irrelevant to
          his human rights appeal. Within the context of a s.65  appeal,  it
          was essential to take account of the human rights not only of  the
          appellant but also of any other person who stood  to  be  directly
          affected by the decision made against the appellant. Thus, in  the
          context  of  an  appeal  brought  by  an  appellant  with   family
          dependants, the decision made on the appellant's appeal  must  not
          amount to an act which is incompatible with the  human  rights  of
          any relevant members of his family ([71]).

    ii)     At [72], the IAT said that, in the context of  a  human  rights
          appeal which involves a husband, wife and children, it seemed that
          "this requirement was similar (although not identical)" in  effect
          to that identified by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Katrinak  in  the
          context of an asylum appeal  and  that,  under  both  the  Refugee
          Convention and the ECHR, risk to one  member  of  the  family  can
          sometimes  entail  risk  to  the  appellant.  However,   the   IAT
          emphasised that it must be demonstrated that "the threatened well-
          being of a family member is in  fact  integrally  related  to  the
          threatened well-being of the appellant".

    iii)    Given that the adjudicator had found an apparent breach of  the
          wife's Article 3 right, he should have applied  the  principle  in
          Katrinak and considered separately whether the appellant's Article
          3 right would be violated because of the adverse impact on him  of
          the traumatisation that would be caused to her by  being  returned
          along with him ([74]). The IAT said  that  it  could  not  make  a
          finding either way on the appellant's Article 3 claim  "given  the
          absence of wholly adequate evidence on  this  issue"  ([76]).   At
          [87], the IAT repeated that  it  did  not  consider  that  it  had
          adequate evidence to decide the issue of the appellant's Article 3
          position and that one relevant  area  of  evidence  would  be  the
          likely impact on the appellant of circumstances in Kosovo  insofar
          as they affected his wife.

    iii)    The IAT decided that it was not necessary to remit  the  appeal
          because it decided to allow the appellant's appeal under Article 8
          for reasons which may be summarised as follows:


            a)   The adjudicator declined to find a  breach  of  Article  8
             because he considered  that  removal  was  too  theoretical  or
             speculative ([78]).


            b)   The adjudicator was wrong to consider that removal was too
             theoretical or speculative because what he had before him was a
             s.65 appeal against a decision to  remove.  It  was  an  appeal
             brought by a claimant who had stated that his wife and children
             were  his  dependants.  There  was  no  undertaking  from   the
             respondent that the appellant's wife and children would not  be
             removed at the same time as  the  appellant.  Integral  to  the
             appeal was that the appellant's  wife  and  children  would  be
             removed with him. Their situation would be dealt with "in line"
             with his. The derivative decisions against  them  were  to  the
             effect that they would be removed along with the  appellant  as
             members  of  his  family  under  s.10  of  the  1999  Act.  The
             adjudicator should therefore have considered as  a  given  fact
             that the appellant would be returned together with  his  family
             ([80]).

16. It is at this point that I will set out the passages in  Met  Sula  and
    upon which Mr Fripp relied. They  are  the  extracts  in  bold  in  the
    following quote from Met Sula:

            "82.  Following  Ravichandran[1]  principles  the  task  of  the
             adjudicator in asylum or asylum-related appeals  is  to  decide
             the appeal on the assumption that removal will take place there
             and then,  although  for  administrative  reasons  that  rarely
             happens. In an appeal with family dependants this assumption is
             simply extended to cover removal of the family along  with  the
             appellant. Inevitably there will be many practical matters that
             will affect what the  Secretary  of  State  eventually  decides
             administratively to do about implementing removal of  families;
             there will quite often be complications of the  kind  noted  in
             the Tribunal decision in  the  case  of  Milanovich  (01TH1556)
             which concerned an appellant whose wife was and  children  were
             of  a  different  nationality.  However,  Parliament  has   not
             allocated responsibility for  those  matters  to  adjudicators.
             Their task is to decide whether an appellant's removal would be
             contrary  to  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human   Rights
             Convention. Thus a decision on the appellant  posits  that  his
             dependants will be removed along with him.

            85.  If the  approach  taken  by  the  adjudicator  were  to  be
             followed the result would be that  in  virtually  every  asylum
             appeal in which dependants were involved, it would be  open  to
             either party to seek to persuade  the  adjudicator  to  take  a
             different  view  depending  on  the   contingencies   of   what
             applications or claims had been made, or were going to be made.
             Issues of whether the Secretary of State was or was not  minded
             to make one or other decision in  response  would  besiege  the
             adjudicator. The adjudicator's task of prognosis  is  difficult
             enough without adding to it the need to  make  speculations  of
             this kind."

17. Mr Fripp submitted, in reliance upon the text I have emboldened  above,
    that the correct basis of assessment of the appellant's asylum case was
    not that the son's appeal on asylum grounds had been  allowed  so  that
    his absence from Pakistan would mean  that  the  family  would  not  be
    targeted. The correct position was to decide the risk of persecution on
    the presumption that the entire family, including the appellant,  would
    return to Pakistan together. On that basis, he submitted that the judge
    should have concluded that the appellant had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution because persecution of her son, with whom she would live as
    she has done in the past, would amount to persecution of the  appellant
    herself.

Discussion

18. There are three main difficulties with the submission advanced  on  the
    appellant's behalf. Each of these is determinative of  the  appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal with the consequence that, even  if  I  am
    wrong in what I say about  any  one,  the  remaining  difficulties  are
    determinative.

The first difficulty

19. The argument advanced, that the judge should  have  presumed  that  the
    appellant would be returning to Pakistan with her  son,  his  wife  and
    children, was not advanced before the judge.  I  have  noted  that  the
    judge recorded at [21] of his decision as follows:

            "21. In respect of  the  Second  Appellant  [i.e.  LS],  it  was
             submitted that persecution of her son  constituted  persecution
             of her. In any event she was a long-term dependant of  her  son
             and also was an  important  carer  for  her  granddaughter  who
             suffered serious health problems."

20. It does not follow, from the mere  fact  that  it  was  submitted  that
    persecution of the appellant's son constituted persecution of her, that
    it was implicit that it was the appellant's case before the judge  that
    the judge should presume that  the  appellant  would  be  returning  to
    Pakistan with her son and his family irrespective of  any  decision  he
    made in relation to the son's asylum claim, given  that  the  appellant
    had a separate appeal from her son and that Met  Sula  was  not  argued
    before the judge.

21. Furthermore, I am satisfied that it cannot be said that the  judge  was
    obliged to make such  a  presumption  on  the  ground  that  it  was  a
    'Robinson obvious' point, i.e. a point which is obvious in the  context
    of  international  obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention.   This
    principle is derived from the judgment in R v SSHD  ex  parte  Robinson
    [1997] EWCA Civ 3090, to the effect that  "obvious  points  of  Refugee
    Convention should not go unconsidered with the risk  that  this  county
    might find itself to have breached its international  obligations"  (AM
    (Serbia and others v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 16 at [21]).  Not only is  it
    the case that Met Sula is a decision of some vintage and which  is  not
    available  on  the  Tribunal's  website,  the  submission  that  it  is
    authority for the proposition that such a presumption should have  been
    made is misconceived and wrong  for  the  reasons  given  at  [22]-[29]
    below.

The second difficulty

22. There are five points here.

23. Firstly, given that leave to appeal to the IAT was granted  limited  to
    the human rights grounds of appeal, anything the IAT said  in  relation
    to the asylum case or the  Refugee  Convention  was  strictly  speaking
    obiter.

24. Secondly, it is clear, in my view, that the IAT's observation  at  [82]
    and [85] about it being necessary to decide an appeal on the assumption
    that removal will take place there and then  and  that  the  assumption
    extends to cover removal of the family relates only to cases  in  which
    there is one appellant with the family members being dependants in  his
    or her claim in the sense that they do not have  separate  appeals.  Mr
    Fripp submitted that this assumption applies to the appellant  but  did
    not engage with the fact that it is clear from the IAT's  reasoning  in
    Met Sula, in particular, the fact that  it  drew  a  clear  distinction
    between individuals in a family unit  who  have  made  separate  asylum
    claims and therefore have separate decisions and separate  appeals  and
    those who are dependants in the asylum  claim  of  a  member  of  their
    family and who therefore receive "in line" or "derivative decisions" so
    that they do not have an independent right to appeal. It is clear  that
    the IAT's obiter observations  at  [82]  and  [85]  of  Met  Sula  only
    concerned those who are dependants in an appeal on asylum grounds.

25. Accordingly, the submission  advanced  on  the  appellant's  behalf  in
    reliance upon Met Sula is simply misconceived and wrong,  in  my  view.
    The passages from [82] and [85] of Met Sula that I have quoted in  bold
    at [16] above have been taken out of context.

26. Thirdly, not only is it the case that the IAT's reasoning  in  relation
    to the asylum case was obiter, as were its  observations  at  [82]  and
    [85], my attention was not drawn to any authority for  the  proposition
    that these observations by way of obiter should be read across to those
    who have separate  appeals  regardless  of  the  circumstances  of  the
    individual case. The decision in Met Sula was a decision to  remove  in
    circumstances where the IAT noted that there was  no  undertaking  from
    the respondent that the wife and children of the appellant in Met  Sula
    would not be removed at the same time as the appellant in that case and
    that the derivative decisions in the case of the wife and  children  in
    Met Sula were to the effect that they would be removed along  with  the
    appellant in Met Sula as members of his family under s.10 of  the  1999
    Act. In contrast, the appellant in the  instant  case  has  a  separate
    decision to refuse her asylum and human rights claims. It was  part  of
    the respondent's case before the  judge  that  the  appellant  had  not
    explained why she would be unable to return to Pakistan without her son
    (the judge's decision at [5] and the  "Detailed  Reasons  for  Refusal"
    attached to the decision letter dated 20 January 2016, at [52]).

27. Fourthly, the IAT decided in Met Sula that it was necessary for a judge
    to decide whether a decision was incompatible with the human rights  of
    anyone affected directly by it. It therefore  followed,  in  the  IAT's
    view, that the human rights of dependants in an appeal brought on human
    rights grounds fell to be considered notwithstanding that they  do  not
    have a separate appeal on human rights grounds. It is  clear  from  the
    obiter reasoning of the IAT in Met Sula that, given the then  statutory
    framework, this principle could not  be  read  across  and  applied  to
    dependants in an asylum claim  precisely  because  the  then  statutory
    framework made it necessary for an individual to have a right of appeal
    on asylum grounds before it was  necessary  for  a  judge  to  consider
    whether the individual was a refugee. That is the  reason  why,  in  my
    view, the IAT was careful to ensure that its obiter  comments  at  [82]
    and [85] concerned asylum appeals with dependants - see  the  parts  of
    the sentences underlined below from [82] and [85] of Met Sula:

            "82. ... In an appeal with family dependants this assumption  is
             simply extended to cover removal of the family along  with  the
             appellant.

            85.  If the  approach  taken  by  the  adjudicator  were  to  be
             followed the result would be that  in  virtually  every  asylum
             appeal in which dependants were involved, ..."

28. Accordingly, it cannot  be  said  that  the  IAT  intended  its  obiter
    observations at [82] and [85] to apply to claimants who  have  separate
    appeals on asylum grounds.

29. Fifthly, as a result of the fact that the appeal of the appellant's son
    in the instant case had been allowed on asylum grounds, there is simply
    no basis for any presumption that he will return to  Pakistan  with  or
    without his wife and children. Any such presumption would be  based  on
    pure speculation. No authority is given for the proposition that judges
    should embark upon such speculation. I  have  dealt  with  (above)  the
    arguments advanced in reliance upon Met Sula.

The third difficulty

30. The IAT in Met Sula considered that Katrinak was not authority for  the
    proposition that, in the case of return of every couple, risk  of  harm
    to one will inevitably entail risk  of  harm  to  the  other  and  that
    whether the return together of the appellant in that case and his  wife
    would cause him as well as her persecutory harm was a question of  fact
    needing further examination. In applying  this  concept  in  the  human
    rights context,  it  said,  at  [72],  that,  under  both  the  Refugee
    Convention and the ECHR, "it has to be demonstrated that the threatened
    well-being of a family member is in  fact  integrally  related  to  the
    threatened well-being of the appellant"  and,  at  [87],  that  in  the
    particular circumstances of that case, one relevant  area  of  evidence
    would  be  the  likely  impact  on  the  appellant  in  that  case   of
    circumstances in Kosovo insofar as they affected his wife.

31. It is therefore clear that the IAT in  Met  Sula  considered  that  the
    question whether acts perpetrated against one individual  would  amount
    to persecution of another is a question of fact in each case.  Although
    the adjudicator in the Met Sula case had found that  the  wife  was  at
    real risk of serious harm, the IAT considered that he (the adjudicator)
    may nevertheless have found that notwithstanding the situation  of  the
    wife the appellant  in  that  case  would  not  experience  persecution
    himself.

32. In  the  instant  case,  I  have  noted  that  the  judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings, which I have consulted, shows that the appellant gave very
    limited oral evidence at  the  hearing.  She  did  not  give  any  oral
    evidence about the impact upon her of  any  difficulties  her  son  may
    experience if he were to return to Pakistan with her. I have also noted
    that she said in her witness statement at [25] as follows:

            "... Any threat directed at my son is a threat to  me  not  only
             because we live together but also because if  anything  happens
             to my son, my grandchildren or my daughter-in-law  would  cause
             me harm and great pain...."

33. The appellant does not explain precisely how she will suffer  harm.  In
    stating that she will experience great pain, she is saying no more than
    that she will be very upset if anything  happens  to  the  son.  In  my
    judgment, this evidence in the appellant's witness statement  does  not
    amount  to  evidence  that  the  impact  upon  the  appellant  of   any
    persecutory acts against  her  son  would  be  such  as  to  reach  the
    threshold for persecution. To decide otherwise would  effectively  mean
    that the mere existence of a family relationship or a close bond,  with
    little more, is sufficient in itself to establish persecution under the
    Katrinak principle, which cannot be right.

34. On this basis alone, the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    stands to be dismissed. Even if I am wrong in everything I have said at
    [19]-[29] above so that it is shown that the judge should have presumed
    that the appellant's son and his wife  and  children  would  return  to
    Pakistan with her, any such error (if he did err in that way,  which  I
    do not accept, for the reasons given above) is not material. There  was
    simply insufficient evidence  before  him  upon  which  he  could  have
    properly found, without embarking upon  speculation,  that  the  impact
    upon the appellant of any acts perpetrated against  her  son  would  be
    such as to reach the threshold for persecution.

35. I have therefore concluded that the judge did  not  materially  err  in
    law. I therefore dismiss the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

      Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


[pic]
Signed                                              Date:       12  December
    2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
                                  Appendix
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]

-----------------------
[1] Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97

