
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01781/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House Stoke                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th November 2017                         |On 11th December 2017         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     fc
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford of Counsel instructed by Whitefield
Solicitors    Limited
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision  of  Judge  Dhaliwal  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on  9th  January  2017.   The
    Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  She has a dependent son born  [  ]
    2008.

 2. In brief the Appellant's immigration history is that she arrived in the
    UK on 12th May 2009 with a Tier 1 dependant visa which expired on  10th
    November 2011.  That visa was extended until 22nd November  2013.   The
    Appellant made a further application for  leave  to  remain  which  was
    refused on 12th June 2014 with no  right  of  appeal.   She  failed  to
    return to Pakistan.  She then claimed asylum on 11th  July  2014  which
    application was refused on 5th December 2014.   That  claim  was  based
    upon anti-Islamic activities of herself  and  her  then  husband.   Her
    appeal against that refusal was heard on 16th April 2015, and dismissed
    in a decision promulgated on 6th May 2015.

 3. The Appellant remained in the UK.  She made a further asylum  claim  on
    29th January 2016.  This claim was refused on 9th February  2016  which
    caused the Appellant to appeal, and the appeal was heard by the FtT  on
    29th November 2016 and dismissed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  9th
    January 2017.

 4. The appeal heard  by  the  FtT  on  29th  November  2016  involved  the
    Appellant's claim that she was part of a social  group,  being  a  lone
    female with a child.  She claimed that she had  been  divorced  by  her
    husband and disowned by her family.

 5. The FtT dismissed the appeal on all grounds finding that the  Appellant
    would not be at risk if returned to Pakistan, and also finding that her
    removal from the UK would not breach Article 8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    There was no challenge to the findings made by the FtT in  relation  to
    risk on return. The single challenge to the FtT decision, was that  the
    FtT had erred by failing to make any findings on, or have any regard to
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (the 2002 Act).

 7. It was submitted that the Appellant's child had resided in the  UK  for
    in excess of seven years, and therefore the FtT should have  considered
    whether it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.
     The FtT had failed to consider the reasonableness test.

 8. It was contended that the FtT had erred by failing to take into account
    the guidance  given  in  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  which
    indicates that if a child has seven years' continuous residence,  leave
    to remain should be granted unless there are powerful  reasons  to  the
    contrary.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted.

Error of Law

10. On 2nd June 2017 I heard submissions from both parties in  relation  to
    error of law.  The Respondent contended there was no material error.  I
    found there was a material error of law disclosed in the FtT  decision,
    as contended in the grounds seeking permission to appeal.  I set  aside
    the decision of the FtT in relation to consideration of section 117B(6)
    but preserved the findings which had not been challenged,  in  relation
    to risk on return.

11.  Full  details  of  the  application  for  permission,  the  grant   of
    permission, the submissions made by both parties,  and  my  conclusions
    are contained in my decision dated 6th June 2017, promulgated  on  15th
    June  2017.   I  set  out  below  paragraphs  13-23  which  contain  my
    conclusions and reasons for setting aside the FtT decision;

         13.  As indicated at the hearing, I find that  the  FtT  materially
             erred in law as contended in the  grounds  seeking  permission
             and therefore the decision must be set aside for the following
             reasons.

         14.  The only challenge to the  FtT  decision  related  to  section
             117B(6) of the 2002 Act which for ease of reference I set  out
             below;

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.

         15.  It was common ground before the FtT that the child arrived  in
             the United Kingdom on 12th May 2009, and  that  the  Appellant
             had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  him.
             Therefore the child  is  a  qualifying  child  as  defined  by
             section 117D.

         16.  The best interests of a child must be considered as a  primary
             consideration, and at paragraph 42 the FtT concluded that  his
             best interests would be met by remaining with his mother,  the
             Appellant.

         17.  There is, however, no specific reference  to  section  117B(6)
             nor any reference to MA (Pakistan).  This,  without  more,  is
             not an error of law, provided the appropriate legal principles
             have been followed.  In my view those principles have not been
             followed in this case as the FtT decision does not reveal  any
             consideration of whether it would be reasonable to expect  the
             child to return to Pakistan.

         18.  The test in paragraph 45 is not a  reasonableness  test.   The
             FtT in  that  paragraph  makes  reference  to  exceptional  or
             compelling circumstances.

         19.  I set out below in part, paragraph 49 of MA (Pakistan);

             However, the fact that the child has been in the UK for  seven
             years would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in  the
             proportionality  exercise  for  two  related  reasons:  first,
             because  of  its  relevance  to  determining  the  nature  and
             strength of the child's best interests and second, because  it
             establishes as a starting point that leave should  be  granted
             unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

         20.  The guidance set out above has not been followed by the FtT.

         21.  The error of law is material and means that  the  decision  of
             the FtT must be set aside.  However there was no challenge  to
             the FtT findings that the Appellant would not be  at  risk  if
             returned to Pakistan and those findings are preserved.

         22.  When I announced at the hearing that the FtT decision was  set
             aside, Mr Saini applied for an adjournment of eight weeks,  as
             the Appellant wished to adduce further evidence in relation to
             her son, as last week he had  been  referred  by  his  General
             Practitioner to a specialist, and the report was awaited.

         23.  I granted that application.  Having considered paragraph 7  of
             the Senior President's Practice Statements, I decided that  it
             was not appropriate to remit this  appeal  back  to  the  FtT.
             There will be a further hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
             The issue to be decided relates to section 117B(6) of the 2002
             Act, and whether it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to leave the United Kingdom.

Re-making the Decision

12. The hearing was listed to be re-made on 7th August  2017  but  on  that
    date Counsel who represented the Appellant applied for  an  adjournment
    to obtain an independent Social Worker's report.  That application  was
    granted and a new hearing date of 24th November 2017 was allocated.

13. At the hearing on 24th  November  2017  the  Appellant  attended.   She
    required the assistance of an  interpreter  in  Urdu.   There  were  no
    difficulties in communication.

14. However Mr Bedford indicated that it was not proposed to call evidence.
     Both representatives agreed that  there  was  a  narrow  issue  to  be
    decided, which related to section 117B(6).  The Appellant's  solicitors
    had submitted a supplementary bundle of documents containing 63  pages.
    This bundle includes an independent Social Worker  report  prepared  by
    Charles Musendo dated 13th November 2017.

15. I firstly heard submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   It  was
    accepted that the child had resided in the UK for in  excess  of  seven
    years.  Mrs Aboni submitted that seven years from  age  four  would  be
    more significant that the first seven years of life.

16. It was submitted that the child is not  at  a  critical  stage  in  his
    education, and his life is predominantly focused upon his  mother,  the
    Appellant.  It was submitted that  there  is  a  functioning  education
    system in Pakistan.  It was contended that the  child  spoke  Urdu,  it
    being noted that the Appellant at all Tribunal hearings, had  not  been
    able to communicate in English and required an interpreter in Urdu.

17. Mrs Aboni submitted that there was no evidence that the child  required
    any special educational needs, and pointed out that the author  of  the
    report had accepted all that he had been told by the  Appellant,  which
    conflicted with the preserved findings made  by  the  FtT.   Mrs  Aboni
    submitted that this applied in particular to paragraphs 11  and  54  of
    the report.

18. With reference to paragraph 37, which refers to  a  teacher  writing  a
    letter dated 27th April 2017, commenting that the Appellant's child  is
    suspected to have autism spectrum disorder, Mrs Aboni pointed out  that
    the letter had  not  been  produced,  and  there  was  no  evidence  to
    establish that the child suffered from autism.

19. With reference to paragraph 41 which referred to a transfer from school
    being disruptive, Mrs Aboni pointed out that if the child  remained  in
    the UK, there would in due course be a transfer to another school.

20. It was submitted that the best interests  of  the  child  would  be  to
    remain with his mother, and that it was reasonable for  him  to  return
    with his mother to Pakistan.

21. Mr Bedford submitted that in considering a  human  rights  appeal,  the
    Tribunal needed to consider whether it would  be  disproportionate  for
    the child to leave the UK, and the issue to be considered in this  case
    related to reasonableness.

22. I was asked to place weight  upon  the  Social  Worker's  report  which
    concluded that the best interests of the child would be  to  remain  in
    the UK.  Mr Bedford submitted that the report disclosed that the  child
    is possibly autistic, with special educational needs.  It  is  relevant
    that he has been educated in English, and that he needs  a  routine  in
    order to thrive.  The report also made a relevant point in  that  there
    is no corporal punishment in schools in the UK, but corporal punishment
    exists in schools in Pakistan.

23. I was asked to find that  the  report  disclosed  that  the  child  has
    friends and teachers upon whom he depends, and the Respondent  had  not
    shown that special educational needs could be catered for in  Pakistan.
    The Secretary of State had not produced any  evidence  to  dispute  the
    conclusion that the  child  has  special  educational  needs.   It  was
    submitted that in Pakistan the child would not have family support  and
    as the Appellant has been twice divorced, this may mean that she  would
    be without family support.  Mr Bedford concluded by submitting that the
    Respondent had not produced any evidence  to  counter  the  conclusions
    reached by Mr Musendo, therefore the appeal should be  allowed  on  the
    basis that it would not be in the best interests of the child to  leave
    the UK.

24. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

25. The issue before me relates to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  It  is
    appropriate that I set out at this stage the preserved findings of  the
    FtT in relation to the Appellant's  claim  she  would  be  at  risk  in
    Pakistan.  The FtT did not accept that, and I set out below  paragraphs
    32 and 33 of the FtT decision in  which  the  conclusions  on  risk  on
    return are set out;

         "32. Based on the evidence before me, I find that

             (i)  the Appellant is a single divorced female with an 8  year
             old child.

             (ii) that if returned, the Appellant  will  not  return  as  a
                  single female, she has the support of her family including
                  her mother, sister and brothers.  She had been  through  a
                  divorce previously and her family were not  only  able  to
                  take her back into their  family  home  but  found  a  new
                  partner for her to get remarried.  I see no difference  in
                  the family  attitude  simply  because  this  is  a  second
                  separation.  Indeed, the Appellant on her statement  dated
                  15th November 2016 accepts that she still has the  support
                  of her mother and sister.  I further find that she has the
                  support of at least one of her brothers, S,  if  not,  the
                  others.  The Appellant has not been disowned.

             (iii)    Rumours may have  been  spread  about  the  Appellant
                  working as a prostitute but those rumours do not amount to
                  persecution.

             (iv) Whilst the Appellant may not be educated, she is a  woman
                  who can stand her own ground, she previously supported her
                  husband  who  spoke  publically  against  extreme  Islamic
                  figures.  She decided to marry Mr C against the wishes  of
                  some male family members, she is not a woman that is timid
                  in any way and is independent and resilient.

             (v)  That there is no risk of persecution or serious harm from
                  Mr C or his family.  To the contrary, Mr C  is  reasonably
                  likely to go through the courts and follow  the  rules  of
                  the land, as has been shown by his  conduct  thus  far  to
                  gain access to his child.  I find that there  is  no  real
                  risk or  reasonable   likelihood  of  hostility  from  her
                  former husband such as to raise a real risk of harm.

             (vi) Even if I were incorrect on this there is no  reason  why
                  this Appellant could  not  relocate  to  another  part  of
                  Pakistan, should she wish to do so, whilst uneducated, she
                  is able to stand on  her  own  two  feet  and  has  family
                  support in the background.

         33.  Considering these factors, I conclude that  the  core  of  the
             Appellant's claim is not  reliable.   The  Appellant  has  not
             established that she has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
             and as such, her claim for asylum fails."

26. In considering Article 8 I adopt the balance sheet approach recommended
    by Lord Thomas at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, and in  so
    doing have regard to the guidance as to the functions of this  Tribunal
    given by Lord Reed at paragraphs 39 to 53.

27. The Appellant and her son live together in the UK.  There is no contact
    with her former husband.  The Appellant believes  that  he  resides  in
    Canada.

28. It is clear that the Appellant and her child  have  established  family
    life together.  They have also established private  lives  in  the  UK.
    The Respondent's decision would not interfere with their  family  life,
    as it is not proposed to attempt to separate  the  Appellant  from  her
    son.  They would either  remain  in  the  UK  together,  or  travel  to
    Pakistan together.  The Respondent's decision would  however  interfere
    with the private lives that they have established in  the  UK,  if  the
    decision means that they have to travel to Pakistan.

29. When considering proportionality,  my  view  is  that  it  is  for  the
    Respondent to  prove  that  the  decision  is  proportionate.   I  have
    considered the guidance in Kaur [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC).  This confirms
    that the best interests of a child must be assessed in  isolation  from
    other  factors,  such  as  parental  misconduct.   The  best  interests
    assessment should normally be carried  out  at  the  beginning  of  the
    balancing exercise when considering proportionality.

30. I follow the guidance in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ  874  and  in
    particular paragraph 35 when considering the best interests of a child.
     Some of the factors to be taken into account include the  age  of  the
    child, and length of residence in the UK, how long the child  has  been
    in education and what stage their education has reached, to what extent
    has the child been distanced from the country of  proposed  return  and
    how renewable their connection with it may be.  Consideration must also
    be given to any linguistic, medical  or  other  difficulties  that  the
    child may have in adapting to life in that country, and to what  extent
    removal would interfere with their family life or their rights, if they
    have any, as British citizens.

31. At paragraph 36 of EV (Philippines) it is stated that the  Tribunal  is
    concerned with how  emphatic  an  answer  falls  to  be  given  to  the
    question, is it in the best interests of  the  child  to  remain?   The
    longer the child has been here, the more advanced or critical the stage
    of education, the looser the ties with the country in question, and the
    more deleterious the consequences of return,  the  greater  the  weight
    that falls into one side of the scales.  If it is overwhelmingly in the
    child's best interests not to return, the need to maintain  immigration
    control may well not tip the balance.  By contrast  if  it  is  in  the
    child's best interests to  remain,  but  only  on  balance  (with  some
    factors pointing the other way) the result may be the opposite.

32. The Social Worker's report concludes that the  best  interests  of  the
    child would be to remain with his mother.  That is clearly the case and
    not in dispute.  I attach some weight to the  Social  Worker's  report,
    but find that the conclusions are flawed to  an  extent,  in  that  the
    author of the report has accepted all that he  has  been  told  by  the
    Appellant.  The author of the report may not have been made aware  that
    there had been an appeal hearing in which findings were made, and those
    findings were preserved by the Upper Tribunal.  I refer to the findings
    made by the FtT at paragraph 32 of its decision.

33. By way of example I refer  to  paragraphs  11  and  12  of  the  Social
    Worker's report, in which it is stated that the Appellant's life  could
    be at risk because she is twice divorced and she risks being  a  victim
    of honour killing.  I do not find any foundation for those  conclusions
    reached by the author of the report, and I  reject  those  conclusions.
    There are other examples within the report in a similar vein.

34. I make it clear I base my assessment of the best interests of the child
    in isolation from  other  factors,  my  conclusion  is  that  the  best
    interests of the child would be to remain in the UK.   I  do  not  find
    this to be overwhelmingly the case, but  I  do  attach  weight  to  the
    length of time that the child has resided in the UK, and  that  he  has
    been educated in this  country,  and  that  he  has  made  friends  and
    established a private life for himself.  I accept that the child  would
    not have any memories of Pakistan, taking into account his  very  young
    age when he left that country.

35. I do not however accept that the child has been diagnosed with  autism.
    I  do  not  accept  that  the  report  confirms  that  he  has  special
    educational needs.  There is reference at paragraph  37  to  a  teacher
    writing a letter stating that it was suspected  that  the  child  might
    have autism spectrum disorder.  It is confirmed at  paragraph  76  that
    there has been no assessment to confirm that  the  child  suffers  from
    autism.

36. The report prepared by the Social Worker does not specifically  address
    the issue of reasonableness, but concentrates on the best  interest  of
    the child, concluding that those best  interests  would  be  served  by
    remaining in the UK.  As previously stated, I do not disagree with that
    overall conclusion, on balance.

37. That however does not mean that the  appeal  must  succeed.   The  best
    interests of a child can be outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of
    other considerations.  It was found in Kaur that  the  seventh  of  the
    principles in the Zoumbas code does not preclude an outcome whereby the
    best interests of a child must  yield  to  the  public  interest.   The
    seventh principle in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 is that a child must not be
    blamed for matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as  the
    conduct of a parent.

38. When considering proportionality and the public interest  I  must  have
    regard to the considerations listed in section 117B of the 2002 Act.

39. In considering whether it would be reasonable to expect the Appellant's
    child to leave the UK I take into account the guidance in MA (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  At  paragraph  101  it  is  confirmed  that  when
    considering reasonableness the Tribunal  must  take  into  account  the
    wider public interest and this includes  the  immigration  history  and
    behaviour of the parents of the child.  Earlier  in  this  decision,  I
    have set out part of what is stated in paragraph 49 of  MA  (Pakistan),
    which confirms that significant weight must be given to the fact that a
    child has been in the UK for seven years or more.

40. In this case the Appellant's child has resided  in  the  UK  since  May
    2009, approximately  eight  and  a  half  years.   The  starting  point
    therefore is that leave should be granted  unless  there  are  powerful
    reasons to the contrary.

41. Sub-paragraph (1) of section 117B  confirms  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the  public  interest.   Sub-
    paragraph (2) confirms that it is in the public  interest  that  people
    seeking to remain in the UK can speak English.  The Appellant  has  not
    proved that she can speak English.

42. Sub-paragraph (3) confirms that it  is  in  the  public  interest  that
    people seeking to remain in the UK are  financially  independent.   The
    Appellant has not proved that she is financially independent.  She  has
    had no leave to remain in the UK since November 2013.

43. Sub-paragraph (4) confirms that little weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life established by an  individual  who  has  been  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, and sub-paragraph (5) confirms that little weight should be
    given to a private life established when a person has had a  precarious
    immigration  status.   The  Appellant's  private  life  was   initially
    established when she had a precarious immigration status  in  that  she
    had limited leave to remain, and thereafter has been established whilst
    she has been in the UK without leave.

44. When considering the public interest, I take into account the Appellant
    was initially granted entry clearance  as  a  dependant  of  a  Tier  1
    Migrant.  Her leave was extended on that basis.  She  has  deliberately
    remained in the UK without leave.  She has made two asylum claims, both
    of which have been refused and gone to appeal.  At both appeal hearings
    judges have made findings that the Appellant is not credible, and  that
    her claims for international protection have no merit.

45. I find that notwithstanding the length of residence of the  Appellant's
    child, it would be reasonable for him to leave the  UK.   I  find  that
    there are powerful reasons for reaching that conclusion,  which  relate
    to the very poor immigration history of  the  Appellant.   It  is  also
    extremely significant that although I find it is overwhelmingly in  the
    child's  best  interests  to  remain  with  his  mother,  it   is   not
    overwhelmingly in his best interests to remain in the UK.  He is  at  a
    very early stage in his education.  I do not accept that he is  in  any
    way at a critical stage in his education.  I do not accept that it  has
    been shown that he has special educational needs.  I do not accept that
    he has been diagnosed with autism.

46. I do not accept that it has been shown that the Appellant's child would
    have any medical difficulties if he moved to Pakistan, nor has it  been
    shown that he would have any language  difficulties.   I  am  satisfied
    that the Appellant's child can communicate in Urdu, and that he does so
    with his mother.

47. There is also the finding made by the FtT that not only would the child
    have the support of his mother, but there would  be  support  from  her
    family.  The Appellant and her child would not be at risk in  Pakistan.



48. There is a functioning education system in Pakistan.  The  child  would
    have access to education.   I  do  not  find  that  evidence  has  been
    submitted to show that he would be at real risk of  suffering  corporal
    punishment.  It is also relevant  that  the  child  is  not  a  British
    citizen, but is a citizen  of  Pakistan.   If  the  child  returned  to
    Pakistan it would be the case that he would have to  leave  the  school
    that he currently attends.  However in  due  course  he  would,  if  he
    remained in the UK, leave that school and move to  another  school.   I
    have made the point that the Appellant's child would have no memory  of
    Pakistan, and therefore he would be moving to a new country, but it  is
    a country of which he is a citizen, where he speaks the  language,  and
    where he has family members and would have family support.

49. I find therefore that there are powerful reasons why  leave  to  remain
    should not be granted to the Appellant  who  has  attempted  to  use  a
    variety of means  to  remain  in  the  UK,  and  I  find  that  in  the
    circumstances it would be  reasonable  for  the  Appellant's  child  to
    return to Pakistan with her.  I conclude that the weight that  must  be
    attached, in this case, to the public interest in maintaining effective
    immigration control, is greater than the weight that must  be  attached
    to the best interests of the child, and the wishes of the Appellant  to
    remain in this country.  The Respondent has proved that the decision to
    refuse the Appellant's human rights claim is proportionate,  and  there
    would be no breach of Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction.   This  is  continued
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
Appellant or any  member  of  her  family.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to a contempt of court.






Signed                              Date 4th December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  The appeal is dismissed.  There  is  no
fee award.






Signed                              Date 4th December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
