
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01174/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2017                         |On 21st December 2017         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               Aso Jabbar Aziz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood of the Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Morris of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 14th March 2017.  The  Appellant
    is an Iraqi citizen of Kurdish ethnicity born on  5th  June  1990.   He
    arrived in the UK illegally on 2nd August 2016 and claimed asylum.

 2. He feared persecution in Iraq on the basis that he had  consensual  sex
    with another man.

 3. His asylum and human rights claim was refused on 20th January 2017  and
    his appeal was heard and dismissed by the FTT following  a  hearing  on
    7th March 2017.

 4. The FTT found at paragraph 38;

         "38. For the above reasons, the Appellant has failed to satisfy me,
             even to the lower standard, that any aspect of his account  in
             these respects is true:"

    The Appellant's account of having sex with another man was rejected  in
    its entirety, and the FTT found that an arrest warrant produced by  the
    Appellant did not support his case.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the FTT had erred in  considering  the
    arrest warrant.  It was contended that the FTT  had  not  followed  the
    guidance in Tanveer Ahmed (Documents unreliable  and  forged)  Pakistan
    [2002] UKIAT 00439.

 6. It was contended that at paragraphs 36 and 37 the FTT had  demonstrated
    consideration of the arrest warrant had been compartmentalised, and the
    evidence had not been considered in the round.  The FTT had  considered
    the arrest warrant,  having  already  reached  its  definitive  adverse
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility.

 7. It was contended the FTT had failed to refer to the background  country
    evidence when assessing the arrest warrant.  That  background  evidence
    indicated that if an accused person did not attend at a police  station
    an arrest warrant would be issued,  and  the  Appellant's  account  was
    consistent with that, in that he had not attended the police station.

 8. It was contended that the FTT had considered the  authenticity  of  the
    arrest warrant, finding at paragraph 37 that the arrest warrant was not
    genuine.  The FTT should have considered whether the document could  be
    relied upon, as indicated in Tanveer Ahmed.  If a document is found  to
    be false, this must be proved by the Respondent and the Respondent  had
    not submitted any evidence to prove the warrant was false.

 9. It was contended that findings of implausibility contained at paragraph
    34 of the decision were unsafe, and the FTT had  failed  to  apply  the
    guidance in HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.  In that decision the Court
    of Appeal had urged judicial decision makers  not  to  reject  accounts
    solely on the basis of implausibility.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused but  a  renewed  application
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan and I  set  out  below,  in
    part, the grant of permission;

         "2.  No specific challenge is made to the judge's findings relating
             to the plausibility and consistency of the Appellant's account
             of events.  However, it is at least arguable  that  the  judge
             may have erred  in  his  assessment  of  the  arrest  warrant.
             Arguably, the judge failed to consider what  weight  could  be
             placed on the warrant in  light  of  the  background  evidence
             relating to the procedures for issuing such documents  in  the
             KAR.  It is also arguable that the judge  may  have  erred  in
             rejecting the authenticity of the document on the sole  ground
             that he had already found the account incredible  rather  than
             assessing the warrant as part of an overall assessment of  the
             Appellant's credibility [37].  Given the numerous reasons  for
             doubting  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's  account  any
             potential error might be found to be immaterial, but  at  this
             stage the grounds are sufficiently arguable to justify further
             consideration at a hearing."

11. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FTT  directed  itself
    appropriately, and it did not err  in  considering  the  principles  in
    Tanveer Ahmed.  It was noted that the FTT referred  to  reliability  at
    paragraph 36, then found at paragraph  37  that  the  warrant  was  not
    genuine, the Respondent submitted that the FTT  had  used  genuine  and
    reliable interchangeably, and made a finding that the warrant  was  not
    reliable, having considered the evidence in the round.

12. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. Mr Wood in making oral submissions relied upon the grounds contained in
    the application for permission to appeal.   He  pointed  out  that  the
    Respondent had not made any allegation of forgery regarding the  arrest
    warrant, and therefore the FTT had erred in finding  that  the  warrant
    was not genuine.  There was no evidence to support such a finding.

14. Mr Wood submitted that the FTT had not correctly applied  the  guidance
    in Tanveer Ahmed.  Mr Wood accepted that it was open  for  the  FTT  to
    make findings of inconsistency in relation to the Appellant's  evidence
    at paragraph 34(iii) but the plausibility findings at  paragraph  34(i)
    and (ii) were flawed  as  the  FTT  had  not  properly  considered  and
    analysed the arrest warrant.  The  FTT  had  not  considered  objective
    evidence in relation to the issue of arrest warrants in Iraq.

15. Mr Diwnycz submitted that there was  no  material  error  of  law,  and
    relied upon the rule 24 response.  It was submitted that  the  FTT  had
    considered the evidence in the round, and reached a  finding  that  the
    arrest warrant was unreliable, and this finding was open to the FTT  to
    make on the evidence.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. There has been, by both parties, reference to  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  the
    principles in that decision are contained in paragraph 38 and  are  set
    out below;

         "1.  In asylum and human rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
             claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely can
             be relied on.

         2.   The decision maker should consider whether a document  is  one
             on which reliance should properly be placed after  looking  at
             all the evidence in the round.

         3.   Only very rarely will there be the need to make an  allegation
             of forgery, or evidence strong  enough  to  support  it.   The
             allegation should not be made without such evidence.   Failure
             to establish the allegation on the balance of probabilities to
             the higher civil standard does not show  that  a  document  is
             reliable.  The decision maker still needs to apply  principles
             1 and 2.  "

18. I find the FTT carried out a comprehensive examination of the evidence.
     At paragraph 28 it is confirmed that all evidence has been taken  into
    account even if not specifically mentioned.  At paragraph  29  the  FTT
    recognises that the appeal largely turns upon the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant, and correctly applies the approach in HK v  SSHD.   The  FTT
    confirms  the  Appellant's  claim  is  to  be  considered  against  the
    background evidence.

19. At paragraph 30 the FTT correctly sets out the burden and  standard  of
    proof.

20. At paragraph 34  the  FTT  sets  out  in  detail  an  analysis  of  the
    Appellant's account, together with reasons for the findings made.

21. At paragraph 36 the FTT refers to  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  makes  specific
    reference to assessing the reliability of  documentary  evidence.   The
    FTT notes that in assessing reliability there is  no  shifting  of  the
    burden of proof to the Respondent.  It is common ground that  if  there
    is an allegation of forgery the burden of proof is on the person making
    the allegation.  In this case there was no allegation of  forgery  made
    by the Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter.

22. Having referred to reliability at paragraph 36, the FTT in paragraph 37
    states, "I do not accept that the arrest warrant is genuine."

23. The reference to genuine has led the Appellant to contend that the  FTT
    found the arrest warrant to be a forgery, which was not alleged by  the
    Respondent, and as the burden of proof is on the  Respondent,  the  FTT
    erred in law.

24. My view is that the FTT erred in paragraph 37 in referring to  genuine.
    However I do not find this error to be material.   It  is  in  my  view
    clear that the FTT was considering reliability.  Reading paragraphs  36
    and 37 together, my view is that the FTT was aware of the principles in
    Tanveer Ahmed, and applied them in assessing  the  reliability  of  the
    arrest warrant.

25. It is arguable, as pointed out by the judge granting  permission,  that
    the FTT judge might have compartmentalised his findings,  by  making  a
    finding the Appellant  was  not  credible  having  assessing  only  the
    Appellant's evidence, and then going on having found the  Appellant  to
    be incredible, to consider the arrest warrant.

26. Although this is arguable, I do not find it to be the case.  My view is
    that the FTT was aware of the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed to consider the
    evidence as a whole, and makes specific reference at  paragraph  36  to
    the fact that "I am required to consider the evidence on any particular
    aspect as a whole and that there is no shifting of the burden of  proof
    to the Respondent."

27. There has been no challenge to the detailed findings made by the FTT to
    the inconsistencies in the Appellant's account contained  at  paragraph
    34(iii)(a)-(h).  I do  not  find  the  FTT  erred  in  considering  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account and I find no error in paragraph
    34(i) and (ii) which contain the FTT credibility findings.

28. I do not find that the FTT erred materially in  considered  the  arrest
    warrant.  I am satisfied that  the  FTT  was  aware  of  the  objective
    evidence, adopted the correct approach by referring to HK v  SSHD,  and
    properly applied the guidance in  Tanveer  Ahmed,  by  considering  the
    evidence in the round.  The error in referring to genuine  rather  than
    reliable in paragraph 37 is not material, and I am satisfied  that  the
    FTT was in fact considering the reliability of the arrest  warrant  and
    considered the evidence in the round.

29. I therefore conclude the grounds, although  skilfully  argued,  do  not
    disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
decision is not set aside and the appeal is dismissed.

The FTT made no anonymity order.  There was no request  made  to  the  Upper
Tribunal for anonymity, and I see no need to make anonymity order.


Signed                              Date 19th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  The appeal is dismissed.  There  is  no
fee award.


Signed                              Date 19th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
