
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01099/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 July and 25 September 2017       |On 27 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               UY (sir lanka)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (03.07.17) and Mr E. Tufan (25.09.17),
                    Senior Home Office Presenting Officers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro sitting at Hatton Cross on  5  April
    2017) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise
    requiring international or human rights protection,  as  a  homosexual.
    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in  favour  of  the
    appellant, and I consider  that  it  is  appropriate  to  maintain  the
    direction for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date  of  birth  is  12
    July 1966.  He came to the United Kingdom on a student visa  issued  to
    him on 12 August 2003.  He successfully extended his leave as a student
    until November 2008, when he obtained leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-
    study) Work migrant.  During the currency of  his  two-year  post-study
    work visa, the appellant returned to Sri Lanka.

 3. He claims that his problems in Sri Lanka started when he had  a  sexual
    encounter with a young man on Hikkaduwa  Beach  in  January  2010.   As
    summarised by Judge O'Garro, the appellant claimed that he met the  man
    on the beach when he was visiting his aunt who lived not far  from  the
    beach.  He said that this man, called Neil, agreed to meet him  on  the
    beach at 6pm later that day.  While he  and  Neil  on  the  beach  were
    engaged in sexually intimate act, they were  attacked  by  a  group  of
    people causing the appellant to sustain physical injury.  He was  taken
    to a police  station  where  he  was  detained  and  mistreated  during
    questioning.  He said that he was released on  bail  the  next  day  on
    condition that he continued  to  report  to  the  police.   He  did  so
    initially, until he decided to return to the United Kingdom on 20 March
    2010, as he was afraid of what would happen to him if he went to Court.

 4. He re-entered the UK on his post-study work visa, and  on  3  September
    2010 he applied for further  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student migrant.  But his application was  refused,  as  were
    further applications for Tier 4 student visas.  Eventually, he  claimed
    asylum on 10 September 2015.  His claim for asylum  was  based  on  his
    fear that if he returned to Sri Lanka he would face ill-treatment owing
    to his sexuality.

 5. On 26 January 2016 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    to recognise the appellant as a refugee.  The account of  what  he  had
    alleged had happened in Sri Lanka in 2010 was incoherent and internally
    inconsistent.  He claimed that there was an outstanding arrest  warrant
    issued by the police for his arrest, but when asked how he knew how  an
    arrest warrant had been issued, he said that he did not know.  He later
    claimed, in interview, that it was his aunt who had told him.  He  said
    that he did not  know  the  details  of  the  warrant.   The  US  State
    Department's 2014 Country Report on Sri Lanka had made clear  that  the
    authorities  very  rarely   enforced   the   criminal   provisions   on
    homosexuality.

 6. The appellant's appeal against the refusal of  his  asylum  claim  came
    before Judge Maxwell sitting at Hatton Cross in the First-tier Tribunal
    on 15 July 2016.  Judge Maxwell found the appellant to be  credible  in
    his claim to be a homosexual.  But he rejected  his  account  of  being
    arrested in 2010 for engaging in sexual activity with another man.

 7. The appellant relied on a letter from Mr  Seneviratne,  dated  28  June
    2016,  which  he  sent  to  Nag  Law  Solicitors.   According  to   the
    letterhead, he was an Attorney at Law and a Notary Public  in  Colombo.
    He enclosed a practising certificate as an Attorney at  Law  which  had
    been apparently issued to him in 1984.  He said that the appellant  had
    contacted him from the UK and instructed him  to  find  out  about  his
    legal suit pending in the Magistrates' Court of Galle.  He said that he
    had visited the Court and had perused the case record of the appellant,
    reference no. [ ]/[ ].  The appellant had been arrested by  the  police
    and released  on  reporting  conditions  for  indecent  behaviour  with
    another male.  The appellant had breached reporting conditions and fled
    the country after his release.  The police had informed the Court,  and
    the Court had issued a warrant for the appellant's arrest.   They  also
    ordered the authority in charge of immigration to arrest the  appellant
    and to produce him to the Court if he tried to re-enter the country.

 8. Judge Maxwell gave a number of reasons as to why he was  not  satisfied
    that either the letter or the practising certificate had been proven to
    the lower standard to  be  either  accurate  or  reliable  evidence  of
    interest expressed in him by the Sri Lankan authorities on  account  of
    homosexual activities.  One of the reasons he gave was  that  while  Mr
    Seneviratne might be an Attorney as claimed, he took judicial notice of
    the fact that the certificate which he had provided could be checked by
    the Sri Lankan High Commission in London for a very modest fee  and  at
    very short notice.  But no such checks  had  been  undertaken  in  this
    case.

 9. In a decision promulgated on 15 September 2016,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McGeachy gave his reasons for  setting  aside  the  decision  of  Judge
    Maxwell.  The first error of law  which  he  identified  was  that  the
    Judge, without notice to the parties, had stated that he did not accept
    the certificate from the Attorney at Law because there was no  evidence
    from the Sri Lankan High Commission that he was qualified to act as  an
    Attorney at Law.  Judge McGeachy found that the Judge had erred in  not
    referring to, and applying, the guidance given by the Court in  Tanveer
    Ahmed.  He remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo
    hearing, save that he preserved the finding of Judge Maxwell  that  the
    appellant was a gay man.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. At the re-hearing of the appellant's appeal before Judge O'Garro,  both
    parties were legally represented.  The appellant's solicitors  compiled
    a supplementary bundle of documents which contained a  letter  from  Mr
    Seneviratne dated 14 March 2017, and what he characterised as certified
    copies of the  appellant's  Court  proceedings  in  Sri  Lanka.   These
    comprised a police report dated 8 June  2010  and  a  warrant  for  the
    appellant's arrest issued by the Magistrates' Court  in  Galle  on  the
    same date.  On the police report, the Officer in  Charge  ("OIC")  said
    that the suspect had been released on  a  bail  bond  and  required  to
    report to the Crime Division of Hikkaduwa Police every Monday.  He  was
    released on 26 March (sic) at about 4pm.  His  fingerprints  were  also
    taken.  The suspect last reported on  15  March  2010  (sic).   But  on
    enquiry from the villagers and the suspect's  family,  they  found  out
    that the suspect had fled Sri Lanka.  Accordingly, he had breached  his
    bail conditions and this was an offence punishable under  sections  365
    and 365A of the Penal Code. He continued: "This is a case  where  there
    is a lot of public  interest  and  the  failure  on  the  part  of  the
    prosecution would be a wrong [precedent] and would lead to  arouse  the
    general public resulting they try to take the law into their hands."

11. According to the arrest warrant, the particulars of the alleged offence
    and reasons for the issue of the warrant were gross  indecency  between
    males and breach of bail condition.

12. In her subsequent findings, the Judge began by acknowledging that there
    was a preserved finding of Judge  Maxwell  that  the  appellant  was  a
    homosexual.  She then referred to LH and IP (Gay men: risk)  Sri  Lanka
    CG [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC), where it  was  held  that  in  general  the
    treatment of gay men in  Sri  Lanka  did  not  reach  the  standard  of
    persecution or serious harm.

13. The Judge noted the submission of  Ms  Harris,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant below, that her client's case could be distinguished from  LH
    and IP because the appellant had an arrest warrant outstanding  against
    him.  So, Ms Harris submitted, if he was  returned  to  Sri  Lanka,  he
    would be arrested and detained, leading to mistreatment.

14. The Judge went on to consider the contents of  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report on Sri Lanka dated September 2015.  In recent years,
    human  rights  organisations  reported  that,  although  not   actively
    arresting  and  prosecuting  members  of  the  LGBT  community,  police
    harassed and extorted money on sexual  favours  from  LGBT  individuals
    with impunity, and assaulted gay men and lesbians in Colombo and  other
    areas.  Although arrested, LGBT  individuals  had  thus  far  not  been
    charged or  prosecuted.  But  there  had  been  reports  of  subsequent
    blackmail, extortion, violence or coerced sexual acts on individuals by
    police officers.

15. The Judge addressed the evidence of Mr Seneviratne  and  the  documents
    which he had produced at paragraphs [37]-[42].  At paragraph [38],  she
    noted the objective evidence  which  said  that  the  authorities  very
    rarely enforced the criminal provisions, "and although  arrested,  LGBT
    individuals have thus far not been  charged  or  prosecuted."   In  the
    light of their evidence, she found that the documents the appellant was
    relying on were "questionable".

16. At paragraph [39], she noted that the claimed warrant of arrest had  no
    date next to the signature.  For this reason, she was not  prepared  to
    give the arrest warrant any evidential weight.

17. At paragraph [40], she noted that the police report had no date on  the
    document.  In addition, in the body of the  document  it  was  recorded
    that the suspect was released on 26 March 2010.  However, according  to
    the appellant's evidence, he  was  arrested  on  25  January  2010  and
    released on 26 January 2010.  In the light  of  this  discrepancy,  she
    said that was also giving no evidential weight to the police report.

18. At paragraph [41], she said that in the  light  of  the  doubts  raised
    about the documents on which the  appellant  relied,  and  since  those
    documents had  been  obtained  through  the  lawyer  whose  letter  the
    appellant also relied on, she was not  going  to  give  any  evidential
    weight to the lawyer's letter.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

19. Ms Harris settled the application for permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.  Ground 1 was that the Judge had erred in her  assessment  of
    the objective evidence.  She submitted that there was no basis on which
    it was open to the Judge to find on the  objective  evidence  that  the
    documents being relied upon by the appellant were "questionable".

20. Ground 2 was that the Judge had materially erred in her  assessment  of
    the arrest warrant and the police report.  The Judge was wrong to  find
    that there was no date on the arrest warrant.  The Judge was also wrong
    to find that there was no date on  the  police  report.   Although  the
    police report made reference to the suspect being released on 26  March
    2010, this was clearly a typographical error.  This was plain,  because
    further on, within the police report, it confirmed that  the  appellant
    had last reported on 15 March 2010.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

21. On 9 June 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant Hutchison  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal because  in  her  view  all  the  points
    advanced by Ms Harris on his behalf were arguable.

Reasons for finding an Error of law

22. I consider that it was open to the Judge to  find  that  the  documents
    from Sri Lanka were "questionable".  As she highlighted, the background
    evidence was to the effect that, although arrested from time  to  time,
    LGBT individuals had thus far not been charged  or  prosecuted.   While
    there was ostensibly the aggravating factor  of  the  appellant  having
    breached his bail conditions, his  arrest  was  also  reportedly  being
    sought in connection with a criminal charge of engaging in  an  act  of
    gross indecency with another male.  Moreover, arguably the  implication
    of the police report is that the police were proposing  to  charge  the
    appellant with gross indecency in any event in  order  to  placate  the
    local populace and prevent them from taking  the  law  into  their  own
    hands.   So,  prima  facie,  the  treatment  that  the  appellant   was
    ostensibly receiving at the hands of the police, even before he  jumped
    bail, was at variance with the background information  as  to  how  the
    police normally behave towards members of  the  gay  community  in  Sri
    Lanka.

23. However, I accept that the Judge erred on the issue of  the  dating  of
    the documents.  Both the arrest  warrant  and  the  police  report  are
    dated. It was open to the Judge to attach less evidential weight to the
    police report because at one point  it  stated  that  the  suspect  was
    released on 26 March 2010, which  did  not  fit  with  the  appellant's
    chronology.  However, the Judge  erred  in  law  in  holding  that  she
    thereby gave the document no evidential weight.  The  same  applies  to
    the Judge's wholesale rejection of the arrest warrant,  in  respect  of
    which she mistakenly found that there was no date next to the  judicial
    signature.

24. At paragraphs [42] and [43] of her decision, the Judge gave  additional
    reasons for disbelieving the core claim.  But she did not  bring  these
    reasons to bear when assessing the probative value of (a)  letter  from
    the Sri Lankan lawyer,  (b)  the  police  report  and  (c)  the  arrest
    warrant.  In short, she  unfortunately  repeated  the  error  of  Judge
    Maxwell, which was to fail to consider the documentary evidence in  the
    round in accordance with the guidance given by the Tribunal in  Tanveer
    Ahmed.

25. Accordingly, I find that the decision of the  Tribunal  dismissing  the
    appellant's protection claim is unsafe and it is vitiated by a material
    error of law, such that it must be set aside and re-made.   However,  I
    do not consider that this is an appropriate case for  remittal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The finding of Judge Maxwell that  the  appellant
    is gay remains a preserved finding.  There is also no challenge to  the
    finding by Judge O'Garro that  the  appellant  had  been  living  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage  with  his  partner  'G'  in  the  United
    Kingdom, but that (absent a successful protection claim) there are  not
    any compelling circumstances that  render  his  removal  to  Sri  Lanka
    disproportionate on family or private life grounds.  The issue in  this
    appeal is whether the appellant faces a real  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm on return to Sri  Lanka  on  account  of  there  being  an
    outstanding warrant for  his  arrest.   The  evidence  bearing  on  the
    resolution of this issue is not extensive, and I am not satisfied  that
    the nature or extent of the judicial fact-finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision to be re-made is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, it is appropriate to remit this case to the First-
    tier Tribunal rather than to retain it in the Upper Tribunal.

26. I am also not satisfied that the effect of the Judge's error  has  been
    to deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or
    other opportunity for that party's case to be put to and considered  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.

The Resumed Hearing on 25 September 2017

27. At the resumed hearing, the appellant was called as a  witness  and  he
    adopted as his evidence in chief his witness statement signed by him on
    11 July 2016. He was asked supplementary questions by Ms Harris, and he
    was  cross-examined  by  Mr  Tufan.  He  also  answered  questions  for
    clarification purposes from me.

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

28. In evaluating the appellant's protection claim, I bear in mind that the
    standard of proof  is  that  of  real  risk  or  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood. I also bear in mind the paragraphs from the Rules  set  out
    below.

29. Under Paragraph 339K, the fact that a person has already  been  subject
    to  persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
    persecution or serious harm, will be regarded as a serious indicator of
    the person's well-founded fear of persecution or serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.

30. Paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules provides that it is the duty of
    the person to substantiate his claim. Where aspects of  his  claim  are
    not supported by documentary or other evidence, those aspects will  not
    need confirmation when all of the following conditions are met:

      i) The person has made a genuine effort to substantiate his claim;

     ii) All material factors at the person's disposal have been  submitted,
         and a satisfactory explanation regarding any lack of other relevant
         material has been given;

    iii) The person's statements are found to be coherent and plausible  and
         do not run counter to available specific  and  general  information
         relevant to the person's case;

     iv) The person has made his claim at the earliest possible time, unless
         the person can demonstrate good reasons for not doing so;

      v) The general credibility of the person is established.

31. On the topic  of  whether  the  appellant's  account  runs  counter  to
    "general information", I accept that there is some force in Ms  Harris'
    submission that a potential distinguishing feature in this case is that
    the appellant was - on his account - caught  having  sex  in  a  public
    place, and so the police had sufficient evidence from eye witnesses  to
    bring a prosecution, whereas normally such evidence  would  not  exist.
    Thus, while in general prosecutions for consensual same sex activity in
    Sri Lanka are rare, a declaration of intent by the police to  prosecute
    the appellant for the offence of committing an act of  gross  indecency
    with another male is plausible in the particular circumstances.

32. The "available specific information" relevant to the  appellant's  case
    is thus crucial. I consider that the contemporaneous  medical  evidence
    which he has produced undermines, rather than  supports,  his  account.
    Most  notably,  he  is  recorded  as  having   told   his   GP   and/or
    physiotherapist in the UK on  or  about  25  March  2010  that  he  had
    sustained an injury to his  knee  on  29  January  2010.  This  is  not
    consistent with his account of sustaining the injury on 25 January 2010
    when trying unsuccessfully to run away from local villagers.  In  March
    2010 the events of late January 2010 would have still been  very  fresh
    in his mind, and it is not credible that he would have been out by four
    days on the date when the injury was sustained,  as  it  was  allegedly
    sustained on the same day that he was dragged by the villagers  to  the
    police station. The later date of 29 January 2010  is  also  consistent
    with the appellant's first consultation with Dr Edirisinghe, Consultant
    Orthopaedic Surgeon at the Teaching Hospital in Kandy,  on  2  February
    2010. It was at this appointment that the medial  ligament  injury  was
    diagnosed.

33. Although the appellant says he was beaten on the face and back  by  the
    villagers, and also beaten by the police while in detention from 25  to
    26 January 2010, he did not seek any medical treatment for any injuries
    sustained as a result of  these  alleged  assaults,  and  there  is  no
    documentary evidence of the appellant purchasing creams or pain-killers
    from a pharmacy for self-administration. The account which he  gave  to
    the doctor was that he had hurt his knee in a fall.  The appellant says
    that he did not tell the truth, as the doctor was the family doctor and
    he was embarrassed. However, it is not credible that Dr Edirisinghe was
    the family doctor as he  signed  all  the  medical  certificates  as  a
    consultant orthopaedic surgeon, not as a general practitioner.

34. On the appellant's account, he had returned to  Sri  Lanka  in  January
    2010 before the expiry of his visa as he could not find a job in the UK
    and he had decided to re-establish himself in  Sri  Lanka.  He  further
    stated in his oral evidence that he had gone  with  his  wife  and  two
    children to his aunt's house five miles  from  Hikkaduwa  Beach  for  a
    family holiday. Against this background, and against the background  of
    the alleged arrest, it is not credible that the appellant  sought  from
    the doctor on 8 February 2010, and again on 22 February 2010, a  signed
    letter certifying on 8 February 2010 that he needed a  minimum  of  4-6
    weeks to recover; and on 22 February 2010 that he  needed  6  weeks  of
    exclusive physiotherapy, followed  by  a  further  6  weeks  of  "light
    duties". This is much more consistent with  the  appellant  having  had
    plans to resume employment in the UK, and needing  to  produce  a  sick
    note to explain his absence. For it is not suggested that the appellant
    had already found new employment in Sri Lanka.

35. The distinguishing feature of PJ (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA  Civ  1011  is
    that in that case it was not  reasonably  contestable  that  the  court
    documents relied on by the claimant had been genuinely extracted from a
    file held at the relevant Magistrate's Court in Sri Lanka.  Given  this
    starting point, it was inherently implausible that the court  documents
    were forgeries, as in order to be forgeries, the  claimant  would  have
    needed to infiltrate forged material into court records genuinely  held
    at the Magistrate's Court in question.

36. PJ (Sri Lanka) is not authority for the proposition that  whenever  the
    Tribunal is presented with a set of court and  police  documents  which
    have been certified as authentic by a Sri Lankan Attorney, the Tribunal
    must treat such documents as being reliable, unless the respondent  can
    establish the contrary.  As was held by Lord Justice David Richards  in
    MR (Sri Lanka) -v- Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 763 at paragraph [8], in the course of his judgment in PJ (Sri
    Lanka) Fulford J stressed  that  documents  should  not  be  viewed  in
    isolation and that the evidence needs to be considered in its entirety.

37. The reliability of  Mr  Seneviratne  is  called  into  question  by  an
    inconsistency between his two letters. In his first letter of  28  June
    2016 he said that he had been instructed by the appellant from  the  UK
    to find out about "his legal suit" pending in the Magistrate's Court in
    Galle. He said that he had visited the Court and  inspected  the  file.
    But he did not claim to have taken copies of the documents on the court
    file. In his second letter of 14 May 2017 he said he was aware of  "the
    circumstances" which the appellant had undergone, "[s]ince  I  was  his
    lawyer". However, he was  not  the  appellant's  lawyer  in  2010:  the
    appellant does not claim to  have  instructed  him  in  2010,  and  the
    message of the attorney's first letter was that his first contact  with
    the appellant was in 2016 when he instructed him to find out about  the
    case pending in Galle. However, the appellant did not know that he  had
    a case pending against him in Galle. All he knew, allegedly,  was  that
    the police had visited his aunt with a warrant for his arrest, which is
    not credible as the police knew that he did not reside with  his  aunt.
    In addition, having allegedly taken the trouble to travel from  Colombo
    to Galle to peruse the court file in 2016, it is not credible that  the
    attorney would not have obtained copies at that juncture.

38. On the appellant's account, Neil (whose full  name  was  known  to  the
    police, according to the police report) was also brought to the  police
    station. Since he and Neil had, on his account, been caught in the  act
    of having sex in a public place, and he had admitted  having  sex  with
    Neil  to  the  police,  there  is  a  fundamental  implausibility   and
    contradiction in the police's alleged behavior. On the one hand, by the
    time of the appellant's alleged release on 26 January 2006, the  police
    had all the evidence they required to charge  the  appellant  and  Neil
    with  an  offence  of  gross  indecency  and  to  mount  a   successful
    prosecution. Moreover, according to the report, they had a very  strong
    incentive to make a public example of the appellant and Neil, which was
    to prevent outraged local people from taking the  law  into  their  own
    hands. However, on the other hand, rather than charging the  appellant,
    they let him go, without - according  to  the  appellant  in  his  oral
    evidence - even requiring  him  to  give  a  bail  bond  or  equivalent
    (although the OIC said that he had given a  bail  bond).  In  his  oral
    evidence the appellant suggested that he  was  charged  at  the  police
    station, but he was vague about this and he was not charged at the time
    according to the  police  report.  Since  the  local  police  were  not
    charging the appellant, there was no good  reason  to  require  him  to
    report to their local police  station  once  a  week,  and  it  is  not
    credible that they would have imposed such a condition. For instead  of
    the appellant remaining safely far away in Kandy  (both  from  his  own
    perspective and from the perspective of him  not  posing  a  continuing
    moral  threat  in  the  district  over  which  the  local  police   had
    jurisdiction), the effect of the condition was to require him to travel
    a considerable distance to and from Kandy every week, and  to  increase
    hugely the risk allegedly apprehended by the OIC of local people taking
    the law into their own hands.

39. The police report presents as contrived. Firstly, it presents as  being
    designed  for  a  different  audience  than  a  local  magistrate.  The
    justification given for prosecuting the appellant - but not  apparently
    Neil - is that the behaviour of  the  two  adult  males  was  not  only
    illegal but "intolerable in the culture of this country".  Secondly, no
    explanation is given as to why the police have not  charged  Neil  with
    the same offence of gross indecency, even though he is on the  face  of
    it no less culpable than the appellant.  The implication of the  report
    is that Neil has been let off, which is inconsistent with  the  alleged
    public outcry. Thirdly, it is suggested that the reason for  the  delay
    in charging the  appellant  was  that  the  police  were  investigating
    whether there were any other gays in  the  area  who  had  operated  in
    connivance with him. However, the police would  have  established  very
    early on that the appellant had only recently returned from the UK, and
    had only just come on a visit from Kandy a few days previously, so this
    line of enquiry is not credible.

40.  The  appellant's  account  is   internally   inconsistent   and   also
    inconsistent with the police  report.  The  clear  implication  of  the
    letter of clarification dated 11 January 2016 was that Neil was already
    his boyfriend, and that when they met on the beach early in the morning
    on 25 January 2010 Neil asked him for help in going  to  Europe  as  he
    knew the appellant had returned from the UK.  The  appellant  initially
    took the same line in his oral evidence - that Neil had approached  him
    on the beach because he knew that he had returned from the UK. But when
    questioned as to how Neil would have known that,  he  reverted  to  the
    alternative version of events put forward  in  his  witness  statement,
    which was that he had never met Neil before, and that the question from
    Neil arose at a later stage of their initial encounter  on  the  beach,
    which the appellant initiated.

41. According to the appellant, he was on  the  beach  with  his  wife  and
    children, and they were staying at his aunt's house,  as  he  was.  But
    according to the police report, before  they  released  the  appellant,
    they visited his aunt's house and took a statement from his  aunt;  and
    police officers went to Kandy to take a statement from his wife. If his
    wife was staying with his aunt, the police  would  have  been  able  to
    interview her there, and they would not have gone to  Kandy  to  get  a
    statement from her in Kandy. The plain implication of the police report
    is that the appellant had separated from his wife before the  incident,
    and they were not living together.

42. For the above reasons, I find that the appellant has not discharged the
    burden of proving, even to the lower standard of proof, that  the  core
    of his disputed claim is true. There are not  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that the appellant was arrested and detained for  having  sex
    in a public place in January 2010; or, if he was, that he was  released
    on condition that he report to the local police station  every  Monday,
    as opposed  to  being  released  unconditionally;  and  there  are  not
    substantial grounds for believing that a warrant  was  issued  for  his
    arrest following his failure to continue to report; or that  a  warrant
    for his arrest remains outstanding. Accordingly, following the  country
    guidance authority cited at [12] above, the appellant does not  qualify
    as a refugee simply on account of his accepted sexual  orientation.  By
    the same token, there is not a real risk of the appellant suffering ill-
    treatment on return to his home country of such severity  as  to  cross
    the threshold of Article 3 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the  appellant's  protection
    claim, and his parallel  human  rights  claim  under  Article  3  ECHR,
    contained an error of law and accordingly the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside and the following decision  is  substituted:
    the appellant's appeal against the refusal of his protection and  human
    rights claims is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







Signed                              Date  26 September 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

