
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01607/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 July 2019                    |On 16 August 2019                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                 IBRAHIM [W]
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with
         the permission of a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  sent
         to the parties on 1 April 2019 following a  hearing  of  20  March
         2019. The tribunal  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
         Secretary of State's decision of 5 February 2019 refusing to grant
         him international protection, on humanitarian grounds and on human
         rights grounds (Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights) but dismissed it on asylum grounds. The  claimant  asserts
         that the tribunal erred in failing to allow the appeal  on  asylum
         grounds or at least in failing to explain why it was not doing so.



      2. The claimant is a national of Iraq and a Sunni Kurd. He has  given
         his date of birth as 1 January 2000. He entered the United Kingdom
         (UK) on 30 July 2018 and  he  made  his  claim  for  international
         protection the day after that. Put simply, his account, which  the
         tribunal accepted as being a credible and truthful one,  was  that
         his brother had had a relationship with a young Iraqi female, that
         her brothers and other family members disapproved, that her father
         is a high-ranking PUK officer in the Kurdish administered area  of
         Iraq (the IKR), that her  brothers shot and killed the  claimant's
         brother, that  there  is  now  a  "blood  feud"  between  the  two
         families, and that had he remained in Iraq, the claimant too would
         have be killed.

      3. The Secretary of State had, in fact,  disbelieved  the  claimant's
         account. But he appeared to accept that,  if  the  account  was  a
         truthful one, the claimant would be at risk in Iraq for  the  1951
         Refugee Convention reason of membership  of  a  particular  social
         group. Such was stated at paragraph 26 of the Secretary of State's
         written reasons of 5 February 2019.

4.    As indicated, the tribunal believed the claimant's account of  events.
On that basis it decided that he would be at risk in his home area of  Iraq.
It also found that he had lost touch with his family, that he does not  have
an important identity document known as a CSID card, and that requiring  him
to relocate away from his home area, in light of  those  matters,  would  be
unduly harsh.

5.     The  tribunals  clearly  explained  and   well   justified   positive
credibility findings and its reasoning as to risk in the home area  and  the
unavailability of internal flight has not been subjected to  any  challenge.
The only issue before the Upper Tribunal, is  the  narrow  one  set  out  at
paragraph 1 above. Permission having been granted on the point there  was  a
hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that that matter  could  be
further considered.

6.    Representation at that hearing was as noted above. I  am  grateful  to
each  representative.  Mr  Howard,  essentially,  relied  upon  the  written
grounds which asserted that a decision as to the applicability of  the  1951
Refugee Convention had been required, particularly, given the  Secretary  of
State's concession (see above) and the fact that the issue had  been  raised
in the grounds of appeal to the tribunal and in a  skeleton  argument  given
to it. Mrs Pettersen, for her part,  and  very  properly  it  seems  to  me,
accepted that the tribunal had failed to deal with the question  of  whether
the claimant is a refugee. In the circumstances she indicated,  when  asked,
that she would not seek to resist my finding an error of law, setting  aside
the tribunal's decision and remaking it on the  basis  that  the  claimant's
appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and under  Article  3  of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights.

7.    I have decided to take that course of action. The  tribunal's  written
reasons  are  careful,  clearly  expressed  and  thorough.  Further  it   is
understandable that the tribunal did not specifically deal with the  Refugee
Convention issue given that the evidence was that the  claimant's  potential
assailants are non-state agents. But there had been  a  concession  in  this
case that if the claimant was to be believed there would  be  an  applicable
1951 Convention reason. The issue had been raised in the grounds  of  appeal
so was before the tribunal. I am not urged to conclude that  the  concession
had been improperly made. I conclude, therefore, that the tribunal made  one
single error in failing to explain  why  it  was  not  concluding  that  the
claimant is a  refugee.  Accordingly,  I  have  decided  to  set  aside  its
decision but I maintain everything else with  respect  to  its  unchallenged
findings of fact and conclusions.

8.    Further, I have decided to go on to remake the decision myself. In  so
doing I allow  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
decision of 5 February 2019 on asylum grounds (membership  of  a  particular
social group) and on  human  rights  grounds  (Article  3  of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights).

9.    Finally, I would make the point that this decision  is  not  authority
for any general proposition regarding blood feuds in  Iraq  and  whether  or
not, in general terms, the existence of such feuds might lead to a  claimant
being regarded as a member of a particular social group.  This  decision  is
based on the specific circumstances of this case and, in  particular,  on  a
concession made by the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  written  reasons  for
refusal of the  international  protection  claim  which  was  not  withdrawn
before me.

Decision

The decision of the tribunal involved the making of an error of law  and  is
set aside.

In remaking  the  decision,  I  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision of 5 February 2109 on asylum  grounds  and  on
human rights grounds (Article 3).

I do not direct anonymity. The tribunal did not do so and I  was  not  urged
to consider doing so myself.


         Signed

                               M R Hemingway
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal

         Dated    14 August 2019




To the Respondent:
Fee award

I make no fee award.


         Signed

                               M R Hemingway
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal

         Dated    14 August 2019
