
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01609/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                            |On 6 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     a a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel, instructed by Dicksons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Azerbaijan.  In a  decision  made  on  2
    February 2017 the  respondent  dismissed  his  protection  claim.   His
    appeal came before Judge N Lodge of the First-tier Tribunal  who  in  a
    decision sent on 16 August 2017 dismissed it.

2.    The  appellant's  grounds  on  which  permission  was  granted  rested
    primarily on a challenge to the judge's stated reasons at paragraph  24
    for departing from the decision made by Judge Bowen  on  23  July  2002
    allowing the asylum appeal of the appellant's sister and finding her  a
    credible witness.  At paragraphs 20-24 the judge stated:

         "20. The appellant claims that he will be  at  risk  on  return  to
             Azerbaijan.  He claims that the Azerbaijani  authorities  will
             persecute him because of his imputed political opinion.


         21.  In 1994 the appellant's father was murdered.  From that  point
             onwards the family received threats.  In his asylum  interview
             in 2005 the appellant does not  ascribe  the  threats  to  the
             Government or the authorities in Azerbaijan.  An unknown group
             was responsible for  his  father's  death,  his  father  being
             killed as a result of a power struggle at the factory where he
             was managing director.  In his screening interview  he  states
             'My father has been killed by some persons  (his  employees)';
             page 44.


         22.  In her Determination of the 23rd July  2002  at  paragraph  54
             Judge Bowen finds that the appellant's sister was perceived to
             be an enemy of the Government because  of  her  father's  high
             position.  Judge Bowen goes  onto  say  that  if  returned  to
             Azerbaijan 'she would suffer persecution for a  cv  reason  at
             the hands of the authorities' and there is no  adequate  state
             protection.  It is noticeable that  in  the  Determination  of
             Judge Bowen there  is  no  reference  to  the  fact  that  the
             perpetrator of the murder has  been  arrested,  convicted  and
             sentenced to imprisonment.  In his asylum  interview  in  2005
             the appellant says 'it is not known' who ordered his father to
             be killed; AIRQ3.  He goes on to  say  he  was  killed  by  an
             employee at the factory and names him; AIRQ7.


         23.  At paragraph 29 one of the issues for Judge Bowen  is  whether
             the Government was covering up the  murder  by  arranging  the
             death  of  the  appellant's  husband,  badly  beating  up  the
             appellant's brother (this appellant)  and  the  appellant  and
             whether this would result in persecution at the hands  of  the
             Government.


         24.  It is against  that  background  that  Judge  Bowen  made  her
             findings that the appellant's sister would suffer persecution,
             if returned, at the hands of the authorities.  I am  satisfied
             that had Judge Bowen been presented with  evidence  that  that
             (sic)  the  murderer  has  been   arrested,   prosecuted   and
             imprisoned it may  be  that  she  may  not  have  reached  the
             conclusion that the  appellant's  fathers'  (sic)  murder  was
             instigated by the state.  I am satisfied  that  I  can  depart
             from the findings of Judge Bowen and consider in the light  of
             all the evidence before me whether the appellant  is  at  risk
             from the Azerbaijani authorities."

3.   In subsequent paragraphs the judge went on  to  identify  a  number  of
    matters which were considered to weigh heavily against the  credibility
    of the appellant's claim.

4.   In submissions Mr Bates said he accepted that the judge  was  wrong  in
    paragraph 24 to say that there was no evidence before Judge Bowen  that
    the appellant's father's murderer had  been  arrested,  prosecuted  and
    imprisoned.  There was.  In the written grounds Ms Rutherford had noted
    that in paragraph 14 of his determination Judge Bowen recorded that the
    appellant's sister in her appeal had said that:

     "... she was not aware of the people who killed  her  father,  but  she
         was aware they worked  for  Haydar  Aliyev.   The  person  who  was
         directly responsible for the killing was taken to court,  following
         a prosecution he was sentenced to 15  years'  imprisonment,  having
         escaped the death penalty"

     and at paragraph 22 she recorded  that  she  had  said  that  "she  has
    subsequently established that the man convicted of her father's  murder
    has been released from prison".

5.   Mr Bates went on, however, to submit that this error  on  the  part  of
    the judge was not material as there was nothing to indicate that it had
    "infected" the judge's other findings.

6.   I am not persuaded by Mr Bates' submissions on immateriality.

7.   It is not in dispute  that  Judge  Bowen's  decision  came  within  the
    Devaseelan  guidelines,  even  though  his  appeal   related   to   the
    appellant's sister.  As the Court of Appeal held in Ocampo [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1276 and AA (Somalia) [2007] EWCA  Civ  1040  such  decisions  fall
    within these guidelines if there is a closely related factual matrix or
    material  overlapping.  Indisputably  there   was   such   a   material
    overlapping here.

8.   The central difficulty with Mr Bates' submission is that the effect  of
    the judge's analysis at paragraph 24 was to reject Ms Bowen's  decision
    as a start-point.   Although  he  did  speak  of  "departing"  from  it
    (language which suggests treating it as a start point), he goes  on  to
    state that he could "consider in the light of all the  evidence  before
    me whether the appellant is at risk from the  Azerbaijani  authorities"
    without any reference to Ms Bowen's decision.   Two  things  flow  from
    this way of formulating matters.  First, the only reason given  for  so
    "departing" was the absence of evidence  that  the  murderer  had  been
    convicted.  That on its face implied that  but  for  this  absence  the
    judge would not  have  departed  from  Judge  Bowen's  findings  (which
    included that there were political motives for  the  murder).   Second,
    the judge was effectively setting Judge Bowen's positive assessment  of
    the appellant's sister's credibility at nought.  This is  confirmed  by
    the judge's subsequent analysis which only  adverts  to  Judge  Bowen's
    decision for the purposes of identifying  discrepant  facts:  see  e.g.
    paragraphs 25 and 40.  By focusing solely  on  the  evidence  at  large
    without regard to how the facts had also been evaluated by Judge Bowen,
    the judge failed to engage with the fact that a previous judicial fact-
    finder (Judge Bowen) had found the sister credible.  It was not  simply
    enough for  Judge  Lodge  to  say,  without  regard  to  Judge  Bowen's
    reasoning, that he considered her "unreliable" (see paragraph 39).

9.   In light of the above I cannot exclude the real  possibility  that  (1)
    had the judge realised there was not a lack of  evidence  before  Judge
    Bowen as regards the  conviction  and  sentencing  of  the  appellant's
    father's murderer, and (2) had he made  a  rounded  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's sister, one that  engaged,  inter  alia,
    with Judge Bowen's reasons  for  finding  her  credible,  he  may  have
    assessed  the  evidence  differently,  particularly  given   that   the
    appellant's evidence was broadly consistent with the background country
    information.

10.  For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and I set aside his decision.

11.  I see no alternative to the case being remitted to  the  FtT.   Nothing
    in my decision should be taken as suggesting Judge  Bowen's  assessment
    of the appellant's sister should be treated  as  a  given  "end-point";
    only that it did require - and will  now  require   -   being  properly
    treated as a start point; and, if the next Judge decides to depart from
    it, it  will  be  necessary  to  do  so  on  the  basis  of  a  correct
    understanding of the evidence that was before Judge Bowen.

12.  To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge N Lodge).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 1 December 2018

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
