
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01559/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th January 2017                 |On 27th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    A.N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Mottershaw of Counsel instructed by Halliday
                    Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Lloyd of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 1st July 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male  Ethiopian  citizen  born  10th  May  1990  who
    claimed asylum based upon his political opinion,  and  his  involvement
    and support for the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF).

 3. The application was refused on 22nd  September  2015.   The  Respondent
    accepted that the Appellant is an Ethiopian of Oromo ethnicity.  It was
    not accepted that the Appellant had been arrested in Ethiopia following
    attendance at a demonstration, nor was it accepted  that  he  had  been
    detained following his arrest.

 4. The Appellant's appeal was heard by the FtT on 24th June 2016.  The FtT
    did not find the Appellant had given a credible account in relation  to
    his claimed activities in Ethiopia.  The FtT did not  accept  that  the
    Appellant was or was perceived to be an OLF supporter or sympathiser in
    Ethiopia.

 5. The FtT accepted that the Appellant had been involved with the  OLF  in
    the UK in that he had attended meetings and some  demonstrations.   The
    FtT found that the Appellant's activities in supporting the OLF in  the
    UK would not have come to the attention of the  Ethiopian  authorities,
    and therefore would not put him at risk if returned.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal.   In  summary,  it  was
    firstly contended that the FtT had made unsafe credibility findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's activities in Ethiopia and  had  failed  to
    make a finding as to whether the Appellant's father had  been  detained
    as claimed.

 7. Secondly, it was contended that the FtT had inadequately  assessed  the
    Appellant's activities in supporting the OLF in the UK.  The  Appellant
    had given evidence that at least one of the demonstrations that he  had
    attended had been broadcast on TV,  and  that  photographs  of  him  at
    meetings and demonstrations could be accessed  via  Facebook.   It  was
    contended that there was background information at pages 35-36  of  the
    Appellant's bundle which was relevant and which had not been considered
    by the FtT.

 8. It was contended that the FtT had failed to have  proper  regard  to  a
    letter dated 12th May 2016 contained within the Appellant's bundle  and
    written by the chairman of the OLF Committee in the UK.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Baker of  the  FtT.
    Following a renewed application, Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley  refused
    permission to appeal on the first ground, concluding that the  FtT  had
    given sufficient reasons for concluding that the Appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness in relation to his claimed activities in Ethiopia, but
    granted permission on the second ground.

10. Judge Lindsley found it was arguable that the FtT had not given anxious
    scrutiny to the risks that might arise from the Appellant's  activities
    in supporting the OLF in the UK, in the light of the evidence from  the
    OLF chairman in the UK, the country guidance decision of MB  (Ethiopia)
    CG [2007] UKAIT 30, and the background evidence regarding the Ethiopian
    government's monitoring and restrictions on social media.

11. Following the grant of permission, the Respondent submitted a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending in summary that the FtT had adequately  addressed  the
    Appellant's activities in the UK at paragraphs  41-50,  and  took  into
    account the relevant country guidance case law,  and  did  not  err  in
    finding that the Appellant's activities in the UK would not be  in  the
    public domain, and  would  not  have  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities in Ethiopia.

12. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Oral Submissions

13. Ms Mottershaw relied upon the grounds contained within the  application
    for permission to appeal, and submitted  that  the  FtT  had  erred  by
    failing  to  give  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  Appellant's  sur   place
    activities in the UK.

14. It was submitted that there  was  evidence  before  the  FtT  that  the
    Appellant supported the OLF in the UK, and had attended demonstrations.
     Ms Mottershaw submitted that the FtT had not taken  into  account  the
    principles contained within BA (Demonstrators  in  Britain  -  risk  on
    return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).  Ms Mottershaw pointed  out  that
    the letter from the chairman of the OLF  in  the  UK  referred  to  the
    Appellant becoming a member of the OLF  in  the  Manchester  area,  and
    attending members' meetings, as well as organising and attending public
    meetings.

15. I was asked to accept that the FtT had erred by failing to place weight
    upon  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  photographs  of  him  attending
    demonstrations and meetings could be found on Facebook, and  there  had
    been TV coverage of a demonstration that he had attended.

16. Ms Mottershaw pointed out that there was  reference  to  some  Facebook
    links in the letter from the chairman of the OLF in the UK.

17. It was further submitted that the FtT had  erred  by  not  taking  into
    account that the Ethiopian government restricts access to social media,
    and there was background evidence to confirm this at pages 18,  22  and
    35 of the Appellant's bundle, and reference  at  page  79  to  bloggers
    being arrested.  This therefore indicated that the Ethiopian government
    were aware of social media and Facebook.

18. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule 24 response.  I was asked to  note  the
    absence of  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  photographs  appeared  on
    Facebook.  If that was the case, the  Appellant  should  have  produced
    that evidence to the FtT and did not do so.  There was also an  absence
    of any evidence to show that a demonstration the Appellant had attended
    had been broadcast on  TV.   The  only  evidence  was  the  Appellant's
    assertion.  Mr Diwnycz submitted that the FtT was not obliged to search
    for evidence, and it was the responsibility of the Appellant  to  place
    evidence before the FtT.

19. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. I do not find that the FtT materially erred in law in  considering  the
    Appellant's activities in  support  of  the  OLF  in  the  UK  for  the
    following reasons.

21. The FtT accepted that the Appellant had provided photographs of himself
    attending  meetings  and  demonstrations,  but  found  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to prove these photographs appeared on  Facebook.
    It is accepted on behalf of the Appellant that no Facebook entries were
    provided.  In appeals such as this there is a low  standard  of  proof,
    but the burden of proof rests on the Appellant.  The Appellant did  not
    produce evidence that he appeared on Facebook supporting the  OLF,  and
    the FtT did not err in considering his evidence.

22. Equally, the Appellant did not produce evidence that a demonstration he
    had attended had been  broadcast  on  TV.   The  FtT  did  not  err  at
    paragraph 42 in noting that no evidence had  been  submitted  to  prove
    that there was TV coverage, nor the extent of any coverage.

23. Background material referred to in the Appellant's bundle does indicate
    that the Ethiopian government restricts access to social media.   There
    was no satisfactory evidence before the FtT to show to what extent  the
    Ethiopian government monitored the activities of Ethiopian nationals in
    the UK.  The guidance in BA (Iran) CG, indicates that relevant  factors
    to be taken into account relate to the nature of  sur  place  activity,
    the identification risk, factors triggering inquiry/action  on  return,
    consequences of identification,  and  identification  risk  on  return.
    Evidence  in  relation  to  those  factors  must  be  provided  by  the
    Appellant, if it is contended he  would  be  at  risk  from  sur  place
    activity.  That evidence was lacking in this case.

24. The FtT did not ignore the background evidence, but concluded,  without
    error, that the background evidence  did  not  assist  the  Appellant's
    claim.

25. The FtT  specifically  considered  the  country  guidance  decision  MB
    (Ethiopia) CG and summarised this at paragraph 48.

26. The FtT took into account the letter from the chairman of  the  OLF  in
    the UK, and accepted at paragraph  44  that  the  Appellant  "has  been
    involved in sur place activities in the UK with OLF".

27. The point that the FtT made in relation to those activities,  was  that
    the Appellant would not be at risk, as it had not been proved that  the
    activities would come to the attention of  the  Ethiopian  authorities.
    Weight to be attached to evidence is a matter for the FtT.  It  is  not
    the case that the FtT ignored material evidence, or placed weight  upon
    immaterial evidence.

28. The FtT was entitled, having considered all the evidence placed  before
    it, to conclude that the Appellant's activities in support of  the  OLF
    in the UK would not have come to the attention of  the  authorities  in
    Ethiopia.  The Appellant failed to discharge the burden of  proof,  and
    the FtT did not err in law in reaching that conclusion.  The  FtT  made
    findings open to it on the evidence,  and  gave  sustainable  and  good
    reasons for those findings.

29. The grounds contained within the application for permission to  appeal,
    display a disagreement with the conclusion reached by the FtT,  but  do
    not disclose an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

Because the appeal relates to a claim for international protection,  I  make
an anonymity direction pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules  2008.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         22nd January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  The appeal is dismissed.  There  is  no
fee award.


Signed                              Date         22nd January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

