
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01910/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2018                           |On 27 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [s l]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Ferguson, Counsel instructed by Birchtree Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, date of birth [ ]  1990,  sought
    in a protection claim, dated 9 August 2016, to remain on the  basis  of
    his sexuality as bisexual.  His claim was refused by the  Secretary  of
    State on 7 February 2017.  His appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hawden-Beal (the Judge) who, on  11  April  2017,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  At that appeal the Appellant was represented by a  Mr  Othieno
    and the Respondent was  represented  by  the  Presenting  Officer,  Mrs
    Banks.  The Appellant gave  evidence,  made  a  statement,  was  cross-
    examined and submissions were duly made on his behalf.   The  Judge  in
    addressing the case  plainly  had  in  mind  the  relevant  burden  and
    standard of proof and clearly understood the basis of  the  Appellant's
    fear on return.  The Judge also as he was  entitled  to  do  took  into
    account the process by which the claim  came  to  have  been  made  and
    assessed the evidence which had principally come  from  the  Appellant.
    Permission to appeal was given on 16 November 2017  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Chalkley.

2.   The Appellant had indicated he had for  some  three  or  four  years  a
    former housemate with whom he had been in a sexual  relationship.   The
    housemate was not present or willing to give evidence in support of the
    Appellant's claim.  The Appellant's  evidence  was  that  he  had  been
    ambiguous or undecided as  to  his  sexuality  when  he  had  lived  in
    Pakistan, until as an adult he had come to the  UK  as  a  student  and
    lived life here.  However, he had done so in a Pakistani  community  in
    London and elsewhere so he had not disclosed his sexuality  other  than
    in the relationship with the partner whose name is not  entirely  clear
    from the Judge's decision, nor indeed the Appellant's statement.

3.   Be that as it may, at paragraph 34 of the decision the Judge   did  not
    accept that the Appellant had been in a relationship  with  the  former
    housemate, and that the Judge found it "very difficult to accept  given
    the close proximity in which they  would  all  have  lived",  that  the
    relationship was not known.  That was an assessment that might be  made
    in the light of the evidence and there was nothing overtly erroneous in
    that conclusion. I bearing in mind I am not seized of  the  information
    about the accommodation, its nature and the extent to which two  people
    could enjoy, whilst living apart, such a sexual relationship.   It  did
    not seem to me that of  itself  the  Judge's  comment  is  particularly
    damaging  to  the  assessment  the  Judge  was  making.   He  was   not
    introducing his personal views of the nature of a relationship and  how
    it might occur within the accommodation spoken to.

4.   Further, the Judge said:-


         "There is no evidence  of  the  relationship  because  the  partner
         feared that coming to court would jeopardise  his  application  for
         indefinite  leave  to  remain.   That  fear   is   irrational   and
         unfortunate  because  it  is  crucial  to  the  Appellant's  claim.
         Without it, there is nothing to support his claimed sexuality."


    It is right to say that that as an expression of fact was plainly wrong
    because  there  was,  of  course,  the  Appellant's  evidence  of   the
    relationship.  It is perhaps infelicitous language to have  said  there
    was no evidence of the relationship because the balance of the decision
    was spent with the Judge assessing the Appellant's evidence, how it sat
    in the context with the background evidence and the claims that he  had
    made, in his statement about his sexuality.  The problem the  Appellant
    faced was quite simply this: On one hand he said (at  paragraph  13  in
    his original statement) that he was not in fear of his community in the
    UK, that he was able to disclose his sexuality to  whom  he  choose  to
    here in the UK, and on the other hand he said, the  position  that  the
    Pakistani community living in the UK hold largely  the  same  views  as
    held by those living in Pakistan: They do not accept LGBT  people,  but
    he said however the important difference was that in the  UK  they  are
    "bound by the law and cannot harm me.  I therefore  do  not  fear  them
    here.  This is not the case in Pakistan where  the  law  supports  harm
    against LGBT people".

5.   It seemed to me that on one hand the  Appellant's  description  of  the
    fact that he has, other than with his partner in the UK, lived his life
    without revealing his sexuality, could be  explicable  entirely  as  he
    claims as part of a genuine case and that he just preferred to live  it
    that way, that must be a matter for him, but the Judge did  not  accept
    that. For reasons that he gave, which may not, or would not possibly be
    the same as the ones I might consider giving  to  justify  a  decision,
    nevertheless are sufficient and adequate to show that he has  addressed
    the issue and has come to a conclusion upon it.   He  was  entitled  to
    conclude the Appellant is not bisexual and that the claim  of  risk  on
    return to Pakistan was therefore false.

6.   It followed from that that the  elements  of  claimed  risk  on  return
    simply do not have a proper basis.   The  background  evidence  plainly
    supports  the  general  view  that  LGBT   people   face   considerable
    difficulties in Pakistan.   Similarly,  gay  men  may  face  particular
    difficulties if they are openly so, but the Judge's view was  that  the
    Appellant did not show he belonged to a particular  social  group,  and
    nor was his sexuality the basis of risk on return for any other reason.
     In those circumstances Miss Ferguson's arguments largely address  this
    on the basis that the Appellant is the only one who can  give  evidence
    essentially about his sexuality.  If the partner is not willing to give
    evidence or former partner is not willing to give evidence,  the  Judge
    should, absence of any demonstrable contrary evidence have reached  the
    conclusion to that low standard of proof that the claim was made out.

7.   Miss Ferguson's argument has the attraction for the Appellant  in  that
    he does no more than simply have his say-so as to  his  sexuality.   He
    describes, for example, he is not part of any drinking culture, being a
    Muslim, but he  attended  clubs  and  he  named  in  his  statement  at
    paragraph 15 about three or four of them, and knew of other places  but
    he could not previously describe them, nor so far as I  can  tell,  did
    not subsequently describe them.  Those clubs are not known  to  me  and
    not in the evidence as far as I can tell, other than by  name.  Whether
    or not it is  simply  inconceivable  that  someone  who  is  so-called'
    straight' would go to such premises for one reason or another, I simply
    do not speculate.  It seemed to  me  simply  attendance  at  clubs,  or
    visiting clubs on one or two occasions or  more  does  not  demonstrate
    with any cogent evidence the sexuality of the Appellant.

8.   In these circumstances, whilst I might not have reached the same  view,
    it seemed to me that the mistakes the Judge made at paragraph 34 do not
    demonstrate a material error of law or that another  Tribunal  properly
    addressing  the  same  evidence  would  have  reached   any   different
    conclusion.

9.   The further criticism upon which leave was given was with reference  to
    paragraph 36 of the decision in which the Judge said:-


         "I am not satisfied  that  his  parents  do  know  of  his  claimed
         sexuality and I am satisfied that he has not told them of his claim
         for asylum because they will then realise that he stopped  studying
         in 2015 and they  have  been  supporting  him  ever  since  for  no
         purpose."


10.  Looking at the Appellant's evidence, not having heard it and  seen  how
    the oral evidence was recorded as  contained  within  the  reasons  for
    decision, I am satisfied that the evidence is considerably ambiguous as
    to whether the parents know of anything about  his  claimed  sexuality.
    It is by no means apparent from what the Appellant was saying that they
    do or would, or would have deduced it by now or since his  presence  in
    the UK, given that he has not been studying for quite a number of years
    now.   Whether  they  might  work  it  out  simply  would  be   useless
    speculation.  It seemed to me that the Judge was entitled  to  come  to
    the conclusion on the evidence that the Appellant had not told them  of
    his asylum claim.  Whether the Judge was right to infer the reason  for
    that was as he stated was neither here nor there because the  substance
    of the point is that the Judge had formed the view that  the  Appellant
    had not  disclosed  his  sexuality,  indeed  within  his  community  in
    Pakistan there or in his community in the  United  Kingdom.  For  those
    reasons the Judge may have speculated  perhaps,  inappropriately  to  a
    degree, in relation to why the Appellant has been concealing the claims
    from his parents, but that  ultimately  does  not  tend  to  suggest  a
    different decision would be reached by any other  Tribunal  looking  at
    the evidence.

11. For these reasons therefore, noting that the Judge  did  consider  this
    matter in the alternative, I nevertheless take the view that the  Judge
    made no material error of law in his assessment of the protection claim
    under  the  Refugee  Convention,  nor  indeed  under  the  Humanitarian
    Protection provisions within paragraph 339C of the  Immigration  Rules.
    There was no challenge to the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Article 8 ECHR claim and the Original Tribunal's decision  I  therefore
    find stands.


   DECISION.


12. The appeal is dismissed.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
