
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/01635/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 22 August 2017                   |On 27 September 2017                   |
|                                    |                                       |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    M. A.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  who  entered  the  UK
      illegally. He made an application for protection  on  11  August  2016
      when encountered,  and  a  fingerprint  match  revealed  that  he  had
      previously been fingerprinted at Dunkirk on  29  July  2016.  On  that
      occasion he had given a different name, and  had  claimed  to  be  two
      years older. The Respondent refused the protection application  on  28
      January 2017, but granted him a period of leave, accepting that he was
      a minor.
   2. The Appellant's appeal to the First tier Tribunal ["FtT"] against that
      decision was heard on 16 March 2017. It was dismissed on all  grounds,
      in a decision promulgated on 5 April 2017 by First Tier Tribunal Judge
      Fox.
   3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  that  decision  on  27
      April 2017 by First tier Tribunal Judge Froom on the basis that it was
      arguable the Judge had  made  a  number  of  errors.  He  had  wrongly
      identified the decision under appeal as a removal  decision,  when  it
      was not. He had arguably taken an inconsistent approach to whether  he
      was assessing risk at the date of the hearing, or at the date of  some
      future hypothetical removal.
   4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice dated 19 May 2017 in relation to
      the grant of permission, opposing it. Neither party  has  made  formal
      application to adduce further evidence. Thus the matter  comes  before
      me.


   Error of Law?
   5. When the appeal was called on for hearing, Mr McVeety  confirmed  that
      notwithstanding the Rule 24 Notice that had been filed, the Respondent
      did not seek to defend the Judge's decision. The  Respondent  accepted
      that the contents of  paragraphs  32  and  35  of  the  decision  were
      inconsistent with one another, and, that the Judge had failed to  make
      it clear whether he was addressing himself to the issue of  risk  upon
      return at the date of the hearing, or at some future date. Furthermore
      passages in the decision were lacking in clarity.
   6. In the circumstances it is common ground that the decision discloses a
      material error of law that renders the dismissal of the appeal unsafe,
      and the decision must in the circumstances be set aside and remade.  I
      have in these circumstances considered whether or  not  to  remit  the
      appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard, or whether  to
      proceed to remake it in the Upper Tribunal. In circumstances where  it
      would  appear  that  the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
      considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law
      has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his  case  to
      be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of
      the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover  the  extent  of
      the judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard  to  the
      over-riding objective, it is appropriate that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012.
   7. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;
     i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
        Tier Tribunal for rehearing. The appeal is not to be listed  before
        Judge Fox.
    ii) A Dari interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) There is presently anticipated to be the  Appellant  and  no  other
        witness, and the time estimate is as a result, 3 hours.
    iv) It is not anticipated by the Respondent that she  has  any  further
        evidence to be filed. The Appellant anticipates that  a  review  of
        the evidence is required and that  a  witness  statement  from  the
        Appellant will be filed. Further enquiries may need to be  made  in
        relation  to  the  availability  of  corroborative  evidence.   The
        Appellant is therefore to file and serve any further evidence to be
        relied upon at his appeal by 5pm 19 September 2017
     v) The appeal may be listed at short notice as a filler on  the  first
        available date  at  the  North  Shields  hearing  centre  after  26
        September 2017.
    vi) No further  Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
        necessary.  Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
        change, they must inform the Tribunal immediately,  providing  full
        details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.
   vii) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

   8. The decision promulgated on 5 April 2017 did involve the making of  an
      error of law sufficient to require the decision to be  set  aside  and
      reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal
      with the directions set out above.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 22 August 2017

