
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01020/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2019                          |On 23 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     IS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shea, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FtT') promulgated on 3 May 2019, dismissing  his  appeal
         on asylum and human rights grounds.  As the appellant  has  made  a
         claim  for  international  protection  I  have  made  an  anonymity
         direction.





Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who claimed asylum in the United
         Kingdom in October 2017.  He is of Kurdish ethnicity  and  has  not
         been to school but worked as a farmer in Iran.

      3. He claimed that he was introduced to the Komala Party and delivered
         leaflets and flags for that party but  was  caught  on  CCTV.   The
         authorities attempted to arrest him but he was warned and left Iran
         before they were able to find him.  He has claimed that because  of
         his role in the Komala Party, including distributing  leaflets,  he
         will be executed if he returns to  Iran.   That  asylum  claim  was
         refused by the respondent in  a  decision  dated  27  January  2019
         against which the appellant appealed to the FtT.

FtT decision

      4. At a hearing on 9 April 2019 the appellant's appeal  was  heard  by
         FtT Judge Chamberlain.  He was represented by  solicitors  at  that
         hearing.  In a carefully  drafted  decision  the  FtT  set  out  in
         considerable detail  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  and  the
         respondent's decision before turning to its findings of credibility
         and fact from paragraph 29 onwards.  It is clear  that  this  is  a
         case that turned entirely on the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
         claim.  If accepted, he was entitled to refugee status  bearing  in
         mind the country guidance  on  the  manner  in  which  the  Iranian
         authorities react to those who are involved in even the smallest of
         ways in political parties furthering the Kurdish cause.  The  FtT's
         decision therefore focused mostly upon the appellant's credibility.
          At [30] the FtT said this:-

             "I did not find the appellant to  be  an  honest  or  credible
             witness.   He  was  evasive   when   cross-examined.    Simple
             questions had to be put to him more than once.   His  evidence
             was not consistent with respect to core elements of his claim,
             in particular his evidence of delivering leaflets  in  support
             of the Komala Party.  I find  that  the  appellant's  evidence
             cannot be relied upon."

      5. The FtT then went on to provide three main reasons for finding  the
         appellant's evidence to be incredible.  First, the  FtT  considered
         that the evidence provided as to the circumstances surrounding  the
         night that the  appellant  leafletted  were  unreliable.   The  FtT
         referred to the appellant being asked how many houses and flats  he
         delivered leaflets to.  The FtT  records  that  the  appellant  had
         first said "a lot", and when asked to give a rough estimate he said
         around 500 to 1,000.  The FtT was concerned with this evidence  and
         said this at [31]:-

             "There is a significant  difference  between  500  and  1,000,
             especially in the context of doing door-to-door deliveries.  I
             find that the  appellant's  failure  to  give  a  satisfactory
             answer as to the  amount  of  houses  to  which  he  delivered
             damages his credibility.  This is especially  the  case  given
             that in his asylum interview the appellant said that  it  took
             two to three hours Q63."

         In addition to this, the  FtT  was  concerned  that  the  appellant
         provided unreliable evidence as to who  carried  the  leaflets  and
         flags and whether it was him or his friend (see paragraph 32).

      6. The second issue of concern related to the appellant's  claim  that
         he was caught on CCTV after taking  off  his  balaclava.   The  FtT
         examined the appellant's evidence in detail and very  carefully  on
         this issue from paragraphs 33 to 40 .  The  FtT's  conclusions  are
         set out at [40] as follows:-

             "I find it lacks credibility that the appellant and Ali  chose
             to remove their balaclavas at all.   This  is  especially  the
             case given that, on the appellant's own  evidence,  Ali  would
             not need to have removed his balaclava in order to smoke.  His
             evidence as to why  he  needed  to  remove  his  balaclava  to
             breathe  also  lacked  credibility.   I  find  there   is   no
             reasonable likelihood that the appellant's account is true.  I
             find that there is no reasonable likelihood that he  delivered
             Komala leaflets and flags in Mariwan wearing a balaclava which
             he subsequently took off outside a  bank,  in  front  of  CCTV
             cameras."

      7. The third issue that was of concern  to  the  FtT  related  to  the
         failure to provide any evidence from the Komala Party in the UK  in
         support of the appellant's claim.   The  FtT  then  concluded  that
         there was no reasonable degree of likelihood that an arrest warrant
         was issued for the appellant given that it was  not  accepted  that
         the appellant carried out the activities that  were  said  to  give
         rise to the issue of the arrest warrant.   The  asylum  appeal  was
         dismissed for those reasons.

      8. The FtT also addressed the appellant's account  on  an  alternative
         footing based on the country guidance evidence.  The FtT  concluded
         at paragraphs 49 to 52 that although the appellant  may  have  left
         Iran illegally and was of Kurdish ethnicity, the  country  guidance
         made it  clear  that  his  completed  lack  of  credible  political
         activity was such that he would not be at risk upon return.

      9. The FtT then dealt with Article 8.  I do not need to refer to those
         findings because the grounds of appeal before me have been  limited
         to asylum.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT)

     10. The appellant drafted the grounds of appeal himself  and  said  the
         following:-

             "I would like to state as follows: in  relation  to  paragraph
             31, the Immigration Judge raised some credibility issues based
             on my answers during cross-examination.

             I was asked how long the road.  I couldn't  answer  because  I
             was unable to check the length of  the  road.   Regarding  the
             answer for 500-1,000 houses, unfortunately this is  my  figure
             of speech.  I personally didn't count the houses  and  when  I
             expressed the above figure I have given this figure as the way
             we speak.  I am not  an  academic  person,  therefore,  I  was
             unable to answer accurately.

             The Immigration Judge relied on  SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:
             failed  asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308  (IAC).
             However, he failed to address HB (Kurds) Iran CG  [2018]  UKUT
             ...".

     11. FtT Judge Bird granted permission to appeal in a decision dated  28
         June 2019 and observed the following:-

             "3.  The appellant seeks permission on the  grounds  that  the
                  judge raised credibility issues in relation to the answers
                  he gave during cross-examination.  It is alleged that  the
                  judge failed to understand that his answer was a figure of
                  speech and was not meant to imply an exact distance but an
                  approximation.  Further the  judge  failed  to  take  into
                  account the fact that he was not an academic person.

             4.   It is arguable that the judge failed to engage  with  the
                  appellant's answer  in  the  proper  cultural  context  in
                  requiring an exact answer as in the western context.   The
                  judge has made findings for which inadequate reasons  have
                  been given.  An arguable error of law has been made in the
                  assessment of the evidence."

     12. In a Rule 24 notice dated 16 July 2019 the respondent said this:-

             "The grounds do not take account  of  nor  argue  against  the
             numerous credibility findings contained  within  [31]-[48]  on
             issues that go to the core  of  the  claim.   The  FtTJ  makes
             reasoned  findings  and   rejects   the   evidence   as   both
             inconsistent and lacking in credibility  on  matters  such  as
             CCTV, the use of balaclavas, the absence of political activity
             in the UK, inconsistent evidence in relation  to  the  alleged
             arrest warrant, and failing to claim in France.   When  viewed
             holistically the core aspects of the  appellant's  claim  have
             been rejected for good reason.  The grounds seek to argue that
             the FtTJ failed to take into account or  understand  that  the
             evidence of the appellant at [31] was an approximation of  the
             length of the street.  It is  submitted  that  this  does  not
             negate from the primary finding that the appellant  had  given
             an unsatisfactory account of how many houses he had  delivered
             leaflets  to  rather  than   the   length   of   the   street.
             Notwithstanding any potential misunderstanding (which  is  not
             accepted), given the remainder of the unchallenged findings it
             cannot be  considered  material  as  to  the  outcome  of  the
             appeal."



Hearing

     13. At the hearing before me the appellant was represented by Mr  Shea.
         He relied upon the reasons provided by Judge Bird for  finding  the
         FtT's factual findings  to  be  arguably  deficient.   He  drew  my
         attention to inappropriate weight being given  to  the  appellant's
         evidence that he delivered leaflets to around 500 to  1,000  houses
         and invited me to allow the appeal.

     14. Mr Tan relied upon the respondent's Rule 24 notice and  invited  me
         to dismiss the appeal.

Error of law discussion

     15. In my judgement the  findings  that  the  FtT  made  regarding  the
         appellant's  credibility  are  adequately  reasoned  and  carefully
         drafted.  The FtT reminded itself that it needed  to  consider  all
         the  evidence  in  the  round  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's
         circumstances and the country situation  generally  (see  paragraph
         29) and properly directed itself to the low standard of proof.   At
         paragraph 6 the FtT said this:-

             "The standard of proof required of an appellant is a low  one,
             to  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,   recognising   the
             difficulty so often faced by appellants in proving their case.
              This standard applies to both past and current circumstances,
             and also to establishing the future risk  in  the  country  to
             which they will be returned."

     16. There is nothing to indicate  that  the  FtT  was  unaware  of  the
         appellant's educational background and the need  to  bear  that  in
         mind when employing the low standard of proof.

     17. The FtT's concerns as to the appellant's evidence that he estimated
         that he delivered leaflets to 500 to 1,000 houses must be  seen  in
         context and the paragraph in which that is referred to must be read
         alongside the other paragraphs that deal with that issue.  The  FtT
         was entitled to observe that  there  is  a  significant  difference
         between  500  and  1,000  in  the  context  of  doing  door-to-door
         deliveries.  The FtT was also entitled to note  that  it  took  the
         appellant two to three hours to do the  deliveries.   The  FtT  was
         also entitled to be concerned that the appellant was unable to give
         reliable evidence as to who carried the 1,000 flags and leaflets on
         this occasion.  Although the appellant has said 500 to 1,000 was  a
         figure of speech, the FtT was aware that the appellant  was  simply
         offering an estimate.  It is clear that the FtT was  not  expecting
         an exact or specific number but was expecting a rough estimate.  In
         the context in which the leafletting was said to have occurred,  it
         seems that the appellant was unable to give any  reliable  estimate
         beyond "a lot" and beyond the very wide difference between  500  to
         1,000.   When  that  is  read  together  with  the  other  concerns
         regarding the appellant's leafletting,  the  FtT  was  entitled  to
         attach some weight to that answer.  Weight, of course, is a  matter
         for the FtT who heard evidence from the appellant  and  would  have
         considered all of that evidence in the round.

     18. In my judgement there has been no failure to take into account  the
         appellant's  educational  background  or  to  appreciate  that  the
         appellant came from a particular cultural context.

     19. As I have already indicated,  in  my  judgement  the  FtT  was  not
         expecting an exact answer.  In the circumstances of this case,  the
         FTT was entitled to expect a reliable estimate.   After  all,  this
         incident formed the very heart of the appellant's asylum claim.

     20. Judge Bird also observed that the FtT provided  inadequate  reasons
         for its findings:  I  disagree.   The  findings  are  detailed  and
         comprehensive.  They span paragraphs 31 to  53.   These  address  a
         discrete incident, that is the incident that caused  the  appellant
         to leave Iran.  Those findings are very full indeed and, as I  have
         already said, carefully drafted.

     21. Although the grounds of appeal  do  not  make  the  submission  and
         neither did Mr Shea, I note that  at  [41]  the  FtT  drew  adverse
         inferences from  the  appellant's  failure  to  provide  supporting
         evidence  from  the  Komala  Party.   It  is  well-recognised  that
         corroboration is not necessary in asylum claims.  However, this  is
         not a case where the FtT was requiring corroboration  from  sources
         in Iran, rather the FtT was expressing concern that  the  appellant
         could have accessed the  Komala  Party  in  the  UK  to  provide  a
         supporting letter and did not.  Mr Shea was therefore  correct  not
         to seek to amend the grounds to raise any point as to that, in  the
         particular circumstances of this case.

     22. Mr Shea did not make any submissions on the second ground of appeal
         raised by the appellant himself relating to  the  country  guidance
         case in HB.  Judge Bird also did not refer to that  decision.   The
         reason for that is straightforward. HB makes it  clear  that  those
         Kurds who have engaged in even the smallest political  activity  or
         might be imputed to have engaged in  such  activities  will  be  at
         risk.  However, the findings of fact that I have  upheld  are  that
         this  appellant  engaged  in  no  political  activity  at  all  and
         therefore HB would not have assisted him.

     23. For those reasons I find that the decision  of  the  FtT  does  not
         contain any material error of law.

Notice of decision

     24. The FtT decision does not contain a material error of  law  and  is
         not set aside.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 19 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

