
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01453/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30th January 2017                     |On 8th February 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     N H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Butler, promulgated on 20th September 2016, following  a  hearing
    at Sheldon Court on 26th August 2016.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant's Claim

 2. The Appellant's claim is that he was raised in the  village  of  Bazyan
    where he stayed until 2012.  At the time he was in love with a girl  in
    the village and had asked her family if he could marry her a few  times
    but they had refused.  After the relationship got more  intimate,  they
    threatened to kill him.  He left Bazyan  and  moved  to  an  area  just
    outside Kirkuk but after about two years ISIS came to the area and  the
    family moved into Kirkuk for their own safety.  In Kirkuk the Appellant
    stated that he and his cousin would often sit outside the house  during
    the day talking and smoking.  His cousin was particularly vocal in  his
    criticism of Islam.  They were threatened.  They made  arrangements  to
    leave and paid an agent to assist them.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge acknowledged that  the  refusal  letter  had  said  that  the
    Appellant had lived in  a  contested  area  of  Iraq  but  it  was  now
    considered reasonable for him to relocate internally.  The decision  in
    AA  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  was  relied  on   in
    acknowledging that the Appellant could not safely return to Bazyan, but
    he could return directly to the Kurdish Region of Iraq (KRI).   It  was
    noted that it would not be possible for the Appellant to obtain a  CSID
    card and a nationality certificate to enable him to return to  the  KRI
    where there was no Article 15(c) risk to ordinary civilians.  The judge
    found the Appellant's claim to be inconsistent and to be a fabrication.
     The judge did not find that the Appellant had a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution from either ISIS or his girlfriend's family or a  religious
    group in Kirkuk.  It was held that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant to return to the KRI because he was a Kurd and spoke  Kurdish
    Sorani and was a Sunni Muslim.  The judge held, "I do not find there is
    any reason why he could not return to Bazyan as I  do  not  accept  his
    account of problems with his girlfriend's family" (paragraph 41).

 4. The appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge wrongly found  that  it
    would be reasonable for the Appellant to relocate to KRI  because  this
    was not supported by the country guidance case of  AA  (Article  15(c))
    Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 0544, because in that case it was  held  that  only
    those formerly from the KRI will be  returned  there  and  all  of  the
    Iraqis would be returned to Baghdad.  The Appellant was not  originally
    from KRI.  Second, that the judge erred in finding  that  there  is  no
    reason why the Appellant could not return  to  Bazyan  because  he  had
    already found (at paragraph 10) that the Respondent had acknowledged in
    the refusal letter that the Appellant could not return to Bazyan as  it
    was a contested area.

 6. On 20th October 2016, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that whether the Appellant is returned to Bazyan or to Kirkuk  both  of
    these were contested areas according to the country guidance.

 7. On 17th November 2016, a Rule 24 response was  entered  to  the  effect
    that the Secretary of State  does  not  accept  that  Bazyan  is  in  a
    contested area and that the judge moreover properly considered  if  the
    Appellant could relocate  to  the  KRI  and  had  applied  the  country
    guidance case accurately.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing before  me  Ms  Radford,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant handed up her helpful outline  submissions  in  writing,  and
    stated that she would rely upon these.  First, the Appellant could  not
    safely return to Bazyan in  the  light  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    concession that it would not be safe for him to  do  so.   The  refusal
    letter had stated at page 10, after reliance upon AA [2015] UKUT 00544,
    that "it is not considered sustainable to argue that you  could  safely
    return to Bazyan."  This was repeated by the judge at paragraph 10 that
    "the Appellant could not safely return  to  Bazyan  ..."  Moreover,  in
    summarising the Secretary of State's position (at paragraphs 25 to 27),
    the judge had mentioned no withdrawal of the concession  regarding  the
    position in Bazyan.   Accordingly,  the  judge,  in  holding  that  the
    Appellant could return to Bazyan, had erred in law.

 9. Second, as far as internal relocation to the  IKR  was  concerned,  the
    judge had erred yet again because there was no assessment of the  range
    of factual issues that were required to be assessed in AA [2015]  UKUT,
    in that there was no case by case consideration of the practicality  of
    travel to  IKR,  the  likelihood  of  securing  employment  there,  the
    availability of family/friends in  the  IKR,  and  the  possibility  of
    obtaining a CSID before or reasonably soon after return to Iraq.

10. Third, as far as the country guidance on this matter was concerned,  it
    was plain from paragraph 170 of AA [2015] UKUT 00544 that the  Tribunal
    would need to know if an individual has a CSID.  If return is  feasible
    and the individual does not have  a  CSID,  then  adverse  consequences
    could result for the Appellant which would breach possibly his  Article
    3 ECHR rights.  These consequences would need to be  considered  if  it
    was to be found that return was feasible.   This  was  clear  from  the
    judgments in AA [2016] EWCA Civ 779 by Christopher Clark LJ  and  Sharp
    LJ.  Moreover, whereas it could be said (at paragraph 171)  that  Kurds
    not from the IKR can get temporary admission to the  IKR  and  can  get
    permanent permission to stay there if they secure long-term employment,
    whether or not this was reasonably possible would be dependent upon (a)
    practicality of travel to the  IKR,  (b)  the  likelihood  of  securing
    employment, (c) the availability of assistance from friends and  family
    in the IKR.  All these matters were not in favour of the Appellant.  He
    had no friends and family for assistance in the IKR and  no  reasonable
    prospects of securing employment.

11. Furthermore, in order to obtain a CSID  in  the  UK,  in  circumstances
    where the individual does not have a passport and  does  not  know  his
    family registration volume and page number, a proxy will have to travel
    to the local office of family registration to obtain a  new  CSID,  and
    that also placed the Appellant in extreme difficulty because he did not
    know his family registration volume and page number, and  the  prospect
    of a proxy travelling for him was not realistic on  the  facts  of  his
    case.  In any event, it is the case (see paragraph  177)  that  if  the
    home governorate is experiencing violence at Article 15(c) levels  then
    this entire process will be "severely hampered" and this was  the  case
    here.  The fact was that in order to obtain a replacement CSID in  Iraq
    one would have to normally travel to the  governorate  (see  paragraphs
    179 to 186) where the family registration book is held.  The success of
    doing so will depend on knowing the page and volume number of the  book
    holding their information, and then  one  would  have  to  persuade  an
    official that one is the person named and that could  be  done  on  the
    basis of the availability of witnesses who could attest to this, all of
    which was highly improbable in the Appellant's case.

12. Finally, the Secretary of State's refusal letter had not specified  the
    planned point of return.  She had suggested that the Appellant  may  be
    able to return voluntarily to the IKR (see page 10) but  she  had  also
    recognised that he is a Kurd originating from outside the IKR (see page
    11) and in AA the Upper Tribunal had  held  that  only  Kurds  formerly
    resident in the IKR would be returned  there  (see  paragraph  204(5)).
    The judge himself had failed to identify any point of return and failed
    to consider whether the Appellant could practically travel to  the  IKR
    or not.

13. For his part, Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge at  paragraph  41  had
    found it reasonable for the Appellant to return to the  KRI.   Even  if
    there was an ambiguity in  his  assessment  of  whether  Bazyan  was  a
    contested area or not,  there  was  an  alternative  finding  that  the
    Appellant could return to the KRI, and this would salvage the decision.
     AA (Iraq) made it clear that Kurds who do not originate from  the  KRI
    can obtain a permit, and this  can  even  be  extended  upon  obtaining
    employment (see paragraphs 19 to 20 of the head note).

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law such that it falls to  be  set
    aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA [2007]).  My reasons are  as  follows.
    First, both Kirkuk, where the Appellant left to settle, and the village
    of Bazyan, where the Appellant was brought up, are contested areas  and
    the judge was clear (at paragraph 10) that, "it was  acknowledged  that
    the Appellant had lived in a contested area of Iraq."   The  fact  that
    the judge did not believe the Appellant's account of threats  from  his
    girlfriend's family or from religious groups in Kirkuk, or  from  ISIS,
    was nothing to the point as to whether the Appellant  could  return  to
    Bazyan.  Yet, the judge held that, "I do not find there is  any  reason
    why he could not return to Bazyan as I do not  accept  his  account  of
    problems with his girlfriend's family" (paragraph 41).

15. Second, in stating that the Appellant could find  internal  relocation,
    the judge has failed to consider the practicality of his travel to  the
    IKR,  the  likelihood  of  his  obtaining  employment  there,  and  the
    availability  of  family  and  friends  who  could  provide  him   with
    assistance, all of which are factors that do  not  necessarily  inspire
    confidence with respect to this Appellant, because the evidence has not
    been so found by the judge.

16. Third, the Appellant does not have a CSID, and does not know his family
    registration volume and page number, and there is  no  finding  to  the
    effect that this is so, such that he would have to elicit  the  support
    of a proxy to go on his behalf before he can  actually  return  to  the
    KRI.

17. Finally, the judge has not considered the obstacles  to  the  Appellant
    obtaining re-documentation.  There is no consideration of  whether  the
    Appellant has an expired  or  current  Iraqi  passport.   There  is  no
    consideration of which office  would  need  to  provide  him  with  the
    replacement CSID.  There is no consideration of which family or friends
    can act as a proxy for him in the relevant regional office.  And, there
    is no consideration of whether it would  be  safe  for  him  to  travel
    there.  This leaves only the possibility of his return to Baghdad,  but
    if this conclusion was to be arrived  at,  then  the  judge  needed  to
    consider how the Appellant would travel to and enter the IKR without  a
    civil ID, and how he would then  obtain  his  CSID  from  a  "contested
    area."  The Appellant would also have to provide witnesses in Baghdad's
    civil status court, where he would need to show that he knows  someone,
    and would be able to invoke the process such that it could culminate in
    the provision of a CSID within a reasonable timeframe.   These  matters
    are for the most part addressed  in  the  detailed  head  note  of  the
    decision in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  544,  and  on  the
    whole they do not suggest, on the lower standard,  given  the  findings
    that the judge has already made,  that  the  Appellant  can  reasonably
    return in the manner suggested by the judge.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is  allowed
to the extent that it is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
determined by Judge other than Judge Butler under Practice Statement  7.2(b)
because the nature of the fact-finding has been  such  as  to  require  that
there be a reconsideration of all  these  matters  again.   This  appeal  is
allowed to that extent.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th February 2017
