
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01775/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 6 June 2019                    |On 11 June 2019                   |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                    F M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, Counsel
      (instructed by Londinium Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS







    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge O'Brien on 30 April 2019 against  the  determination
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge S  L  Farmer  who  had  dismissed  the
         appeal of the Appellant against the refusal  of  her  international
         protection claim.  The decision and reasons was promulgated  on  28
         March 2019.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 7 February 1983.
          The Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  on  26
         January 2011 but soon became an overstayer.   She  has  two  United
         Kingdom born children, a son  and  a  daughter.,  neither  of  them
         "qualifying children" under Home  Office  policy.   The  daughter's
         father warned of FGM in 2018.  The Appellant claimed asylum  on  23
         August 2018, asserting inter alia a fear of family in Nigeria.  Her
         claim was refused by the Secretary of State on 8 February 2019.

    3.     Judge Farmer provided a  detailed  summary  of  the  Appellant's
         claim at [12]  of  her  decision.   The  Appellant  is  Yoruba  and
         Christian.  She was previously in a relationship  with  Mr  Michael
         Alerebo whose Delta/Ibo family approve of  traditional  mutilation,
         and who (it was said) wanted to  perform  FGM  on  the  Appellant's
         daughter.  The Appellant had claimed asylum as she was afraid  that
         her daughter might be taken to Nigeria for FGM.

    4.     The Appellant's identity was accepted  by  the  Respondent,  but
         Judge Farmer otherwise found that the Appellant's  credibility  was
         generally low and, also having  heard  evidence  from  Mr  Alerebo,
         entirely lacking on the key issues.  There  was  no  real  risk  on
         return, as FGM  could  be  avoided  in  Nigeria  in  any  event  by
         relocation.  There  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  and   the
         children's best interests were not compromised by going to  Nigeria
         with their healthy mother.  The appeal was  accordingly  dismissed.



    5.     Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Jude
         O'Brien because he considered it was arguable that  the  judge  had
         failed to mention or  make  any  findings  on  the  fact  that  the
         Appellant was  HIV+  which  was  a  material  factor  in  the  best
         interests of the children and the proportionality of removal.

    Submissions

    6.     Mr Parkin for the Appellant relied on the grounds and  grant  of
         permission to appeal.  The tribunal referred him  to  the  skeleton
         argument from the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  Mr Parkin  accepted
         (after perusal of the skeleton argument) that no  reliance  on  the
         Appellant's HIV+  status  had  been  raised.   On  instructions  he
         renewed the application to adjourn for the submission of additional
         evidence to the Upper  Tribunal  which  had  been  refused  by  the
         Principal Resident Judge on 5 June 2019.  The tribunal refused  the
         renewed application as no  new  matter  had  been  raised  and  the
         tribunal considered that the error of law issue could be fairly and
         justly resolved on the evidence which had been  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal judge, in accordance with standard practice  from  no
         special reason to deviate had been shown.

    7.     Mr Parkin submitted that it was obvious  from  the  reasons  for
         refusal letter that the  Appellant's  HIV+  status  was  an  issue,
         regardless of the skeleton argument.  While  that  condition  might
         not have reached the Article 3 ECHR threshold, it was  relevant  to
         the Article 8 ECHR claim and had a bearing on the position  of  the
         children if returned to Nigeria.  The other issue,  the  risk  from
         the Appellant's former partner in Nigeria, was not  as  strong  but
         should have been addressed.  The justice of the case meant that the
         decision and reasons should be set aside for failure to  deal  with
         all of the evidence and to make proper findings.  The appeal should
         be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal by another judge.

    8.     Mr Tufan for the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         opposed the appeal.  The judge had dealt with the Appellant's claim
         adequately.  The Appellant's HIV+ status simply had not been a live
         issue.  There had been no country evidence put before the judge and
         in any event it was now well  known  that  HIV+  was  no  longer  a
         serious problem.  The onwards appeal should be dismissed.

    9.     There was nothing which Mr Parkin wished to add by way of reply.

    No error of law finding

    10.    In the tribunal's view, the determination of First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Farmer was unimpeachable and, as Mr Tufan submitted,  covered
         all live elements of the Appellant's claim.   Indeed,  the  grounds
         of onwards appeal were seriously  misleading  on  the  HIV+  point,
         because there was nothing on that which the judge had been asked to
         determine.  Not only was there no mention of the  Appellant's  HIV+
         status in the skeleton argument, there was no mention of it in  the
         Appellant's own witness statement.  Permission to appeal should not
         have been granted.

    11.    The claim that the judge had not taken no account  of  the  fact
         that the Appellant  is  HIV+  is  based  on  a  misreading  of  the
         determination.  The Appellant  had  declared  her  HIV+  status  at
         section 2.1 of her asylum application and that was not in  dispute.
         At section 2.3 of the same form the Appellant stated that  she  was
         "fine".  The subject is addressed in the reasons for refusal letter
         at [107ff] and the Appellant mounted no  challenge  to  that.   The
         judge refers to the reasons  for  refusal  letter  at  [4]  of  her
         decision.  The Appellant produced no  country  background  evidence
         for Nigeria which suggested that she might encounter any difficulty
         in obtaining medicine, nor any  medical  evidence  which  suggested
         that there would be any other problem for her arising from her HIV+
         status.

    12.    At [16] the judge states that  all  of  the  evidence  had  been
         considered by her,  including  medical  evidence,  whether  or  not
         specifically mentioned.   At  [33]  the  judge  recorded  that  the
         Appellant stated that she was in good health and there was  nothing
         to suggest that she would be unable to work.  The Appellant's  HIV+
         status was not raised by the Appellant as an element of her  appeal
         at any stage.  It was for the Appellant to provide evidence  as  to
         how her HIV+ status might affect her children on  return,  and  for
         any such point to be developed in submissions, foreshadowed in  the
         skeleton argument if the First-tier Tribunal judge was required  to
         decide  any  such  question.   The   Appellant's   solicitors   are
         experienced specialists in the IAC's jurisdiction and there was  no
         evidence to indicate that her appeal (such as it was) had not  been
         fully prepared.   There was no error of law by the judge here.

    13.    As to the claimed  threat  to  the  Appellant  from  a  previous
         partner in Nigeria, Mr Parkin accepted that it  was  not  a  strong
         argument.  The finding  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  credible
         witness was sufficient to dispose of that claim entirely, requiring
         no examination of other viable alternatives such relocation as well
         as the sufficiency of protection.

    14.    Neither of the children  are  qualifying  children.   The  judge
         addressed their position in  substantial  and  entirely  sufficient
         detail: see [48ff] of the determination.   There was  nothing  else
         to factor in  when  the  evidence  showed  that  their  mother  the
         Appellant was in good health and able to look after her children in
         a cultural context with which the Appellant was familiar.

    15.    Thus in the end the submissions advanced for  the  Appellant  in
         the onwards grounds of appeal amounted at best to disagreement with
         the very experienced judge's decision.  The tribunal finds that the
         onwards appeal has no proper basis and that there was no  error  of
         law in the decision challenged.

    DECISION

    The appeal is dismissed

    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.




    Signed Dated 6 June 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




