
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01407/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th December, 2017                         |On 15th January, 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [m r]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Wagner of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion I shall refer to her  as  being  the,
    "claimant".  The respondent is a citizen of Iraq who was  born  on  1st
    January 1970.

2.   The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 5th February  2000  and
    applied for asylum on arrival and his application was refused  on  19th
    September 2001, but he was granted exceptional  leave  to  enter  until
    19th February 2005.

3.   On 1st October 2003, the respondent was  convicted  at  Kingston  Crown
    Court of two counts of attempting wounding for which he  was  sentenced
    on 21st October 2003, to eighteen months' imprisonment on each count to
    run concurrently.  Leave to appeal against sentence was refused on 22nd
    January 2004.  The respondent was recorded as having  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom on 22nd May 2005, it appears that he  had  travelled  to
    Tehran in Iran, according to stamps present in his Home  Office  travel
    document.  On 22nd August 2005, he  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  A liability for deportation letter was issued  on  6th  August
    2008 and on 1st October 2008, a decision was  deport  and  reasons  for
    deportation letter were  issued.   A  subsequent  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed  on  11th  March  2009,  and  a  reconsideration
    request granted on 7th April 2009.  The appeal was again  dismissed  on
    28th July 2009 and permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
    refused on 4th September 2009.

4.   The respondent then applied for voluntary  assisted  return  under  the
    voluntary assisted return and reintegration programme on 5th  September
    2005, but this application was refused on account of his convictions on
    10th September 2009.

5.   Representations were received on his  behalf  on  19th  November  2013,
    with additional information being provided on 13th December  2013,  1st
    August 2014, 14th January 2015, 5th  January  2015  and  8th  September
    2015.   Representations  were  considered   to   constitute   a   fresh
    application for asylum and human rights and they were refused  on  25th
    January 2016.  The respondent appealed and  his  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Boardman sitting at Taylor House on 17th July
    2017.  Judge Boardman allowed the respondent's appeal based on  Article
    8  rights.   He  made  no  direction  for  anonymity.   The   claimant,
    dissatisfied with the judge's decision, applied  for  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

6.   It was suggested that the judge was wrong to conclude that it  was  not
    currently feasible to return  the  respondent.   Enforced  removals  of
    foreign national offenders are possible after approval from the Kurdish
    Regional Government with the use of  a  EUL  or  valid  passport.   The
    issues of feasibility of return  the  respondent  being  documented  or
    undocumented were technical obstacles and matters for the Secretary  of
    State.

7.   The second challenge suggested that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    repeatedly referred to the claimant  attaching  an  unjustifiably  high
    public  interest  in  deportation  at  paragraphs  60  to  79  of   the
    determination.  It pointed out that Parliament had set the weight to be
    attached to the public  interest  and  although  acknowledged  this  is
    dependent on the circumstances, it is not for the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to make such an assertion.  The  grounds  submit  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has failed to give clear reasons at paragraph 81 why the
    respondent's partner and children's circumstances can be considered  to
    be unduly harsh.  Reference was placed on PF Nigeria  and  AJ  Zimbabwe
    and others such as NA Pakistan, confirming that separation of  a  child
    from the [respondent], even if they are a British citizen, does not  in
    itself amount to unduly harsh or exceptional circumstance.   The  judge
    has pointed to nothing more than the separation of the  respondent  and
    concluded  that  this  will  amount  to  unduly   harsh   circumstances
    outweighing deportation.  It was submitted that the public interest  in
    deportation  outweighs  the  best  interest  of  the  respondent's  two
    children.

8.   Mr Melvin suggested that the judge had erred by saying as he  did  that
    the weight attached by the claimant to the public interest in deporting
    foreign criminals in this case is unjustifiably high.  The weight to be
    attached to deportation of foreign criminals is a matter for Parliament
    and Parliament has decreed that foreign nationals should ordinarily  be
    removed.  This respondent is from the Kurdish Autonomous  Region.   The
    judge has failed to properly consider country guidance in the  form  of
    AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).  Relatives would be
    in a position to obtain the necessary documentation for the respondent.
     This had not been considered by the judge.

9.   Mr Wagner pointed out that the appeal had been  granted  on  Article  8
    grounds only.  He referred me to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
    Rhuppiah v the Secretary of State for the Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    803 and, in particular to paragraphs 49 and 50.  The question of public
    interest he said goes into the balance and it  is  clear,  reading  the
    determination as a whole, that the judge has considered the question of
    public interest as part of the balance.  He says at paragraph  81  that
    having considered all the factors in the round he finds that:


         "(a) ...


         (b)  ...


         (c)  ...


         (d)  ...


         (f)  The weight attached by the respondent to the  public  interest
         in maintaining immigration control in this  case  is  unjustifiably
         high."


10.  As to the question of whether  or  not  the  removal  would  be  unduly
    harsh, Mr Wagner referred me to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in
    NM (Uganda) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  617  and  in  paragraphs  22
    onwards.  The respondent had undergone  an  Islamic  marriage  in  2008
    after the decision of  the  claimant  and  he  and  his  wife  had  two
    children.  His wife enjoys immigration status in the United Kingdom and
    in 2015 made application for naturalisation.  Counsel was not  able  to
    tell me whether or not that application had been considered, but on the
    question of unduly harsh, it was necessary to consider  in  detail  the
    clinical psychology report placed before the judge at paragraph 37  the
    judge summarises it.  The  expert  confirms  that  the  children  would
    struggle  emotionally,  socially   and   intellectually   without   the
    respondent.  His son in particular would be likely to suffer with self-
    confidence, self-concept and in his  educational  achievements  and  it
    would be unduly harsh for the children to live without the appellant in
    the United Kingdom.  The expert  suggests  that  were  they  likely  to
    suffer emotional distress then at least  one  of  them  would  find  it
    difficult and would struggle to trust people easily in the future.  The
    expert reported that the respondent and his wife  by  Islamic  marriage
    have a stable and happy relationship together and that  she  relies  on
    the respondent for practical and emotional support herself  and  social
    and academic support with the children.  Removing the  respondent  from
    the United Kingdom would have a detrimental impact on her psychological
    and emotional wellbeing placing her at risk of suffering from emotional
    distress, depression and anxiety and as a result she may not be able to
    fully meet her children's needs emotional and development  needs  as  a
    single parent  particularly  in  the  context  of  her  children  being
    emotionally distressed, confused and anxious at not having their father
    in their lives.  Mr Wagner pointed out that this was a  decision  which
    this judge was entitled to reach on the evidence before  him.   It  was
    not a decision that no reasonable judge could have reached.

11.  The question of the appellant's returnability  was  not  in  any  event
    relevant.  At paragraphs 54 and 55, the judge considers the question of
    returnability  and  concludes  that  he  is  not  persuaded  that   the
    respondent can be returned  to  Iran  however,  that  is  not  relevant
    because he has allowed the appeal under Article 8.

12.  Mr Melvin addressed me briefly in conclusion and  asked  me  to  uphold
    the determination.

13.  I have carefully read the determination.   It  is  very  full.   It  is
    detailed and I have  concluded  that  it  is  sustainable.   The  judge
    reaches conclusions on the evidence  which  may  be  considered  to  be
    generous, but nonetheless are sustainable.  They may very well  not  be
    the same conclusions that I would have made had  I  been  deciding  the
    appeal, but that is not the test.  The test is whether or not the judge
    has made a material error of law.

14.  So far as the first challenge is concerned, the  judge  considered  the
    question of the public interest in deportation at paragraph 60  of  the
    determination.  He noted that the more serious the offence committed by
    a foreign criminal the greater the public interest is  in  deportation.
    He noted the appellant's two offences of attempting wounding were  very
    serious  as  is  reflected  in  the  sentences  of   eighteen   months'
    imprisonment on each concurrent.  The judge points  out  that  this  is
    three times the length of a maximum sentence which a magistrate's court
    can impose for a single offence.  He  noted  that  the  respondent  had
    pleaded not guilty, but was found  guilty  after  trial  and  that  the
    public interest in deportation of a foreign  criminal  not  only  takes
    account of public interest in the prevention  of  crime  but  also  the
    public's revulsion at the commission of serious crimes and the need  to
    deter others from committing crimes.  He was entitled to note that  the
    sentence  was  imposed  some  fourteen  years  earlier  and  that   the
    respondent was released from prison after only  four  months.   He  was
    correct to note that there  was  no  evidence  of  reoffending  by  the
    respondent and he was entitled to take into account the fact  that  the
    respondent expressed regret and that he was described as being  a  very
    kind and gentle person.  He concluded by finding that the weight to  be
    attached by the claimant to the public interest in deportation in  this
    case was unjustifiable high.  That was a finding which, on the evidence
    before him, he was entitled to reach.  The judge went  on  to  consider
    the best interests of the respondent's children,  having  examined  the
    clinical psychology  report  by  Dr  Rozmin  Halari,  as  well  as  the
    respondent's son's school report. The judge was entitled to conclude as
    he did at paragraph 81(f) and was  also  entitled,  having  taken  into
    account the expert evidence, that the respondent's removal  would  have
    unduly harsh consequences for the respondent's spouse and children.  In
    summary, therefore, I find that the judge has not erred in  law  and  I
    uphold his determination.

No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered making a fee award  and  have
decided to make a fee award of any  fee  which  has  been  paid  or  may  be
payable (adjusted where full award not justified) for the following  reason.
 The appeal has been allowed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
Date: 12 January 2018

