
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01481/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2019                            |On 6 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     DJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Masih, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   In a decision of 27 January 2017 the respondent refused the  protection
    claim made by the appellant, a national of Pakistan.  His  appeal  came
    before Judge O'Garro of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) who in a decision
    sent on 24 October 2017 dismissed his appeal.  Despite  accepting  that
    in 2006 the appellant had been president of a student branch  of  JKSLF
    in his home area in Pakistan (Northern  Punjab  region)  and  had  been
    involved in UKPNP meetings and activities in the UK, the judge did  not
    find credible his claim to be at risk from the authorities in  Pakistan
    due to his political profile.

2.   The appellant was successful in obtaining a  grant  of  permission  and
    advances seven grounds.  They contend that the judge erred in:

    (1)  giving the photographs he had produced no weight because  she  did
         not find him credible;


    (2)  in not accepting the evidence of the witness, Mr  Khan,  in  full,
         despite accepting that he was credible;


    (3)  in selectively drawing on the expert report of  Christopher  Bluth
         concerning Kashmir  and  the  role  of  the  Pakistan  Intelligence
         Service (ISI);


    (4)   in misconstruing background  country  information,  the  CPIN  in
         Pakistan: Background Information, including actors  of  protection,
         and internal relocation country report in particular;


    (5)  in irrationally assuming that because the appellant  said  that  a
         false FIR had been taken  out  against  him  this  meant  that  the
         incident to which it referred did not happen;


    (6)  in rejecting the evidence of the lawyer on a mistaken basis; and


    (7)  in disregarding the opinion of the expert that "the  ISI  will  be
         aware of the appellant and have file on him and that on  return  to
         Pakistan he will be at risk due to his political activities in  the
         United Kingdom as well as in Pakistan."  In relation to  the  final
         ground, Ms Masih highlighted the fact that the  judge  appeared  to
         have misread the expert's report and background country information
         to say that only those with a high political profile  would  be  at
         risk.

3.   I received very careful submissions from both representatives.

4.   Whilst I do not  consider  all  these  grounds  to  have  merit,  I  am
    persuaded that several do and that  taken  cumulatively  they  identify
    more than one error of law on the part of the judge.  As  regards  (1),
    whilst the final sentence of paragraph 54 taken in isolation  indicates
    a false compartmentalisation of the evidence ("...as I do not find  the
    appellant credible I will  give  these  photographs  no  weight"),  the
    earlier sentences make clear that the photographs were considered quite
    inconclusive in any event.  Ground (2), however, is troubling.  Despite
    stating at paragraph 59 that "I have no doubt about the credibility  of
    the witness himself", the judge goes on to doubt his  independence  and
    incorrectly portrays Mr Khan's evidence as  to  his  knowledge  of  the
    appellant's political activities to "when he left Pakistan"  (paragraph
    59).  In fact Mr Khan's witness statement spoke of  knowing  about  the
    appellant's political activities  in  Pakistan  and  of  the  appellant
    having a significant profile (being "an active  member  of  JKSLF"  and
    "well known in our area") and did not state (as the  judge  implies  in
    paragraph 59), that the authorities in Pakistan had  no  real  concerns
    about him.

5.   Also troubling is the judge's  treatment  of  the  country  expert  and
    background information (grounds (3) and (4)).  The judge drew  on  both
    to count against the appellant  his  claim  to  have  been  politically
    active in the JKSLF and later the UKPNP in Pakistan which were seen  to
    be undermined by the fact that he had avoided detention and have had no
    family members subjected to detention.  Yet neither Mr  Bluth  nor  the
    CIPIN stated that all  those  active  in  the  UKPNP  in  Pakistan  are
    detained without exception or that their family members are.   Further,
    these sources addressed the situation of  all  those  involved  in  the
    campaign for independence of Kashmir, not just the UKPNP,  and  on  the
    judge's own findings at paragraph 43 she accepted that  the  appellant,
    along with other JKSLF members, may have been arrested and detained  at
    JKSLF demonstrations.  Even assuming the judge was entitled  to  reject
    the appellant's claims to have become involved with the UKPNP in  2009,
    the appellant's own evidence relating to his earlier experiences whilst
    a member of the JKSLF includes a claim that  in  October  2008  he  was
    detained for six weeks and beaten and tortured after  giving  a  speech
    about Kashmir rights in Kotli.  The judge did not address this  element
    of the appellant's account at all, even though if it  was  accepted  as
    credible it would have  demonstrated  past  persecution.   The  judge's
    statement at paragraph  75  that  "[t]he  appellant  had  no  political
    profile that brought him to the interest of the authorities  before  he
    left Pakistan..." is very hard to square with that evidence.

6.   In relation to ground (5), Mr Mills accepted that it was  difficult  to
    follow the judge's logic at paragraph 49 wherein she stated  that  "the
    appellant's evidence is that the FIR [relating to a public  meeting  12
    December 2009] is a fake charge against him which I interpret  to  mean
    the incident did not occur at all." The appellant's evidence  was  that
    the authorities had decided to charge him as a result of  a  speech  he
    gave against the government on this date; that is, he  was  not  saying
    the incident did not happen, only that the charge meted out to  him  in
    response was fake.  This is not at all to say that the judge was  wrong
    to identify discrepancies in the charges contained in the FIR  and  the
    appellant's claim that they arrested and charged him with treason.  But
    it remains that the FIR was not said by the appellant to  be  false  in
    the way the judge assumed.

7.   I see no arguable merit in ground  (6),  but  consider  that  ground  7
    encapsulates a difficulty running through  all  the  judge's  analysis,
    namely that she seeks to find that the appellant would not be  at  risk
    because in truth he has a "low-profile" politically, without explaining
    how that was consistent with her apparent acceptance  of  the  expert's
    report.  The latter had concluded  that  the  ISI  would  know  of  the
    appellant and have a file on him and that as a result of his  political
    activities in Pakistan and the UK he  would  at  risk.   Certainly  the
    judge  nowhere  set  out  reasons  for  not  accepting   the   expert's
    assessment.

8.   For the above reasons I conclude that the decision  of  the  FtT  Judge
    must be set aside for material error of law.

9.   Given  that  the  principal  challenges  are  to  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility findings, I see no alternative to remitting the case to the
    FtT (not before Judge O'Garro) to be heard de novo.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date: 3 January 2019
[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


