
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01928/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 January 2019                             |On 12 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                               Muhammad Saghir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   A national of Pakistan, the appellant has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Grimmett of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent  on  9
    July 2019 dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 19 February 2019 refusing his protection claim.

2.   Five errors were alleged to have been committed by the judge:

    (a)  failing to consider that to remove the appellant whilst his family
         court proceedings are ongoing was disproportionate, contrary to the
         guidance given in Mohan [2012] EWCA Civ 1363 was cited in support;


    (b)  unfairly making adverse findings  about  the  motives  behind  the
         appellant's contact application when this was not a submission made
         by the respondent or put to the appellant;


    (c)  making inadequate findings on the appellant's protection claim;


    (d)  failing to consider the appellant's evidence that the breakdown of
         his marriage had reignited the previous family dispute and that his
         "brother has been beaten up in Pakistan as a warning to me"; and


    (e)  failing to engage properly with either the appellant's  protection
         or Article 8 claim.

3.   I am grateful to the appellant and Mrs Aboni for their submissions.   I
    should point out that the appellant produced a number of  documents  at
    the hearing including a further Cafcass report dated 11  July  2019,  a
    July 2019 certificate showing that  he  had  successfully  completed  a
    parenting course and a letter  from  Heart  of  Worcestershire  College
    dated 16 October stating that he was enrolled on a  course  to  improve
    his English skills.  Since these all post-date the decision of the FtT,
    I cannot take them into account in deciding whether the judge erred  in
    law although I would observe that their content is consistent with what
    is foreshadowed in the previous Cafcass  report  that  was  before  the
    judge.

4.   Ground (a) focuses on the evidence set out  by  the  appellant  in  his
    witness statement  of  2  May  2019  that  he  had  started  new  court
    proceedings in May 2018 to have  contact  with  his  children  and  had
    attended the first directions hearing in Derby dated  4  February  2019
    where no safeguarding issues were raised.

5.    I do not consider ground (a) has merit.  In the  first  place,  it  is
    clear that the judge took fully into account the  appellant's  evidence
    regarding ongoing family court proceedings.   At  paras  10  -  13  she
    wrote:

         "10. The respondent does not dispute the fact  that  the  appellant
             has two children in  the  UK  who  are  British.   Some  court
             documents have been lodged from the Family Court.  It  is  not
             clear  whether  that  Court  granted  leave  for  them  to  be
             disclosed.  It is plain that only some of the  documents  have
             been disclosed.  The appellant said  that  he  does  not  have
             direct contact with the children, but he is allowed  to  write
             to them.  [A1] has never seen the appellant and [A2] last  had
             direct contact with him in 2012 when he was one year old.


         11.  The appellant  instructed  solicitors  in  May  2018  to  seek
             contact, after he had sought asylum.  He said at  the  hearing
             that he sent the children presents  every  week.   He  is  not
             currently allowed direct contact, but he is allowed  to  write
             to them which he says he is doing.  At p89 of the bundle is  a
             letter from Cafcass to the Derby Family Court  dated  4  April
             2019 it says there was a child arrangement order for  indirect
             contact dated 1 April 2016.  Although it is said both  parents
             have parental responsibility, the letter noted  the  appellant
             had not had even indirect contact with the children for over a
             year.  No progress had been made since the last proceedings in
             2016.  The report noted the appellant's former  wife  believed
             to application was made because he wants to remain in the  UK.
             It also said the appellant would have to explain why  indirect
             contact had not been maintained suggesting that the  appellant
             has not been writing to them as he claimed.  He said  that  he
             had recently started sending them letters but that was not the
             view of the Family Court only last month.


         12.  I am not satisfied that he has shown  he  enjoys  family  life
             with his children as he has not seen his  younger  child  ever
             and has not seen his older child since she was  one.   He  has
             not explained why he did not pursue an  application  until  he
             was threatened with removal.


         13.  It is usually in  the  best  interests  of  children  to  have
             contact with both parents.  I am in difficulty in reaching any
             conclusion about their best interests as I  have  no  evidence
             about their lives.  There is nothing to suggest they  are  not
             properly cared for by their mother.  As they have always lived
             with her, I  am  satisfied  it  is  their  best  interests  to
             continue to do so.  I have no seen no independent evidence  to
             suggest it is in their best interests to see their father.  He
             does not appear to have made  any  serious  attempts  to  have
             contact with them until he was told he had to  leave  the  UK.
             That strongly suggests his application was made to support his
             desire to remain in the UK not  to  establish  a  relationship
             with the children.  As he has played no part in the children's
             lives, as he does not appear  to  have  made  any  significant
             attempt to see the children until now, when he  is  face  with
             removal, I have serious doubts as to  the  reason  behind  his
             application.  The delay in and the timing of  the  application
             for contact means that I cannot be  satisfied  it  is  in  the
             children's best interests to have direct contact when  he  has
             not shown by his past behaviour that it is likely,  should  he
             gain a contact order, that he will actually see the children."

6.   The appellant's grounds do not challenge any specific aspect  of  these
    findings save for the  adverse  reference  in  para  13  regarding  the
    reasons  behind  the  appellant's  application  (which  I   deal   with
    separately below).  Second, this was not a case where the appellant was
    seeking for the first time to pursue contact proceedings.  As noted  in
    the respondent's refusal decision, he had applied on 21  May  2013  for
    LTR in order to seek custody of the children and had received  a  grant
    of leave for that purpose for 5 September 2013 - 4  April  2014,  which
    had been extended further from 8 April 2014 - 8 October  2014.   Third,
    it is apparent from the family court documentation that  the  appellant
    never succeeded in being granted custody and the family court had  only
    ever agreed indirect contact. A final order was made on  1  April  2016
    and further proceedings have been confined to  the  issue  of  indirect
    contact.  Fourth, on the evidence before the judge, the  appellant  had
    not been consistently utilising even the provision made in  the  family
    court order for indirect contact.  The appellant's  own  evidence  does
    not explain why this has been the case, although he does point out that
    he has taken steps, in line with the family court wishes  to  pursue  a
    parenting course and improve his English language.   Fifth,  since  the
    case of Mohan the Immigration Rules contain  provisions  for  leave  to
    remain to be granted to persons who can show they have direct access to
    their child - E-LTRP.2.4(a)(ii) and the respondent was plainly entitled
    to conclude the appellant could  not  benefit  from  these  provisions.
    Sixth, in terms of "proportionality", this  could  only  have  been  an
    issue if the appellant had been able to establish that he had a genuine
    and subsisting family life relationship with his children, whereas  the
    judge found at para 12 that he had not shown that he enjoys family life
    with his children.  Even if the judge has proceeded on the  basis  that
    the  appellant's  biological  ties  with  his  children   sufficed   to
    constitute family life in formal terms, her assessment would have  come
    to the same conclusion since the factual  content  of  the  appellant's
    relationship with his children was virtually non-existent.

7.   As regards ground (b), it is true that the respondent's refusal  letter
    does not allege ulterior motive in the appellant pursuing family  court
    proceedings, but it was clearly a key part of the  appellant's  written
    and oral evidence that he was actively seeking to maintain contact with
    his children and it was open  to  the  judge,  having  considered  that
    evidence, to view it adversely.  The judge's findings that "he does not
    seem to have made any serious attempt to have contact with his children
    [(even in 2007, 2011)] until he was told to leave the UK" is consistent
    with the  data  produced  about  the  appellant's  immigration  history
    (having become an overstayer in January 2013 and having  first  applied
    for leave to remain on the basis of contact with his  children  in  May
    2013).  According to the Cafcass report of 4 April 2019, the  appellant
    made a further application for a Child Arrangements Order in  2017  but
    it goes on to note that "there has been no indirect contact for over  a
    year.  He has never met  his  son."   The  appellant  was  given  every
    opportunity to demonstrate his pursuit of contact  had  been  sustained
    and continuous. The judge was clearly entitled to find he had failed to
    demonstrate such.

8.   It is convenient to take grounds (c)  and  (d)  together.   As  regards
    (d), I accept that the judge  should  have  addressed  the  appellant's
    evidence that the breakdown of his  marriage  had  reignited  the  land
    dispute.  However, it was also the appellant's parallel  evidence  that
    the land dispute had been settled as the land was still  jointly  owned
    by the two families, and the judge cannot be faulted for accepting that
    evidence.  It was open to the judge to consider that if the family  was
    still concerned about the dispute they could have attempted to approach
    the police or the courts, but they had not.  In any event, even if  the
    judge did err in failing to consider the evidence of  recrudescence  of
    the land dispute,  the respondent had  concluded  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal decision that even if the appellant would be  at  risk  in  his
    home area he could relocate safely and reasonably.  The  appellant  had
    failed to produce evidence to substantiate his claim that the family on
    the other side of the land dispute had influence and power beyond their
    home area.  The appellant's asylum claim never had a realistic prospect
    of success and it would be wholly unwarranted to consider there was any
    material error in the judge rejecting it.  It is apparent from what has
    already been said that the judge did adequately address the appellant's
    protection claim.

9.   As regards (f), it  amount  in  essence  to  the  contention  that  the
    judge's treatment of the appellant's protection of Article  claim  were
    too cursory.  I have already explained why I consider that there was no
    material error in the  judge's  treatment  of  the  asylum  claim.   In
    relation to the appellant's Article 8 claim, it was addressed in detail
    in paras 10 - 13 and was properly found to be wanting by virtue of  the
    lack of factual content to his  relationship  with  his  two  children.
    Whilst the judge did not conduct a detailed examination of factors  for
    and against his Article 8 claim in the  manner  urged  by  the  Supreme
    Court in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, the only potentially  strong  point
    in the appellant's favour hinged on  the  nature  and  content  of  his
    relationship with his children, which the judge examined in  depth  and
    found wanting.

10.  To conclude I am not persuaded that the judge materially erred  in  law
    and accordingly his decision must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2020
               [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
