
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/01330/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |          Decision & Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                         |
|On 31 May 2017                      |          On 19 June 2017           |
|Prepared 31 May 2017                |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between


                                     wA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Kumudusena of Liyon Legal Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Sri  Lanka,  date  of  birth  8  September
    1986, appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 26 January  2017
    to refuse an asylum protection claim as well as a claim in relation  to
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.
     In addition the Secretary of State concluded that Article 8  ECHR  had
    not been engaged outside of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge B Morris  (the  Judge)
    who, on 22 March 2017,  promulgated  her  decision  and  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeals on all grounds.

3.   An anonymity order was made and whilst no reference has  been  made  to
    that fact for these proceedings today I continue the anonymity order.

4.   Permission to appeal the Judge's decision  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 20 April 2017. On 26 April  2017  the
    Respondent made a Rule 24 response.

5.   The substance of the grounds are that there was  procedural  unfairness
    in failing to  grant  the  Appellant,  who  for  the  purposes  of  the
    proceedings before the Judge  was  acting  in  person,  an  adjournment
    because he was awaiting  documents  to  be  produced  from  abroad  and
    awaiting a medical report in  respect  of  which  he  attended  for  an
    examination on 7 March 2017 before a doctor, Mr Mason.   The  Appellant
    attended the hearing before  the  Judge  in  person.   The  Appellant's
    representatives, Liyon Legal Limited, had written a letter, seeking  an
    adjournment of the hearing on 9th March 2017, sent by fax late  in  the
    afternoon on 7 March 2017.

6.   The letter explained what evidence it was  hoped  to  be  produced  but
    quite simply really never got to the heart of why the evidence had  not
    been sought in advance either so as to be dealt with, with the PHR/CMR,
    or alternatively in advance of the listed hearing date which  had  been
    given as early as 9 February 2017.  In any event a  pre-hearing  review
    took place on 23 February 2017: At that stage it is clear that  it  was
    not intended by the Appellant to obtain medical evidence and there  was
    no indication that court documents were being sought or were awaited so
    as to cause the delay in the listing of the  case.   As  a  result  the
    directions sent out by the Tribunal on 23 February 2017 so far  as  the
    Tribunal was aware the appeal was ready for hearing.

7.   The Judge considered  the  adjournment  application  and,  for  reasons
    properly set out in the decision at paragraphs 15-17,the Judge rejected
    the application and proceeded with the hearing.

8.    The  argument  essentially  run  by  Mr  Kumudusena  is  that  if  the
    documents had been before the Judge a different  decision  'might  have
    been' forthcoming:  He might even say' would have been'.  It  seems  to
    me that the benefit of hindsight which may have a bearing  on  how  the
    matter  progresses  hereafter  does  not  establish  that   there   was
    procedural unfairness in the way in which the decision was made or  the
    reasons given for the decision by the Judge.  What  the  documents  may
    show is that a different decision is possible and it  is  a  matter  of
    evidence which has yet to be considered  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    There had not been an opportunity for the Secretary of State before the
    hearing to have taken a view on the genuineness of  the  documents  and
    whether or not it  was  accepted  they  were  reliable.   It  does  not
    inevitably follow that the Secretary of State would take the view  they
    were not reliable.  The question is to what extent they might impact on
    the real risk on return and the extent to which, if they are  reliable,
    they may feature in the sense of putting the Appellant into one of  the
    GJ categories.

9.   It seemed to  me  that  the  Judge  on  the  material  which  she  had,
    explained why she found aspects of the Appellant's evidence  unreliable
    and affected his credibility.  Those matters she  reasonably  explained
    and it seems to me that they are not shown to be flawed simply  by  the
    existence of those other documents or indeed the medical evidence.   It
    may be that in other circumstances, looked at as a whole with  all  the
    evidence, could have led to a different conclusion.   It  seems  to  me
    therefore that what is essentially being argued  is  that  within  this
    appeal there ought to effectively  be  a  re-hearing  of  the  case  on
    different basis to that which had previously been advanced.

10.    I quite understand why that course may be preferred but the  fact  is
    that that evidence has not been considered by the  Secretary  of  State
    and it could be a different outcome is reached.  I do not second  guess
    that and I express no views on the merits of the case.
11.   In the circumstances therefore the Judge, it seems  to  me,  correctly
    addressed the overriding objective found within the Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules 2014, in particular Rule 2, which indicates that the parties must
    help the Tribunal to further the overriding  objective  and  co-operate
    with the Tribunal generally.  That is an often understated objective to
    which  the  parties,  by  being  parties  to  such  procedures,  commit
    themselves.   I conclude this is a case  where  there  was  unjustified
    delay in production and preparation of the case: Whether it  is  simply
    to do with funding or other matters I do not speculate. It is  open  to
    the Appellant on this later arising material to argue the matter before
    the Secretary of State on  the  basis  of  a  change  in  circumstances
    because they have not  been  considered.   That  must  be  for  another
    application and for a later date.  In the circumstances I conclude  the
    Judge's decision does not disclose any material error of law.

NOTICE OF DECISION
12.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands and the appeal is dismissed.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 5 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award


Signed                                  Date 5 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

