
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01311/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 February 2019                  |On 26 February 2019                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     A A
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Sarah Rogers, Counsel
                    instructed by the Immigration Advice Centre
For the respondent:    Ms Rhona Petterson, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal  refusing  him  international  protection  on  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection grounds, or  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen  of  Iran,
    of Kurdish ethnicity, born and formerly habitually resident in Iraq.

 2. The appellant claimed that he could not return to Iran, because of  his
    late father's KDPI activities, nor to Iraq, because of his  association
    with the interpreter son of his foster family.

 3. The respondent in his refusal letter of 1 February 2017 did not seek to
    return the appellant to Iran.  He  decided  that  the  appellant  could
    lawfully be returned to Iraq, of  which  he  found  the  appellant  was
    probably  a  citizen,  without  any  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
    international obligations.

 4. The appellant subsequently produced a birth  certificate  from  the  Al
    Tash camp in Iraq, which records the Iranian citizenship  of  both  his
    parents.  The respondent has attempted to verify that birth certificate
    with the UNHCR but without response to date.

 5. At the hearing today, and having regard to the lower standard of  proof
    applicable in international protection claims,  Ms  Petterson  accepted
    that the appeal should be approached on the basis  that  the  appellant
    was a citizen of Iran, not Iraq. There  has  been  no  further  refusal
    letter dealing with the risk to the appellant in Iran.

Background

 6. The appellant was born in the Al Tash camp in Iraq in December 1986, to
    Iranian citizen parents who are said to have fled Iran because  of  his
    father's involvement in Iran with the Kurdish Democratic Party of  Iran
    (KDPI).  The appellant has never lived in Iran. He had been  ordinarily
    resident in Iraq for all his life before coming to the United  Kingdom.
    The appellant's parents died in the camp when he was young, his  father
    when he was six and his mother when he was 10 (so in 1992 and 1996).

 7. The appellant then lived as an informal member of another family in the
    Al Tash camp and later, in Rawa camp, where the family occupied a house
    which belonged to an American, and one of their  sons  worked  for  the
    American forces as an interpreter. There are said to have been  serious
    difficulties between that family and a Shi'a terrorist group, by reason
    of the foster family's interpreter son's activities.  Ms Rogers accepts
    however that as the arrangement  of  the  appellant  living  with  that
    family was informal, there would be no record of his  involvement  with
    that family and it would not now give rise to a risk on return.

 8. The appellant left Iraq to come to the United Kingdom  via  Turkey  and
    claimed asylum on 18 May 2008, describing himself  as  a  self-employed
    shoe polisher.  He said he  had  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  the
    previous day, clandestinely by lorry.

Refusal letter

 9. In a refusal letter dated 1 February 2017, the respondent decided  that
    the appellant could be returned to Iraq, his country of former habitual
    residence,  without  breaching  the  United   Kingdom's   international
    obligations.

10. Fingerprint records show that the appellant claimed asylum in Italy  on
    21 November 2007.  He arrived clandestinely in the United  Kingdom,  he
    says on 17 May  2008,  and  claimed  asylum  on  that  date,  but  then
    absconded, fearing return to Iraq.  Four  years  later,  on  3  January
    2012, the appellant surfaced and asked for an asylum interview.  He was
    interviewed on 18 June 2012 but the interview was suspended due to  his
    health problems.  He was interviewed on 13  May  2013  and  20  January
    2017.

11. When interviewed, the appellant knew very little about either  Iraq  or
    Iran.  He was particularly  lacking  in  geographical  knowledge  about
    capital cities and  countries  which  bordered  Iraq.   The  respondent
    considered that the appellant's lack of knowledge about  Iraq  was  not
    consistent with his having lived in an Iraqi refugee camp for  over  20
    years, and/or having been born there, and that his description  of  the
    camp he said he was in (Al Tash, in Ramadi)  was  not  consistent  with
    publicly available description of life  in  the  camps  nor  with  maps
    showing the surrounding areas.

12. The respondent did not believe either that the appellant was an Iranian
    citizen and the son of a KDPI activist, or that he was involved with  a
    family, one of whose sons was an American interpreter, and  who  had  a
    house owned  by  an  American.   The  respondent  considered  that  the
    appellant was an Iraqi citizen seeking to portray himself  as  a  Kurd,
    that he had never lived in a camp at all and that the interpreter story
    was fabricated.

13. The respondent refused international protection and then considered the
    appellant's medical condition, cystic echinococcosis, a disease  caused
    by a particular type of tapeworm, finding that it could be  treated  in
    Iraq and was not an exceptional circumstance for which leave to  remain
    should be granted outside the Rules.

First-tier Tribunal decision

14.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  identified  multiple  problems   with   the
    appellant's account, in particular  with  the  dates  therein  and  the
    things he said about the camps where he had lived.  At [61], the  Judge
    accepted that while it was difficult to make a precise finding  on  the
    appellant's origins, he could not conclude with any certainty that  the
    appellant originated from the IKR.   He  accepted  that  the  appellant
    faced a real risk of serious harm from non-state agents in  Baghdad  or
    the south of Iraq (there is a mystifying reference to persons acting on
    behalf of non-State agents, which  I  disregard,  as  such  individuals
    would also be non-State agents).  The Judge concluded:

         "61. It is difficult to make a precise finding on  the  origins  of
         the appellant.   I  cannot  with  any  certainty  conclude  on  his
         geographical origins in [IKR].  I  find  however  for  the  reasons
         given that the appellant is not a refugee.  Although I accept  that
         he faces a real risk of serious harm from non-State agents or  from
         those acting on their behalf should he be returned  to  Baghdad  or
         the south of Iraq.  The  alternative  of  a  return  to  the  [IKR]
         remains at this point an option which is dependent on whether he is
         from that region.  I am aware that  this  can  be  checked  by  the
         authorities in the [IKR] by pre-clearing."

15. Very similar findings appear also at [66] in the decision.  At [67] the
    Judge concluded that the appellant had  not  been  truthful  about  his
    family background in Iraq and 'there remains the  possibility  that  he
    has support and can be assisted by family in the [IKR]'.  There was  no
    up-to-date evidence about the appellant's medical condition which could
    support any conclusion that he still needed specialist treatment.

16. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal and the appellant appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

17. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that,  the  Judge  having
    accepted that the appellant could not safely be returned to Baghdad  or
    the south of Iraq, he had erred in law in failing to make a finding  of
    fact as to whether the appellant came from the IKR or a contested area,
    which, together with the difficulties in  obtaining  a  CSID,  arguably
    made her consideration of internal relocation unsound.

Rule 24 Reply

18. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 Reply.

19. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

20. The appellant's Iranian nationality was disputed by the  respondent  in
    his refusal letter but is now accepted, as the appellant has produced a
    birth certificate recording his birth in the Al Tash camp in  Iraq,  in
    the contested area of Ramady.  The respondent  has  not  yet  made  any
    decision in which the  appellant's  return  to  Iran,  his  country  of
    nationality, is contemplated and the appeal today turns only on  return
    to Iraq.

21. Ms Rogers accepted that as the appellant was  never  a  member  of  his
    informal foster family, any record of his living  with  them  would  be
    most unlikely, and there is therefore no real risk  to  him  from  that
    family's American associations through their interpreter son,  even  if
    that account were accepted.

22. Ms Rogers further accepted that the appellant can succeed  only  if  he
    can show a generalised risk to him in Iraq under  pursuant  to  Article
    15(c) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC  of  29  April  2004  on  minimum
    standards for the qualification and status of third  country  nationals
    or stateless persons as refugees  or  as  persons  who  otherwise  need
    international protection and the content of the protection granted (the
    Qualification Directive) and  paragraph  339CA(v)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules HC 395 (as amended).

23. When making the First-tier Tribunal decision, the Judge  did  not  have
    the benefit of the country guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds  -  internal  relocation)  (CG)  [2018]  UKUT  212  (IAC),
    promulgated on 26 June 2018.

24. There is no clear finding of fact in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    as to whether the appellant comes from the IKR or a contested  area  of
    Iraqi Kurdistan.  On the evidence now before the Tribunal, Ms Petterson
    accepts that the appellant  has  demonstrated  that  he  comes  from  a
    contested area, one of the last strongholds of ISIL which is not within
    the IKR and that this appeal falls to be allowed on that basis.

25. Ms Rogers did not pursue the Article 8 ECHR arguments before me  and  I
    therefore allow  the  appeal  only  under  Article  15(c),  by  way  of
    humanitarian protection, and dismissing both the Refugee Convention and
    human rights appeals.



DECISION

26. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.



Date:         21 February 2019               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson




