
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01033/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC (via Skype)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 March 2021                     |On 23 April 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             MOHAMMAD CHOWDHURY
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jorro instructed by Lawmatic Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on the 3  March  1990
         who entered the UK on the 24 September 2009 with entry clearance as
         a student valid to 30 June 2013.
      2. On 30 November 2017 the appellant claimed asylum. That  application
         was refused and the appeal against the refusal dismissed by a judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated on the 9  June
         2020.
      3. In a decision promulgated on 9 December  2020  the  Upper  Tribunal
         found the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  and  set  that
         decision aside, albeit with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal
         Judge in relation to the appellant's identity, immigration history,
         and nature of his political activities both in  Bangladesh  and  in
         the UK, including level involvement in such activities and Facebook
         activities, being preserved findings.
      4. In relation to his political activity in Bangladesh, the  appellant
         claimed before the First-tier Tribunal to have been a member of the
         BNP since 2003 or 2004 [23]. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted
         that the appellant became a member of the BNP,  in  particular  the
         JCD, and undertook political activity for the BNP [26]. The  First-
         tier Tribunal also record at [27] that  the  appellant  claimed  to
         have led a rally to a  monument  to  those  who  gave  their  lives
         fighting for Bangladeshi independence when they  were  attacked  by
         members of the Awami League (AL). The appellant's evidence was also
         that he campaigned for the BNP in the general  elections  in  2008.
         The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  that  notwithstanding  these
         activities it was not made out the appellant was of any interest to
         the AL or the authorities as claimed [35].
      5. In relation to political activities  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
         appellant joined the UK-BNP in 2011 being appointed to the position
         of Vice President of the London City Branch, for whom he  has  been
         an active member by attending conferences, seminars, demonstrations
         and other events [37].
      6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept the evidence that  UK-
         BNP is an extension of the BNP in Bangladesh, finding the group was
         no more than "friends of BNP" [40]. The Judge did accept,  however,
         that the appellant is a member  of  the  UK-BNP  and  that  he  had
         carried out low-level political activities in the UK in support  of
         the BNP [41].
      7.  It  was  also  found  the  appellant  had  joined  various   other
         organisations in the UK, including the Bangladeshi  Students  Union
         UK ('BSU') in 2010 and Voice for Bangladesh in 2017,  for  whom  he
         was appointed as an Executive Member of the  Central  Committee  in
         2018 [44].
      8. The First-tier Tribunal accepted the evidence  that  the  appellant
         was one of the core organisers of an international conference  held
         in the House of Lords on 17 January 2017 and accepted the  evidence
         that the BSU and Voice for Bangladesh are interrelated. The  First-
         tier Tribunal also  accepted  the  appellant's  role  within  these
         organisations [45].
      9. The First-tier Tribunal also noted the appellant  was  involved  in
         events involving the  Law  Society,  Amnesty  International,  Human
         Rights Watch, the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office,  and  others,
         although did not find such involvement created a real risk  to  the
         appellant if returned to Bangladesh [48].
     10. The First-tier Tribunal refer to the  appellant's  Facebook  posts,
         including criticism of AL, the Prime Minister of Bangladesh  Sheikh
         Hasina, and encouraging BNP  supporters  to  vote  in  the  general
         elections of December 2018 in Bangladesh.
     11. The First-tier Tribunal also note the  appellant's  claim  to  have
         been targeted by the AL on one specific occasion when he  was  part
         of a demonstration in front of the Bangladesh  High  Commission  in
         London which the appellant claimed resulted in the  Prime  Minister
         ordering government agencies to take action against  him  and  some
         political colleagues when  they  protested  against  her  when  she
         visited London in 2016 and  2017.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  noted
         reference to the demonstration by  UK-BNP  against  AL  during  the
         Prime Minister's visit, in which some individuals  broke  into  the
         High Commission and to the UK  police  becoming  involved  and  one
         arrest, not of the appellant, being made.

Discussion

     12. It was submitted by Mr Jorro, and not contested by Mr Tan, that the
         two key issues to be considered at this hearing are:

         a. On the basis of the FTT Judge's  positive  findings  as  to  A's
             political actions, including in respect to his protesting as a
             BNP-UK  member  against  Bangladeshi  Prime  Minister   Sheikh
             Hasina's visits to the UK, and  in  light  of  the  up-to-date
             background country evidence, such accepted actions  would  put
             him at real risk of being persecuted on return to  Bangladesh,
             and / or


         b. In light of that up-to-date background country evidence  and  on
             the basis of the FTT Judge's acceptance that A was  an  active
             (albeit 'low level') member of the BNP student organisation in
             Bangladesh and has been  active  (albeit  'low  level')  as  a
             member of the BNP-UK and in other organisations in the  UK  in
             demonstrating his opposition to the current AL regime, A would
             be at real risk of being persecuted were  he  to  continue  to
             peacefully express his pro-BNP and anti-AL political  opinions
             inside, and anywhere inside, Bangladesh as he is  entitled  to
             do and as he would - on the evidence accepted by the FTT Judge
             - wish to do on return to Bangladesh but for the risk of being
             persecuted for so doing: cf. MSM (Somalia) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA
             Civ 715 at [3], [18], [24]- [29], [33]-[46] (with reference to
             the principles in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31, [2011] 1 AC
             596).

     13. Both advocates placed reliance upon the Secretary of States Country
         Policy Information Note (CPIN) Bangladesh:  Political  parties  and
         affiliation, Version 3.0, September 2020.  Consideration  has  been
         given to  this  document,  together  with  the  CPIN:  journalists,
         publishers and internet bloggers, Bangladesh, January 2021.
     14. The climate of politics in Bangladesh is summed up by the entry  in
         the CPIN relating to political parties and affiliations where it is
         written:

         2.4.1    Bangladesh is a parliamentary democracy  (see  Parliament,
              President and Prime Minister).  The  two  main  parties  that
              dominate politics and have a  longstanding  rivalry  are  the
              Awami League (AL - the  ruling  party  since  2009)  and  the
              Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), both said to have several
              million members. Other major parties include the Jatiya Party
              and the Jamaat-e-Islami (JI or Jamaat), a  BNP  ally,  albeit
              deregistered as a political party in 2013.


         2.4.2    The incumbent AL swept to victory  in  the  December  2018
              elections, with the party's coalition securing 288 out  of  a
              possible  300  directly  elected  seats  in  parliament,  and
              officially winning 96% of the popular vote. The Jatiya  Party
              won 22 seats and became the official opposition despite being
              allied with the AL coalition during  the  election  campaign.
              The Jatiya Oikya Front (aka National Unity Front - NUF),  the
              main opposition alliance led by the BNP and also included  JI
              members, was left severely weakened. It won 8  seats:  6  for
              the BNP  and  2  for  the  Gono  Forum  Party  (see  National
              elections 2018).


         2.4.3    Foreign and domestic analysts assessed that  the  election
              was neither free nor fair. There  have  been  accusations  of
              ballot-box  stuffing,  voter  intimidation   and   harassment
              including voters and opposition polling agents  being  denied
              access to polling places and ruling party activists occupying
              polling places and casting ballots in the  place  of  voters.
              Over 10,500 BNP and JI party activists were arrested  in  the
              run  up  to  the  election   (see   Election   violence   and
              irregularities and Politically-motivated harassment,  arrests
              and detentions).

     15. The type of adverse activities experienced by opposition groups  at
         the time of elections is amply illustrated by the entry at 2.4.5 of
         the CPIN where it is written:

         2.4.5    BNP and JI officials claimed mass arrests  and  detentions
              of their supporters pre-2018 election, with thousands  facing
              'trumped up' charges or under the Digital  Security  Act  for
              posting/liking posts against ruling party members  on  social
              media. The leader of the BNP, Khaleda Zia, was jailed for  17
              years in early 2018 on charges of  corruption.  Filing  cases
              against the opposition is common although, on many occasions,
              cases are reportedly dismissed by courts  for  being  without
              merit.  There  are  reports  of  police  extortion,   whereby
              numerous  arrested  activists  and  leaders   are   routinely
              released on condition of payment. There are also  reports  of
              torture  in  police  custody,  extra-judicial  killings   and
              disappearances and restrictions on movement.

     16. It is not disputed that the  attack  upon  the  appellant  in  2008
         occurred when he was a member of the student wing  of  the  BNP  in
         Bangladesh. Such attacks and disruption of political  opponents  by
         members of the AL are common. The current  situation,  recorded  in
         the CPIN is as follows:

         10.1.1   The DFAT report provided  an  overview  of  the  political
              rivalry between the AL and  BNP,  noting:  'The  relationship
              between the two parties is characterised  by  a  longstanding
              political and dynastic  rivalry,  which  has  increased  over
              time. Both parties derive their legitimacy from  their  claim
              to be the true heirs of Bangladeshi nationalism: the  AL  led
              the independence movement before and during  the  1971  civil
              war, while the BNP  holds  as  its  institutional  basis  the
              ideology of Bangladeshi nationalism. The rivalry between  the
              two parties is also deeply personal at  the  highest  levels:
              the AL's leader,  Sheikh  Hasina,  is  the  daughter  of  the
              'Father of the Nation' Sheikh Mujibur Rahman  and  the  BNP's
              leader, Khaleda Zia, is the widow  of  the  party's  founder,
              former General and President  Ziaur  Rahman.  Sheikh  Mujibur
              Rahman and Ziaur Rahman were both assassinated in office, and
              their respective parties view them as martyrs.'


         10.1.2   The  DFAT  report  added,  'Since  independence,  the  two
              parties have, for the most part, alternated in the  roles  of
              ruling party and opposition. The  ruling  party's  affiliated
              organisations  have  historically   controlled   all   public
              institutions while that party has been in power, and both the
              AL and BNP have used the state machinery  against  government
              opponents while in office.'


         10.1.3   Jackman noted in the ESID Working  Paper:  'Following  the
              return  to  parliamentary  democracy  in  1990,   Bangladeshi
              politics  has  been  characterised  by  intense   competition
              between the country's two major political parties, the  Awami
              League  and  Bangladesh  Nationalist  Party.   In   practice,
              parliament has been largely boycotted by the opposition  ...,
              with competition instead taking place on the streets  through
              violent  mobilisation   and   demonstrations   of   strength,
              particularly within urban areas. When in  office  each  party
              has typically politicised  state  institutions  and  directed
              them against  the  opposition,  while  exploiting  privileged
              access  to  the   state   and   market   to   support   party
              infrastructure.'


         10.2.1   The BTI 2020 Report noted 'There is  complete  intolerance
              for any point of view that is seen as being in opposition  to
              the government.'  According  to  the  Freedom  House  report,
              Freedom on the Net 2019, covering the period 1 June  2018  to
              31 May 2019, 'The ruling Awami League (AL)  has  consolidated
              political  power  through   sustained   harassment   of   the
              opposition and those perceived to be allied with it [...].'


         10.2.2   The DFAT report noted that, since the AL came  into  power
              in 2008, it had considerably  restricted  the  activities  of
              opposition parties, particularly the  BNP  and  JI,  by  '...
              using police and other security forces to arrest thousands of
              opposition political party members and supporters,  often  in
              conjunction with political demonstrations; using  police  and
              other security forces  to  prevent  opposition  parties  from
              holding   meetings   and   demonstrations;   and   pressuring
              opposition candidates to withdraw from  local  and  municipal
              elections, including through preventing them from  submitting
              election nominations.


         10.2.3   According to Human Rights  Watch  (HRW),  since  the  2013
              protests  by  the  BNP  and  other  opposition  parties,  who
              demanded the  reinstatement  of  a  caretaker  government  to
              oversee elections: '[T]he Awami League government has cracked
              down on the political opposition. Law enforcement authorities
              have illegally detained scores of  opposition  activists  and
              held them in secret without producing them before courts,  as
              the law requires. In most cases,  those  arrested  remain  in
              custody for weeks or months, before being  formally  arrested
              or released. Torture in police custody, including mutilations
              such "knee-capping" has been widely  practiced.  Others  have
              been killed in so-called armed  exchanges,  and  many  remain
              "disappeared." Many  of  these  cases  appear  to  have  been
              politically motivated, sometimes targeting the  relatives  of
              political opponents.'


         10.2.4   The HRW report  also  noted  'While  the  police  promptly
              launched investigations and made arrests in  attacks  on  the
              ruling party, it ignored complaints from the opposition.'


         10.2.5   The FCO's human rights report for 2019 noted 'Violence  by
              organisations associated  with  political  parties  continued
              throughout 2019. In October, a student  from  the  Bangladesh
              University of Engineering and Technology was beaten to  death
              by members of the student wing of the Awami League, allegedly
              for  posting  material  online  which  was  critical  of  the
              government.'


         10.2.6 The USSD HR  Report  2019  stated  'Human  rights  activists
              claimed police falsely constructed cases to target opposition
              leaders, workers, and supporters,  and  that  the  government
              used the law enforcement agency to crack  down  on  political
              rivals.'


         10.2.7    The  same  report  added:  'Political  affiliation  often
              appeared to be a factor in claims of arrest  and  prosecution
              of members of opposition parties, including through  spurious
              charges under the pretext of responding to national  security
              threats. The opposition Bangladesh  Nationalist  Party  (BNP)
              maintained  that  thousands  of  its  members  were  arrested
              arbitrarily throughout the year,  often  in  connection  with
              planned and preauthorized political rallies in an attempt  to
              both intimidate and prevent activists and  political  leaders
              from participating.'


         10.2.8   Reporting on allegations of  false  criminal  cases  being
              filed  by  police  against  opposition  party   members   and
              supporters, a  March  2019  VoA  article  noted:  'Police  in
              Bangladesh have filed criminal  complaints  against  tens  of
              thousands of people  for  violence-related  cases  in  recent
              years. But the opposition and rights activists  say  most  of
              the cases, allegedly involving bombing and rioting, were made
              up. Opposition parties claim  most  of  those  targeted  were
              their  leaders,  workers  and  supporters,   and   that   the
              government used the law enforcement agency to crack  down  on
              its political rivals.'


         10.2.9   Human Rights  Watch  (HRW)  noted  in  its  annual  report
              covering events in the election  year  of  2018:  'Bangladesh
              continued a harsh crackdown to suppress those  that  disagree
              or are critical of the ruling Awami  League.  These  included
              members  and  supporters   of   the   political   opposition,
              journalists, prominent members of civil society, as  well  as
              students,  and  even  school  children.  [...]  Thousands  of
              opposition  supporters,  including  senior   leaders,   faced
              trumped-up cases. Newspapers  reported  that  even  names  of
              individuals who are dead or critically ill  in  the  hospital
              were included in these arbitrary actions.'


         10.2.10 An article in the Dhaka Tribune, dated  30  December  2019,
              stated: 'The BNP claimed the government filed at least  4,098
              cases against nearly 300,000  BNP  members  and  arrested  at
              least  4,300  activists  before  the  11th   election   alone
              [December 2018 election]. 'Before the election,  BNP  sent  a
              list of 1,046 "false cases" against its members to the  Prime
              Minister's Office, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina  promised  to
              see the issue of false cases before election. But no progress
              was made.'


         10.2.11 Human Rights Watch explained that: 'Since the beginning  of
              2018,  the  authorities  have  dramatically   increased   the
              practice of filing false  or  fictitious  cases  against  the
              government's democratic opponents, primarily  from  the  BNP.
              Typically, a single case accuses a list of named individuals,
              sometimes more than 100, of participating in a crime, plus an
              unspecified number of "unknown"  perpetrators.  Other  people
              can then be added to the case later, if the police claim that
              they were among the earlier "unknown accused".'


         10.2.12 Despite the claims that cases were  filed  against  persons
              who were dead, disabled, absent from the country or  in  jail
              at the time of the reported offences, the government insisted
              such cases were not politically motivated.


         10.2.13 Freedom House noted  in  its  Freedom  in  the  World  2020
              report, 'The main opposition BNP has been weakened by regular
              harassment and arrests of key members that have significantly
              harmed its ability to challenge the AL in elections. The 2018
              election campaign was characterized by a crackdown on dissent
              that saw thousands of people and several political candidates
              arrested. There were  also  a  number  of  acts  of  violence
              committed against opposition figures.'


         10.2.14 In its concluding observations, dated August 2019,  the  UN
              Committee against Torture (UNCAT) noted:  'The  Committee  is
              concerned at reports that in January and February  2018,  the
              authorities  arrested  almost   5,000   supporters   of   the
              opposition Bangladesh Nationalist Party,  including  ordinary
              persons suspected of being opposition sympathizers, ahead  of
              the verdict in the corruption case against the leader of  the
              party,  Khaleda  Begum  Zia.  It  is  also  concerned   about
              allegations of thousands of arrests of opposition  supporters
              around the time of the  elections  and  that  many  of  these
              persons remain in detention.'


         10.2.15 The DFAT report noted: 'BNP figures allege that  they  have
              been subjected  to  enforced  disappearance  after  raids  on
              private homes and party offices [...]. While such allegations
              typically involve houses  being  raided  at  night,  daylight
              raids on party offices  have  also  been  reported.  The  BNP
              claims  that  authorities  have  frequently  arrested   their
              supporters during protests for  alleged  criminal  damage  or
              assault on police  with  little  supporting  evidence,  while
              alleging that violence against BNP supporters perpetrated  by
              AL members occurs with impunity.'


         10.2.16 Jackman noted in the ESID Working Paper, that  as  well  as
              arrests, 'BNP activists and human rights groups  allege  that
              many activists face torture, in a strategy seemingly designed
              to both extract information, but also destroy the morale  and
              motivation of the opposition to contest the ruling  party.  A
              college-level Chattra  dal  leader  relayed  the  torture  of
              fellow Chattra dal members, which occurred whilst  on  remand
              in local  police  stations  (thanas),  saying  '[Police]  are
              inserting sticks into their backside, they are clipping  your
              tongue and giving you electric shocks, and  pulling  out  all
              ten nails. It  is  a  very  common  practice  nowadays,  very
              frequent.'


         10.2.17 Jackman also described the use of extortion by police as  a
              means of controlling the opposition: 'Following  a  round  of
              arrests (during a political protest, for  example)  activists
              described first hand how police divide  those  arrested  into
              different  camps.  Some  face  police  cases   and   possible
              imprisonment, and others are simply threatened with the  plan
              of extorting them. A large number of  activists  and  leaders
              arrested  are  thus  routinely  released  on   condition   of
              payment.'


         10.2.18 On 8 February 2018, Khaleda Zia was sentenced to  a  5-year
              prison term for corruption. Zia's son  and  vice-chairman  of
              the BNP, Tarique Rahman, living in exile in the UK, was  also
              sentenced to 10 years in prison alongside  former  legislator
              Quazi Salimul Haq, former principal secretary to  Zia,  Kamal
              Uddin Siddique, Zia's nephew Mominur Rahman  and  businessman
              Sharfuddin Ahmed. Zia's sentence was increased to 10 years in
              October and in the same week she  received  an  additional  7
              years for another corruption case.


         10.2.19 An October 2018 article  by  Deutsche  Welle  (DW)  stated,
              'Filing cases against members of the opposition is  a  common
              practice in Bangladesh. On  many  occasions,  courts  dismiss
              cases for lack of legal merit. BNP leaders have claimed  that
              the lawsuits against their leader Khaleda were "intentionally
              designed" to harass and undermine  her  political  career,  a
              claim denied by Hasina's Awami League.'


         10.2.20 Jackman noted in the ESID Working Paper that Khaleda  Zia's
              conviction  in  2018  '...  led  to  a  brief  escalation  in
              political  mobilisation,  with  the  BNP  announcing   hartal
              [strikes], street protests, marches and hunger strikes,  most
              of which were met with a huge  number  of  arrests,  violence
              from  Awami  League  activists,  truncheon   charges,   water
              cannons, beatings and arrests by the  police;  and  all  with
              relatively little impact on daily life in  the  city  [Dhaka]
              compared to previous protests.'


         10.2.21 Reuters reported on 24 March 2020 that Khaleda Zia's prison
              sentence was suspended for 6 months on  humanitarian  grounds
              due to ill health. The suspension was on the  condition  that
              she remain in Dhaka to receive  treatment  for  diabetes  and
              arthritis.


         10.2.22 The DFAT report noted in  respect  of  the  Jamaat-e-Islami
              (JI): 'Authorities have particularly targeted for arrest  the
              JI's senior leadership, few of whom remain free  and  active.
              Other targets have included prominent  leaders,  ICS  [Islami
              Chhatra Shibir - student wing] members and,  in  some  cases,
              family members. Lower-level JI members have  reportedly  been
              able to avoid the attention of authorities either through the
              paying of bribes to AL leaders or by  physically  relocating.
              DFAT assesses as  credible  reports  that  the  situation  is
              better for JI members in villages than in cities.'


         10.2.23 The same source added, 'People who are perceived  as  being
              supporters of JI have reported being followed or intimidated,
              including  when  abroad  [see  Sur  place  activities].  Some
              government critics with no affiliation with JI have  reported
              that they have been accused of having such links as  a  means
              of attacking their credibility.'


         10.2.24 The Freedom House Freedom in the World 2020 report noted 'A
              JI spokesman said more than 1,850 party members were arrested
              ahead of the 2018 elections, and some party  members  claimed
              they had been subject to torture while  in  custody.'  forces
              reportedly used torture to gather  information  from  alleged
              militants and members of political opposition parties.'


         10.2.25 Odhikar reported that 'In 2019, attacks and suppression  on
              the  opposition  political  parties  and  dissidents  by  the
              government became alarming. During this  period,  there  were
              reports  of  fictitious  cases  filed  against  leaders   and
              activists of the opposition political parties (especially BNP
              leaders and activists) arrests and re-arrests from  the  jail
              gate after a person had been released on bail. Women  leaders
              and activists of the opposition  were  also  arrested  during
              internal meetings.'


         10.2.26 Odhikar reported that during January to  March  2020,  'the
              right to freedom of expression has been  massively  violated'
              and 'Dissidents, opposition leaders, activists  and  ordinary
              citizens and even a Baul artist  have  been  sued  under  the
              Digital Security Act 2018 and  sent  to  jail  for  allegedly
              writing on social media or posting a "like / share" on a post
              against high level persons  of  the  ruling  party  or  their
              family members,  the  ministers,  parliamentarians  and  even
              Indian  Prime  Minister  Narendra  Modi;  and   for   hurting
              "religious sentiment". The same source  also  described  with
              regards to violence  against  women  that  'there  have  been
              reports of the ruling party leaders making large  amounts  of
              money by reconciliation through mediation'.


         10.2.27 In August 2020 Amnesty International reported that: '"There
              is a disturbing pattern of enforced  disappearances  emerging
              in Bangladesh in recent years, mainly  targeting  people  who
              express their dissenting  political  opinions.  Ashraf  Uddin
              Mahdi [a student activist] was forcibly disappeared from  the
              centre of the capital as a brazen  tactic  to  silence  him,"
              said  Sultan  Mohammed  Zakaria,  South  Asia  Researcher  at
              Amnesty International.  Student  activists  have  also  faced
              violence from groups closely associated with the ruling party
              to silence criticism of the authorities. On 8 August, members
              of Chattro League, the student wing of the ruling party Awami
              League, beat Saleh  Uddin  Sifat,  a  law  student  of  Dhaka
              University, in the Sitakunda are of Chattogram district after
              accusing him of "anti-government activities" on social media.
              The attackers left Sifat in critical condition. He had to  be
              transferred to a hospital where he  is  currently  undergoing
              medical treatment.

     17. Not only is there evidence of a real risk to those deemed to be  in
         opposition to the ruling AL at times of increased tension, such  as
         elections, but there also appears to be a deliberate  targeting  of
         those who  express  what  are  perceived  as  dissenting  political
         opinions within Bangladesh at  other  times.  Local  elections  are
         being held in phases in Bangladesh during  2021,  the  final  phase
         being April 2021, with the next national government  elections  due
         in December 2023. In light of  the  country  information  and  past
         performance it is likely there will be an increased risk  to  those
         deemed to express opposition views contrary to the interests of the
         ruling party, whether in person or on social media.
     18. There was much discussion about whether the appellant's  activities
         in the United Kingdom mean he has sufficient profile  to  create  a
         real risk for him on return, per se. This  is  not  a  case  of  an
         individual who comes before the Tribunal purporting  to  do  little
         else bar attend a couple of demonstrations with a very low or  non-
         existent profile, but of a person who has been found to be involved
         in a number of credible activities. I do agree with the submissions
         of Mr Tan that a lot depends upon the profile of an individual  and
         the appellant's activities indicate he is an ordinary member of the
         BNP-UK without evidence of holding a  high  profile  or  leadership
         role within the United Kingdom sufficient to have  brought  him  to
         the adverse attention of the authorities  in  Bangladesh  for  that
         reason alone to date.
     19. I accept there is evidence that members of the AL  are  present  in
         the United  Kingdom  who  may  provide  intelligence  to  those  in
         Bangladesh  of  individuals   openly   expressing   adverse   views
         sufficient to create a risk profile and of more concern in relation
         to this appellant was his attendance at the demonstrations  against
         the leader of the AL, the Prime Minister of Bangladesh, during  her
         visits to the United Kingdom as noted above. The  appellant  claims
         that he has been named in a  media  publication  as  one  of  those
         present at those  demonstrations  and  it  was  not  disputed  that
         another  individual,  a  British  citizen,  was  arrested  when  he
         returned to Bangladesh on a visit and faces charges  in  connection
         with his attendance at those demonstrations in the UK and for other
         reasons. The profile of that individual is  greater  that  that  of
         this appellant as he is recorded as being the Vice-President of the
         BNP in the UK who will face a greater risk on return  in  light  of
         the prevailing political climate in Bangladesh,  although  he  must
         have thought it was safe for him to enter Bangladesh.
     20. If the authorities in Bangladesh are aware of the appellant's  name
         and activities in attending the  demonstration  against  the  Prime
         Minister of Bangladesh there  is  a  real  risk  to  him  of  being
         detained  and  suffering  ill-treatment  on  return.  Despite  this
         particular  aspect  being  known  to   the   Secretary   of   State
         insufficient evidence to  counter  the  appellant's  claim  of  his
         attendance and activities at that demonstration has been provided.
     21. In relation to  the  appellant's  Facebook  activities,  the  CPIN:
         journalists, publishers and internet bloggers, Bangladesh,  January
         2021, is relevant. In relation to his sur place  activities  it  is
         written:

         7.1 Legal context


         7.1.1    Section  4,  Chapter  1  of  the  DSA  2018  provides  for
              extrajudicial application and states:


              '1) If any person commits any offense within this Act outside
                   Bangladesh  which  would  be  a  punishable  offense   if
                   committed inside Bangladesh, then the provisions of  this
                   Act would be applicable in such a manner as if those Acts
                   were committed in Bangladesh


              '2) If any person commits any offense  in  Bangladesh  within
                   this Act from  outside  Bangladesh  using  any  computer,
                   computer system, or computer, then the provision of  this
                   Act will be applicable in such a manner as if  the  whole
                   process of the offense was committed inside Bangladesh


              '3) If any person  commits  any  offense  outside  Bangladesh
                   within  this  Act  from  inside  Bangladesh,   then   the
                   provisions of this Act  will  be  applicable  in  such  a
                   manner that the whole process of committing  the  offense
                   occurred inside Bangladesh.'


         7.1.2    In its analysis of the DSA, Article 19  expressed  concern
              that section 4 was 'overbroad' and that it would lead to 'the
              extraterritorial application  of  provisions,  which  are  in
              breach of international human rights law.






         7.2  Blogging from abroad


         7.2.1    Freedom House noted that 'The government has also targeted
              expatriate  Bangladeshis  for  criticizing   the   government
              online.  According  to  a  senior  officer  of  the  Criminal
              Investigation Department  (CID)  of  the  Bangladesh  Police,
              cases were filed against  at  least  12  expatriates  in  the
              United Kingdom, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Australia, and
              Oman for allegedly  spreading  anti-state  rumors  on  social
              media.'


         7.2.2    Reporting on bloggers  living  in  exile,  HuffPost  India
              referred to atheist blogger, Camelia Kamal and  her  blogger-
              husband, Subrata Adhikary, who fled Bangladesh in  2015,  but
              continue to write on social  media.  HuffPost  noted  'Though
              they have lived in  Sweden  for  the  past  five  years,  the
              distance from Bangladesh has not made them feel safe.  Emails
              and  phone  calls  that  claimed   familiarity   with   their
              whereabouts made the couple move homes several times. "We try
              not to live in the same place  for  more  than  6-7  months,"
              Kamal told HuffPost India.'


         7.2.3    Other bloggers told HuffPost  India  of  the  threats  and
              insults they frequently received. Whilst largely ignoring the
              threats, Shammi Haque, who  left  Bangladesh  in  2015,  said
              '"Religious fundamentalism has no borders. Their  ideological
              brethren could be living next to me. I try to  closely  guard
              information related to my movements and whereabouts. I am not
              completely safe anywhere," said Haque, who has  been  working
              with a German language newspaper for the past two years.'


         7.2.4    HuffPost added 'Five years on, these bloggers  see  hardly
              any possibility of going back ever again. "I will  either  be
              jailed   by   the   government   or   killed    by    Islamic
              fundamentalists," said  Haque.  "Democracy,  secularism,  and
              freethinking have died  in  Bangladesh.  The  government  has
              struck a deal with fundamentalist forces".'


         7.2.5     According  to  the  same  source,  'Bangladesh's  largest
              religious organization Hefazat-e-Islam's Narayanganj district
              unit president Abdul  Awal  said  on  July  24  [2020]  at  a
              gathering to offer namaaz [prayer], "We would have  torn  the
              atheists into pieces and soothed the  pained  hearts  of  the
              Muslims, only if we could reach them. Unfortunately,  we  are
              not being able to reach them at present".'


         7.2.6    HuffPost mentioned Asad Noor, living in  hiding  following
              death threats (see Critics of Islam), and  stated  'Following
              the recent harassment of his family members, Noor said,  "The
              police also dialed  my  number,  and  threatened  me  against
              continuing my activities online".'

     22. The reference above to the "DSA" is to  the  Digital  Security  Act
         2018, which came into force in October 2018. An article by Reuters,
         'Factbox: Bangladesh's broad media laws', 13 December 2018,  states
         that:

              'The law allows police to arrest anyone without a warrant  if
              they believe that an offense under the law has  been,  or  is
              being committed, or they believe there is a possibility of  a
              crime and risk of evidence being destroyed. The  law  carries
              prison sentences of up to 14 years for any person  trying  to
              secretly  record  information  inside  government  buildings.
              Critics say this  makes  investigative  journalism  into  any
              government corruption almost impossible.

     23. The use of the Act to suppress opposition appear to be part of  the
         general crackdown by the AL on freedom of expression in Bangladesh.
         In relation to the application  of  the  Act  in  practice,  it  is
         written in the CPIN:

         5.4  Arrest, detention and charges brought under media laws.


         5.4.1    The DFAT report stated, 'Defamation charges  are  commonly
              brought against journalists  and  others  who  criticise  the
              government.' The same source added 'Sedition laws can also be
              applied broadly, and penalties range from fines  to  life  in
              prison or even the death penalty if the accused is  found  to
              have undermined the Constitution.'  Similarly  Freedom  House
              noted that 'Online activists, journalists,  and  other  users
              regularly  face  civil  and  criminal  penalties  for  online
              expression. ... During the  COVID-19  pandemic,  arrests  for
              online speech alarmingly increased.'


         5.4.2    There have been hundreds of arrests under the ICT Act  and
              DSA although the exact number in any given time  varies  from
              source to source.


         5.4.3    The USSD HR  Report  2019  noted  that:  'Libel,  slander,
              defamation, and blasphemy are treated as  criminal  offenses,
              most commonly employed against individuals  speaking  against
              the government,  the  prime  minister,  or  other  government
              officials. The DSA provides for sentences of up to 10  years'
              imprisonment   for   spreading   "propaganda"   against   the
              Bangladesh  Liberation  War,  the  national  anthem,  or  the
              national flag. As of July [2019] a  total  of  420  petitions
              requesting an investigation had been filed under the act with
              more than 80 individuals arrested.'


         5.4.4    Amnesty International reported on  8  October  2020  that:
              'Nearly 2000 cases have been filed under the  DSA  since  its
              enactment on 8 October  2018,  according  to  data  from  the
              Bangladeshi government's Cyber Crime Tribunal. This  includes
              more than 800 cases filed in the first nine  months  of  2020
              alone, with many of the country's most prominent editors  and
              senior journalists being increasingly targeted... In 2020, at
              least 10 editors of national and regional dailies and  online
              news platforms  have  faced  legal  charges  under  the  DSA,
              following critical reporting on leaders of the  ruling  Awami
              League party.'97 5.4.5 According to  data  collected  by  the
              human rights NGO, Odhikar, in 2019, 42 people  were  arrested
              under the DSA and 6 under the ICT Act.


         5.4.6    Reporting on the number of  arrests  in  2019  into  2020,
              Prothom Alo, a major daily newspaper, noted in September 2020
              that according to police data, 'A total of 1,135 people  were
              arrested in 732 cases filed under the DSA across the  country
              in the last year... In the first two months of 2020,  another
              339 people were arrested in 165 cases filed under the act...'


         5.4.7    According to data collated by Odhikar, between January and
              September 2020, a total of  111  people,  including  ordinary
              citizens, teachers and imams, were arrested  under  the  DSA,
              for criticising individuals or leaders of the government  and
              the ruling party. Freedom House  recorded  that  'During  the
              first six months of  2020,  authorities  recorded  113  cases
              impacting a total of 208 people,  including  53  journalists.
              They arrested 114 people, the majority of whom were still  in
              detention awaiting bail as of  June  2020.  Sixty  cases  had
              already been filed against  over  100  people,  including  22
              journalists. Such numbers are a significant increase from  63
              cases in 2019 and 34 in 2018, when the act came into  force.'
              Odhikar also reported that, whilst working in a  professional
              capacity, 5 journalists were arrested during the same  period
              and 55 were prosecuted under the DSA.


         5.4.8    DFAT noted some prominent cases in  recent  years:  'There
              have  been  a  number  of  legal  cases  against   individual
              journalists  in  recent  years,  notably  against  those   at
              mainstream outlets: . 'In February 2016, the  editor  of  the
              Daily Star was served with  67  defamation  and  16  sedition
              lawsuits, mostly lodged by AL members, after he  admitted  to
              publishing  unsubstantiated  information  about   the   Prime
              Minister. The lawsuits were lodged in  districts  nationwide,
              thus requiring the editor to spend  weeks  travelling  across
              the country to make bail applications. While the  High  Court
              dismissed two of the cases, the remainder are unresolved  and
              could be reactivated at  any  time.  .  'In  August  2018,  a
              prominent photojournalist was arrested under  the  provisions
              of the DSA for making "false" and "provocative" statements on
              Al-Jazeera and on Facebook about the Road Safety  Protests...
              . 'Authorities charged  a  reporter  for  the  Dhaka  Tribune
              newspaper and the Bangla Tribune news website  with  offences
              under the DSA for calling the legitimacy of the December 2018
              election into question by pointing out irregularities in  the
              vote  count.  Another  journalist  who  reported   the   same
              irregularity went into  hiding  after  the  same  charge  was
              brought against him. If convicted, the two  journalists  face
              up to 14 years' imprisonment.'


         5.4.9    The photojournalist, Shahidul Alam, cited above,  said  he
              was beaten and tortured whilst  in  police  custody.  He  was
              released on bail in November 2018, after spending  more  than
              100 days in jail.


         5.4.10   In January 2019,  the  Committee  to  Protect  Journalists
              (CPJ) reported on the arrest  of  journalist  Hedait  Hossain
              Molla after  he  was  accused  of  violating  the  DSA  after
              reporting that the number of votes cast from  a  constituency
              in Khulna district was higher  than  the  number  of  voters.
              Although  the  figure  was  later   corrected   by   election
              officials,  Molla   was   arrested   for   reporting   'false
              information' as the story was already published. According to
              the USSD HR Report 2019,  'Although  Molla  was  released  on
              bail, he was obliged to appear regularly  before  the  court,
              since the case remained active.'


         5.4.11   The DFAT report noted 'In March 2019, authorities arrested
              a senior Bangladeshi member  of  football's  world  governing
              body after she said on a televised talk show that  the  Prime
              Minister was neglecting football.' The FIFA official, Mahfuza
              Akhter Kiron, who was accused of  making  derogatory  remarks
              against the Prime  Minister,  was  granted  bail  on  medical
              grounds but, according to  the  USSD  HR  Report  2019,  'the
              charges against her were not dropped.'


         5.4.12   Deutsche Welle (DW) reported  on  Bangladeshi  journalist,
              Shafiqul Islam Kajol, who disappeared in March 2020  the  day
              after being charged  under  the  DSA  for  making  defamatory
              comments against an Awami League. Nearly 2 months  after  his
              disappearance Kajol was 'found' in a field with his arms  and
              legs bound and  taken  into  custody.  Civil  society  groups
              believe Kajol was a victim of enforced disappearance  by  the
              security forces and, in August 2020, called for his immediate
              release. As at October  2020,  Kajol  remained  in  pre-trial
              detention.


         5.4.13   Article 19 voiced alarm at the government's  crackdown  on
              freedom of expression since  the  start  of  the  coronavirus
              pandemic. It reported on 19 May 2020: 'Since the  coronavirus
              pandemic hit Bangladesh, there has been a surge in arrests of
              journalists,  activists  and  others   who   criticised   the
              Bangladesh Government for its lack of preparedness  and  poor
              response to the pandemic. Since the start of the pandemic, 16
              journalists have been arrested. 'Many have been charged under
              the 2018 Digital Security Act. It  is  becoming  increasingly
              difficult for journalists and bloggers to  report  about  the
              crisis. As well as the  arrests  outlined  below,  in  April,
              journalists' movements were restricted to allegedly stop  the
              spread of coronavirus. 'On 6 May, 11  people  -  including  a
              cartoonist, two journalists and a writer were  charged  under
              the Digital Security Act with "spreading rumours and carrying
              out anti-government activities". They were  alleged  to  have
              posted about, "the coronavirus pandemic to negatively  affect
              the nation's image and to create confusion among  the  public
              through  the  social  media  and  cause  the  law  and  order
              situation to deteriorate". Four were remanded in prison;  the
              others  are  bloggers  and  journalists  who   live   outside
              Bangladesh.'


         5.4.14   Freedom House similarly  noted  that  'Amid  the  COVID-19
              pandemic, users were  frequently  arrested  and  charged  for
              their online speech. For example, 11 people were  charged  in
              May 2020 under the Digital Security Act allegedly  for  their
              participation in the "I am Bangladeshi" Facebook page.'


         5.4.15   The CPJ also cited numerous cases of journalists  arrested
              under the DSA, relating to charges for reporting  on  alleged
              government  misappropriation   of   food   aid   during   the
              coronavirus  pandemic  or  for  publishing  so-called   false
              reports on political officials. CPJ noted 'Between March  10,
              2020, and May 21, 2020, authorities  detained  at  least  six
              journalists in Bangladesh and opened investigations  into  at
              least nine more under the  country's  Digital  Security  Act,
              according  to  news   reports   and   CPJ   interviews   with
              journalists.


         5.4.16   Reporting on 3 July 2020, Article 19 stated its concern at
              the arrest of a 15- year-old boy, for allegedly insulting the
              Prime Minister on Facebook, and of 2 university teachers, who
              were arrested for criticising the previous health  minister's
              mismanagement of the health care system  and  the  subsequent
              negative effect on the care of coronavirus patients.


         5.4.17   In March 2020, CPJ reported on Dhaka  Tribune  journalist,
              Ariful Islam, who was arrested by men in paramilitary uniform
              for alleged drug offences, which Ariful claimed were  planted
              in his home. The men assaulted the journalist and  broke  his
              arm and it was reported  he  was  stripped,  blindfolded  and
              tortured  whilst  in  police  custody.  That  night  he   was
              sentenced to prison  by  a  mobile  court  though  was  later
              released on bail by another court.  Ariful  had  reported  on
              corruption among local officials. The government  launched  a
              departmental case  against  4  officials  for  their  alleged
              involvement.


         5.4.18   Amnesty International reported the case  of  Ashraf  Uddin
              Mahdi, a student and online activist, who was disappeared  by
              unknown men in Dhaka in August 2020. Mahdi told the NGO  that
              he was released by  his  abductors  after  48  hours  on  the
              condition that he cease posting critical commentary on social
              media about people connected to the government.


         5.4.19   On  7  September  2020,  RSF  reported  on  the  arbitrary
              detention of a journalist in Cox's Bazar in the southeast  of
              Bangladesh132. According to RSF, Faridul Mostafa was held for
              nearly  a  year   after   reporting   on   local   government
              corruption133. The  Officer  in  Charge  (OC),  who  was  the
              subject of Mostafa's report, accused  him  of  extortion.  In
              fear of his life, Mostafa fled to Dhaka but  was  located  by
              the OC via his mobile phone signal and,  in  September  2019,
              was brought back to Cox's Bazar by whom the RSF described  as
              the OC's 'thugs'135. Even after  a  high  court  ordered  his
              release in August 2020, charges against him remained for  the
              illegal possession of drugs, alcohol and firearms, which were
              reportedly planted in his home during a police raid.  Mostafa
              also claimed he was tortured whilst in police custody.

     24. Notwithstanding the  evidence  showing  the  security  services  in
         Bangladesh have  purchased equipment to allow them to monitor posts
         made online, it is not made out  the  material  the  appellant  has
         posted to date in the UK will have come to  the  attention  of  the
         authorities in Bangladesh, such as to create a real risk for him on
         return.
     25. Where I find the appellant does face a real  risk  of  harm  giving
         rise to an entitlement to a grant of international protection is in
         relation to the issue of whether he  will  continue  his  political
         activities in Bangladesh or whether he will cease  such  activities
         as a result of facing a real risk of harm if he  did  not;  the  HJ
         (Iran) point.
     26. The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant's  political
         activities and expression of opposition political views  on  behalf
         of the BNP is genuinely held. This is therefore not  a  case  of  a
         person not holding genuine views. In such a  scenario  that  person
         can be expected not to express them if questioned  in  relation  to
         them. The appellant has been found to be a person who continued his
         political interests and activities both in Bangladesh  and  in  the
         United Kingdom, which is a preserved finding. It is contrary to the
         finding of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) that a person who holds a
         fundamental belief should be required to  hide  or  deny  the  same
         solely  to  avoid  persecution.  The  appellant's  entries  on  his
         Facebook account, even if they create no real risk in isolation and
         were posted in the  United  Kingdom,  are  also  matters  that  the
         appellant could not be expected to deny if asked about the same  on
         return  to  Bangladesh.  If  the  authorities  on  return  ask  the
         appellant to open his Facebook page to show his entries and  posts,
         even if the majority just repost other articles or  comments,  that
         could bring him  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities,
         resulting in a real risk of ill treatment  contrary  to  article  3
         ECHR.
     27. The core of this case is, however, that the appellant is  a  person
         who has been found to be  politically  active  and  who  wishes  to
         continue to be so. Such acts will  put  him  in  the  spotlight  in
         Bangladesh giving rise to real risk, and he cannot be  expected  to
         act discretely. In light of the country  material  recordings  that
         those perceived by the agents of persecution, whether state  agents
         or members of AL are intent on quashing any opposition activity, by
         whatever means, and in light of the evidence of a further  increase
         in such activities and real risk of  increasing  political  tension
         with a forthcoming parliamentary election, it is credible that  the
         appellant would not want to involve himself in activities  such  as
         those he has undertaken in the past in Bangladesh when  the  likely
         consequences of the same will be that he will face a real  risk  of
         persecution or harm.
     28. The appellant's profile will be further  increased  in  a  negative
         sense if his attendance at the  demonstrations  against  the  Prime
         Minister of Bangladesh in the United Kingdom becomes known to those
         who are questioning him, which the appellant cannot be expected  to
         deny if he is asked about his activities  in  the  United  Kingdom,
         which represent genuinely held opposition political views.  Indeed,
         it is arguable that on return to the airport should such  questions
         be asked of him he cannot be expected to lie which  will  create  a
         real risk of  detention,  torture,  abuse,  charges,  and  possible
         disappearance in accordance with the country information.
     29. I find, to the lower standard  applicable  to  an  appeal  of  this
         nature, that the appellant has established that he is entitled to a
         grant  of  international  protection  on  the  above   basis,   and
         accordingly allowed the appeal.

Decision

     30. I allow the appeal.

    Anonymity.


         The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 13 April 2021


