
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/01392/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 May 2017                        |On 9 June 2017                  |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     ALsF

                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr J Howard, Solicitor, Fountain Solicitors
For the Appellant:     Mr A. McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    At the hearing on 30 January 2017 I had made an  anonymity  direction.
    That shall remain unless and until the Upper Tribunal or Court  directs
    otherwise. There  shall  be  no  identification  of  the  Appellant  by
    reference to his names within these proceedings. This  is  my  decision
    following today's resumed hearing following that error of law hearing.

2.    I had noted in my error of law decision that the Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  based  on  asylum
    grounds. The Appellant, a Libyan national, had claimed to be at a  real
    risk if removed from there from the United Kingdom.

3.    The Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  had  explained  that  the
    Judge was wrong to allow the appeal based on the Appellant's  assertion
    that he was in fear of local militia who had killed his  brother  in  a
    revenge attack and who he alleged had also shot him. The grounds stated
    that it was perplexing that despite the Appellant not coming within any
    of the risk categories in the Country Guidance case of  AT  and  Others
    (Article  15c:  risk  categories)  CG  [2014]  UKUT  318,   the   Judge
    nonetheless went on to conclude that  internal  relocation  was  not  a
    possibility.

4.    I had come to the following conclusions:

      "Having considered the rival submissions, it is clear to me  that  the
    Judge did materially err in law. That was because he did not adequately
    reason why internal  relocation  was  not  a  viable  option  for  this
    Appellant. I reject Mr Sharif's  submissions  that  because  the  Judge
    noted he had been provided with some 400 pages of  background  material
    that therefore he must have taken it into account. All  that  had  been
    said at paragraph 28 was, "The Appellant has provided me with a  bundle
    of documents comprising 406 pages and I have a bundle of documents from
    the  Respondent  all  of  which  I  have  taken  into  account".   What
    specifically was it about the background material that led the Judge to
    conclude that internal relocation was not possible? The gloss now being
    put on that by Mr Sharif is understandable, but the difficulty is  that
    the Judge did not explain what he made of the background material.

      I agree with Mr Duffy that when allowing or indeed when dismissing  an
    appeal a Judge does not have to cite every piece of evidence, but it is
    necessary to give adequate reasons why a party has lost based  on,  for
    example, internal relocation. Indeed, more so  when  the  Secretary  of
    State had specifically explained in her decision  letter  why  internal
    relocation was a viable option. The Judge had summarised the  Secretary
    of State's position in respect of internal relocation at  paragraph  30
    of his decision.

      The difficulty with the Judge's finding at paragraph 46  is  that  the
    Appellant did not come within any  of  the  risk  categories  from  the
    Country Guidance case of AT and Others.  It  was  clear  that  internal
    relocation was not available for those within  those  risk  categories.
    This Appellant was not within those risk categories and so he did  have
    to show internal relocation was not possible.   In  the  circumstances,
    although one can see why the Judge  was  minded  to  allow  the  appeal
    because the Appellant had been shot at and because he found him  to  be
    credible on a more general  basis,  I  conclude  that  there  has  been
    inadequate reasoning in respect of the internal relocation issue.

      Although it was not necessary for the Judge to have  referred  to  the
    decisions of the House of Lords in Januzi and  others  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5, [2006] 2  AC  426  and  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  AH  (Sudan)  and  others
    [2007] UKHL 49, [2008] 1 AC 678 it was necessary for  him  to  ask  the
    right question. That being whether it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant to relocate within Libya or whether it would be unduly  harsh
    to expect him to do so. It is also  noteworthy  that  this  Appellant's
    appeal is not one which seems to rely on persecution or risk  from  the
    state.

      In my judgment, the correct law was not applied and the  reasoning  of
    the Judge was inadequate. "

  5.  I had also made directions, including for the filing  and  service  of
    bundles and skeleton argument in respect  of  the  internal  relocation
    issue. Unfortunately, the first skeleton  argument  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant did not address the correct issues. Mr Howard put that  right
    by providing me with a supplemental skeleton argument this morning with
    an apology for the error which he said had occurred at his office.

6.    Mr Howard also  sought  to  raise  an  issue  as  to  whether  it  was
    "Robinson" obvious that Article 8 ECHR was also an  error  of  law  and
    that I should consider the same today. Mr McVeety said I should  reject
    that submission. I pointed out to Mr Howard  that  I  had  clearly  and
    specifically dealt with the scope of today's hearing. It was restricted
    to the protection claim and  then  only  in  respect  of  the  internal
    relocation issue. There was no appeal before me (or indeed  previously)
    in respect of Article 8. I therefore ruled that there was no such basis
    for me to consider Article 8 at this resumed hearing.

7.    Both parties said that they had discussed the matter and  were  agreed
    that they wished to proceed by way of  submissions  only  and  that  no
    evidence was to be called.

8.    Mr Howard said he relied on his supplemental skeleton argument. He
    had set out the factual matrix from the First-tier Tribunal which
    included that:
      (1) the Appellant had been shot when in Libya;
      (2) it was not speculative to assume the assailants were from a
militia;
      (3) The Appellant's brother had been involved in the death of an
important
      member of the rebel militia. The Appellant was called by name.

9.    It was said that although the Appellant does not fit into any  of  the
      specified categories in the Country Guidance case of AT the  judge  of
      the First-tier Tribunal had been satisfied that the Appellant would be
      a  target  for  the  rebel  militia  as  a  result  of  his  brother's
      involvement in the death of a prominent  militia member.

10.   Mr Howard relied on an expert report which had been prepared for  this
      resumed hearing. The  report  was  by  Professor  Joffie.  Mr  McVeety
      interrupted to say that there was no issue  about  Professor  Joffie's
      credentials.

11.   Mr Howard referred in particular to paragraph  126  where  the  expert
      had  said  that  in  recent  months  the  situation   in   Libya   had
      significantly worsened, particularly in western Libya.  Paragraph  130
      onwards then also dealt with the problems in  other  parts  of  Libya.
      There was specific reference to the Appellant and the risk to  him  at
      paragraphs 140 and 141.  It was said that "in short" there was a  real
      possibility that the Appellant would not have  safe  access  to  Libya
      given the current security situation if he was returned. In  addition,
      it was said that there was a real possibility that the Appellant would
      not be able to ensure his own safety once admitted to Libya.

12.   At paragraph 141 the expert report stated that, "Relocation is  simply
      not a viable option in current circumstances and a large part  of  the
      country is now a closed zone.  In  fact  [the  Appellant]  would  face
      enormous problems in terms of relocation  elsewhere  in  the  country.
      "The expert explained why this was so,  including  because  of  travel
      bans and insecurity of  internal  travel  and  because  there  was  no
      (functioning)  authority  which  could  provide  the  Appellant   with
      protection.

13.   Mr Howard relied on the Home Office  Country  Policy  and  Information
      Note for  Libya  dated  30  January  2017.  The  section  on  internal
      relocation was at paragraph 2.4. Section 3.1.5 showed that even though
      it was said that there the general security  situation  was  not  such
      that  a  person  by  simply  being  present  in   Libya   would   face
      indiscriminate violence to lead to a successful claim,  there  may  be
      particular circumstances that do place such a person at risk.

14.   In his submissions Mr McVeety said Libya was not in a  good  state  of
      affairs. He said he was not saying Libya was "paradise" or that  there
      was no violence and no issues. Mr McVeety said he also noted that  the
      Appellant had been accepted to have been credible in his  account  and
      at risk in his home area. He said any brief reading of the COIS report
      showed that there was in-fighting in Libya and  that  there  were  the
      names of many militia. It was a fragmented situation. He  said  though
      that the real issue was that no single  militia  had  control  of  the
      country. The militia was there, but their reach was not  beyond  their
      area. The militia  had  attacked  the  Appellant  in  his  home  area.
      Paragraphs 141 to 143 of  the  expert  report  showed  that  this  was
      inherent in the problem. In respect of the Article  15(c)  the  expert
      said he cannot make the argument in respect of this aspect. Mr McVeety
      referred to  the  statistics  and  the  number  of  deaths  which  had
      occurred.

15.   Mr Mcveety said that his point was that there are  other  areas  where
      the Appellant could live. The statistical analysis showed there  could
      be a move. For example, there were more killed in Paris in respect  of
      the Charlie Hebdo issue. More than one death is a tragedy but it  does
      not mean Article 15(c) is engaged. It was accepted that  there  was  a
      relationship with a British citizen but that did not add  anything  to
      this part of the argument.

16.   After hearing  from  Mr  Howard  in  reply  I  had  then  reserved  my
      decision.

17.   Having considered the rival arguments and considering the Home  Office
      background material from January 2017 and the expert report  of  April
      2017, it is clear that Libya is indeed  a  very  dangerous  place.  Mr
      McVeety is right though that it is not possible  for  me  to  conclude
      that there is a sufficient basis to enable me to conclude  that  there
      is a risk "just" because a person happens  to  be  present  in  Libya.
      Therefore, there is no sufficient basis to enable me to conclude  that
      Article 15(c) is made out. That is despite the Country Guidance of  AT
      being some three years old now. I am aware  that  there  will  be  new
      Country Guidance for Libya.

18.   Article 15(c) was not the basis of the Appellant's  case  though.  His
      case is that he has been the victim of a deadly attack whereby he  was
      shot and wounded. The militia know who he is.  His  brother  has  been
      killed. I have taken into account the Country of Information  Note  at
      paragraph 3.1.5 which makes clear that there may  well  be  particular
      circumstances of some persons which place them at risk.

19.   I then factor in the expert report. Mr  McVeety's  Professor  Joffie's
      credentials are not in dispute. I see no reason  how  I  can  disagree
      with the concession on behalf of the Respondent.   The  expert  report
      has to be afforded due weight in the task I  have  to  undertake  when
      applying anxious scrutiny to this protection claim.  The  expert  made
      clear that he does not even consider  it  will  be  possible  for  the
      Appellant to somehow safely return to  his  original  home  area.  The
      expert concludes that even if the Appellant did somehow  make  to  his
      home area, he would  then  be  at  risk  there.  Further,  the  expert
      explains that travelling to new areas is fraught with risk too.

20.   In view of the specific and clear  expert  evidence,  particularly  at
      paragraph 141, which  is  not  challenged  by  any  other  contrasting
      evidence from the Respondent I accept that for the  purposes  of  this
      case only that for travellers between areas in  Libya  face  a  closed
      zone. The large majority (some 70%)  of  persons  live  in  two  urban
      constellations in the  East  and  West  of  the  country.  Travel  and
      relocation outside of these areas is currently forbidden. I accept the
      evidence that no authority can provide sufficient  protection  against
      arbitrary arrest which takes place.

21.   Set against that  background  and  set  against  what  the  favourable
      findings were, I assess whether it would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
      harsh for the Appellant to be expected to relocate within Libya. In my
      judgment, even if this Appellant could make it safely into Libya  with
      his background, he will not be able to relocate within  Libya  without
      it being unduly harsh or unreasonable  for  him  to  do  so.  That  is
      because of the clear and uncontroverted expert  evidence  which  makes
      that plain.

22.   I note that  this  position  does  not  even  take  into  account  the
      Appellant's British family.

23.   I therefore conclude that although the  original  decision  which  had
      allowed the Appellant's appeal (on Refugee grounds)  had  contained  a
      material error of law, a remaking  of  the  decision  means  that  the
      Appellant's appeal in respect of this protection claim  is  made  out.
      Specifically, he is  at  risk  on  return  to  Libya  because  of  the
      particular circumstances of his case set  as  against  the  background
      material set out in the Home Office  report  and  in  the  Appellant's
      expert report. This resumed hearing was on a narrow issue  of  whether
      internal relocation was a viable alternative. It is clear that in this
      particular case it is not.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's protection claim is allowed pursuant to the Refugee
Convention.

An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Date: 11 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

