
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01889/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 November 2016                          |On 16 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     KH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bundock, Counsel, instructed by Turpin Miller
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. Mr KH (Appellant) appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal Thew, promulgated on 18 August 2016, dismissing
        his protection and human rights  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
        decision of 11 February 2016  refusing  his  protection  and  human
        rights claims and maintaining the deportation  order  made  against
        him under the automatic deportation provisions of  the  UK  Borders
        Act 2007.


   Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Malaysia, date of birth  11  January
        1977. He is of Chinese descent. His parents divorced when he was  6
        months old and he lived with his paternal grandmother  who  treated
        him badly and beat him before eventually going  to  live  with  his
        father when he was a teenager. The Appellant did not  have  a  good
        relationship with his stepmother and left school  aged  18  without
        any qualifications. He had only seen his mother once when he was  6
        years old. The Appellant did not enjoy a happy  childhood,  had  no
        close friendships and had great difficulty trusting people.


     3. After leaving school  the  Appellant  went  to  Kuala  Lumpur  and,
        although lonely to begin with, his life did improve. He  worked  in
        different jobs taking whatever he could get that would provide  him
        with accommodation. When he was around 19 years old  the  Appellant
        realised he was gay. He believed  that  if  his  homosexuality  was
        known he would be "treated as a freak". He  was  "too  afraid"  and
        "did not want trouble". For these reasons he  never  disclosed  his
        sexuality. He had no relationships in Malaysia and nobody  knew  he
        was gay.

     4. He left Malaysia in 2006 and made his way to the UK entering  as  a
        visitor, although there was no evidence before the judge  that  the
        Appellant had been issued with a visitor entry  clearance.  In  any
        event, the Appellant overstayed and began working illegally.


     5. The Appellant met his current partner, AW, via Gaydar, a gay dating
        website, in 2009. AW is a British citizen born in  1937.  He  is  a
        retired mechanical engineer. He has been HIV positive for  over  20
        years. At the time they met the Appellant was living  in  Wakefield
        and would visit AW every 3 weeks or so for approximately  4  years.
        During this time they were not "exclusive". In 2014  the  Appellant
        was diagnosed with HIV having been very unwell in  2013.  After  he
        became unwell the Appellant asked AW if he could stay with  him  in
        his London flat. They lived together for about 4 or 5 months  until
        the Appellant's arrest.

     6. The Appellant was arrested on 15 July 2014 and pleaded guilty on 22
        July 2014 to two offences of  possessing  or  controlling  identity
        documents with intent. He was found  in  possession  of  two  false
        Chinese passports when attempting to open a bank account in a false
        identity.  The  Appellant  received  two  sentences  of  12  months
        imprisonment to run concurrently. He was served with  a  notice  of
        decision to deport him on 28 November 2014 and a deportation  order
        was signed on 8 January 2015.


     7. The Appellant claimed asylum on 4 February  2015.  If  returned  he
        feared he would be asked why he was away from Malaysia for so  long
        and would be unable to hide his HIV status. He feared he  would  go
        to jail and believed his life would be over and  that  his  removal
        would breach Article 8. Following his  release  from  detention  in
        June 2015 the Appellant continued to live with AW.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing

     8. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant and  from
        AW and CMP, a former long-term partner of AW. AW had had  a  spinal
        operation a few months before the hearing and the  Appellant  cared
        for him and undertook the  cleaning,  cooking,  and  shopping.  The
        Appellant gave evidence regarding  the  type  of  jobs  he  did  in
        Malaysia  and  the  circumstances  leading  up  to   his   criminal
        conviction. The Appellant was cross-examined about statements  made
        by the Sentencing Judge suggesting  that  the  motivation  for  the
        Appellant's criminality was to obtain money to enable him to return
        to Malaysia. AW was aware that the Appellant was an overstayer. The
        Appellant said he no longer had any relationship with  his  family.
        The Appellant described how he and AW would go out for meals, walks
        and shopping. AW spent Christmas 2015 in Canada with his sister  as
        she was having chemotherapy. The Appellant  said  that  he  and  AW
        cared for one another and that they worried about each other.


     9. AW described how he and the Appellant met and the contact they  had
        with each other until they began to cohabit in February 2014. Their
        relationship  was  described  as  being  "very  close,  loving  and
        comforting", and the more they were together the closer  they  got.
        AW had angina and had had 2 stents inserted a couple of  years  ago
        in addition to his spinal difficulties that made walking difficult.
        He was registered disabled.  The  Appellant  did  the  cooking  and
        provided emotional support. The Appellant was described as  a  very
        private  person.  Evidence  was  additionally  given  by  CMP   who
        described the Appellant and AW as inseparable since the Appellant's
        release and said they were a loving and committed couple.

    10. The judge recorded that the Reasons  For  Refusal  Letter  accepted
        that a gay man, as a member of the LGBT community in Malaysia,  was
        capable of being a member of a  Particular  Social  Group  for  the
        purposes of the Refugee Convention.


    11. After setting out the relevant provisions of the immigration  rules
        (paragraphs 398 to 399A) the judge considered the evidence relating
        to the Appellant's relationship with AW. The judge noted  that  the
        Appellant had not disclosed his sexuality or his relationship  with
        AW until after the deportation order was made. The judge found that
        AW's evidence had "a ring of truth about it" and  found  there  was
        credible evidence of a relationship between him and the Appellant.

    12. At [43] the judge set out the approach to be followed by  Tribunals
        set out in HJ (Iran) v SSHD  [2010]  UKSC  31  when  assessing  the
        Appellant's  asylum  claim.  The  judge  analysed  the   background
        evidence contained  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  and  found  that,
        although  there  was  no   documentary   evidence   of   widespread
        persecution, it was clear that the current regime in  Malaysia  was
        intolerant of the LGBT community and that gay sex was illegal [49].
        The judge concluded [50]  that  gay  people  who  lived  openly  in
        Malaysia  would  be  liable  to  persecution.  There  has  been  no
        challenge to this principle finding.


    13. The judge noted that the Appellant had lived  in  Malaysia  for  29
        years and, at [51], the judge referred to  the  Appellant's  asylum
        interview where he said that, for his first three years in the  UK,
        his behaviour did not change. He  did  not  thereafter  change  his
        outward behaviour but he did tell people about his sexuality if  he
        was certain that they were gay. The Appellant said he  became  more
        confident in telling people that  he  was  gay  after  he  went  to
        prison. In his asylum interview the Appellant,  when  asked  if  he
        left Malaysia for fear of harm or for  another  reason,  said  "For
        lots of other reasons", stating that he was homosexual and lived in
        a Muslim country and wanted to try and forget his past. He said  he
        feared the Muslim government on return because he  would  be  asked
        why he had been away for so long and didn't think he could hide his
        HIV status and would end up in jail.


    14. The judge was not satisfied that the Appellant was as committed  to
        AW as AW was to the Appellant [52] and found that prior to February
        2014 the Appellant and AW only had a close friendship. At [54]  the
        judge  noted  AW's  evidence  that  the  Appellant  was  still  not
        comfortable with the gay scene, preferred to stay at home  and  did
        not like to show public displays of affection. At  [55]  the  judge
        took into account the Appellant's criminality, AW's  view  that  it
        was connected with the Appellant's wish to provide  some  financial
        contribution to their relationship, and posed the  question  as  to
        why the Appellant would put his relationship  at  risk.  The  judge
        additionally attached significant weight to the Sentencing  Judge's
        remarks concerning  the  Appellant's  criminal  motivation.  Whilst
        noting the Appellant's explanation that he was "pretty  ill"  there
        was said to be no evidence that the Appellant's mental  health  was
        such that he did not give a truthful explanation for committing the
        offences when he said that he wanted to accumulate money to  return
        to Malaysia [56]. The judge concluded that the evidence pointed  to
        the Appellant being extremely discreet about  his  sexuality  [57].
        Based on the Appellant's behaviour in both Malaysia and in  the  UK
        the judge concluded that he was "most unlikely to be a gay man  who
        would openly flaunt his sexuality" (at [58]).

    15. At [59] the judge stated,


         I must then consider why  this  particular  Appellant  would  live
         discreetly if returned to Malaysia. I find on the evidence  before
         me that this Appellant has adopted that way of life in  the  past,
         that is  a  way  of  life  of  being  discreet  about  his  sexual
         orientation not only until he was aged 29 while living in Malaysia
         but in particular in the approximate 8 years that he has lived  in
         the UK. Despite being in a relationship with AW the evidence shows
         that he does not openly display to others his sexual  orientation.
         I conclude that that is how he himself has shown that he has lived
         in the past and it is reasonably likely that that is how he  would
         wish to live. Although he has referred in  his  interview  to  not
         wishing to return to Malaysia because he would be  a  second-class
         citizen and that he would have to be careful and he has said  that
         he has become more confident and comfortable with who he is but he
         still found it difficult to trust  people  and  to  be  open  with
         everyone. I find that the evidence before me is such that it shows
         a man who would choose to live discreetly because that is  how  he
         himself would wish to live and he would not tell his family  about
         his sexual orientation.


    16. The judge concluded  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  show  that
        disclosing his HIV status would entail a real risk  of  persecution
        for that reason. The judge did not find that  the  Appellant  would
        live discreetly for fear of persecution, but that he  would  choose
        to live discreetly because that  is  how  he  had  lived  and  this
        continued to be his preference, even in the UK [61].


    17. It was accepted that the Appellant could not meet the  requirements
        of paragraph 399 as his relationship  commenced  when  he  was  not
        lawfully in the UK. The judge then set out the  factors  identified
        in s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the
        2002 Act)  that  must  be  considered  when  assessing  the  public
        interest in respect of foreign nationals  subject  to  deportation,
        and relevant extracts from MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  450.
        The judge then considered whether the  effect  of  his  deportation
        would be unduly harsh  on  AW.  The  judge  acknowledged  that  the
        Appellant's offence was at the lowest end of seriousness capable of
        triggering automatic deportation and that he had no other  criminal
        convictions. This weighed in  the  Appellant's  favour.  The  judge
        additionally took into account the OASys report  assessing  him  at
        low risk both in relation to the commission of further offences and
        in respect of any harm to the public. The Appellant was adhering to
        his medication and there was an absence of evidence suggesting that
        the Appellant would be unable to access appropriate  medication  in
        Malaysia. The judge found it was likely that  the  Appellant  would
        face some discrimination as a person who is HIV positive. The judge
        took into account the Appellant's immigration history and the  fact
        that his relationship with AW commenced when he was  unlawfully  in
        the country.


    18. The judge acknowledged AW's age, his  disabilities,  and  his  HIV-
        positive status. It was noted however that  AW  had  been  able  to
        spend a number of weeks with his  sister  in  Canada  at  Christmas
        2015. The judge took into consideration the amount of time that the
        Appellant  and  his  partner  had  actually  lived  together,   the
        explanation given by the Appellant to the Sentencing Judge and  the
        timing of his cohabitation with AW. This led the judge to  conclude
        that the Appellant was not as committed to his relationship  as  he
        had declared. The judge  did  not  doubt  that  there  would  be  a
        considerable impact upon the Appellant's partner if he returned  to
        Malaysia given that AW is British with a settled long-term life  in
        the  UK.  The  judge  recognised  that  AW's   age,   his   medical
        circumstances and the different approach in Malaysia to people  who
        were gay compared with the UK would, in reality, mean that  it  was
        unlikely that AW would go  there  with  the  Appellant.  The  judge
        recognise this would have a significant  impact  on  AW  [77].  But
        weighing up all the factors set out in  the  decision,  and  taking
        account of the Appellant's immigration and  criminal  history,  the
        circumstances in which the relationship occurred and the period  of
        cohabitation, the judge found that  the  harshness  that  would  be
        occasioned by the Appellant's deportation would not amount to undue
        harshness either for the Appellant or his partner,  or  that  there
        were very compelling circumstances sufficient to warrant a grant of
        leave to remain pursuant to Article 8.

The grounds of appeal, the grant of permission, and the oral submissions

    19. The grounds took issue with the judge's approach  to  the  question
        why the Appellant would act with discretion on return to  Malaysia.
        It was submitted that the judge  failed  to  consider  whether  the
        Appellant's fear of persecution constituted a material  reason  for
        his discretion. It was submitted that the judge failed to take into
        account important evidence indicating that a  fear  of  persecution
        was a material  reason  for  the  Appellant's  discretion.  It  was
        additionally submitted that the judge was not  rationally  entitled
        to conclude that the Appellant  would  "wish  to  live"  discreetly
        given that the manner in which he previously lived in Malaysia  was
        caused by the cruel and degrading circumstances of  his  upbringing
        and the long period of time it had taken for him to come  to  terms
        with his sexuality.

    20. It was further contended that the judge failed to take into account
        the life the Appellant would be facing in Malaysia as he  was  very
        unlikely to be able to form a meaningful family relationship  given
        the evidence of a culture  openly  hostile  to  and  repressive  of
        homosexuality, and the stigmatisation he would face on  account  of
        his HIV status. The judge failed  to  take  into  account  evidence
        suggesting that the relationship the Appellant had with AW was very
        important to the Appellant, and failed to  take  into  account  the
        significance of  AW's  age  when  considering  the  effect  of  the
        deportation on him. It was finally submitted that the  judge  acted
        irrationally in concluding that the effect of the deportation would
        not be unduly harsh on AW having regard to the seriousness  of  the
        Appellant's  offending,  the  OASys  report,  and   AW's   personal
        circumstances.


    21. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington stated,


         It is arguable that although the judge  accepted  the  Appellant's
         sexuality [38] and found that those who lived openly  in  Malaysia
         would be liable to persecution [50], he erred in his consideration
         of whether the Appellant would live  discreetly  in  Malaysia  and
         why. The judge factored into his analysis as to how the  Appellant
         would live in the future, his discretion whilst in  Malaysia,  but
         did not  acknowledge  relevant  and  recorded  evidence  that  the
         Appellant throughout stated he had lived  discreetly  in  Malaysia
         because of the homophobic society there [15]  and  was  afraid  of
         getting into trouble  [8].  It  was  also  acknowledged  that  the
         Appellant is living with another man in the UK albeit that he does
         not openly display to others to sexual  orientation.  The  grounds
         that the judge has misapplied HJ Iran v SSHD [2010] UKSC  31,  are
         arguable and would arguably affect the Article  8  assessment  and
         thus all grounds are arguable.

    22. In his oral  submissions  Mr  Bundock  expanded  upon  his  written
        grounds. Mr Bundock identified the evidence that the  judge  failed
        to take into account when assessing whether the  Appellant  held  a
        fear of serious ill-treatment in  Malaysia  if  his  sexuality  was
        disclosed. The judge failed to explain what she understood  by  the
        words "fear" and "troubles" and did not refer  to  the  Appellant's
        evidence, contained in his  witness  statement,  that  he  was  too
        afraid and did  not  want  trouble.  It  was  not  clear  from  the
        determination that the judge concluded that the  overriding  reason
        why the Appellant would act discreetly was because he  found  being
        gay shameful. The judge's decision in this regard was irrational or
        insufficiently reasoned. Nor was it clear what the judge meant when
        she said that the Appellant would  "wish"  to  live  discreetly  in
        light of his harsh and degrading upbringing. With  respect  to  the
        Appellant's private and family life it was submitted that Article 8
        was forward looking and the judge  was  required  to  consider  the
        Appellant's ability to establish  relationships  in  Malaysia.  The
        Appellant would be unable to have meals with a partner or to go for
        walks together. The general climate of discrimination  against  gay
        people in Malaysia, and the fact that an openly gay man would  face
        persecution, made it much more likely that the Appellant  would  be
        more cautious in establishing a relationship. It was submitted that
        the judge made no  reference  to  the  impact  on  the  Appellant's
        private life and the limitations that would be placed upon any  gay
        relationship that may arise in the future.


    23. Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the  judge  properly  considered  the
        evidence through the HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
        Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1024 principles.  The  judge  recognised
        that persecution may arise from society as well as the authorities.
        The judge was entitled to find that  the  Appellant's  reasons  for
        acting discreetly did not include  a  fear  of  serious  harm.  The
        Appellant's statement was, at its best,  ambiguous  as  to  why  he
        would live discreetly. At paragraph 59 the judge did  consider  why
        the applicant would choose to live discreetly  and  concluded  that
        this was the Appellant's choice. With  respect  to  Article  8  the
        judge noted that the  Appellant  may  face  discrimination  in  his
        private life but  that  this  was  limited  to  access  to  medical
        treatment and not in respect of inhibitions on the establishment of
        relationships. There was very limited evidence in  respect  of  the
        Appellant opening up to other people and becoming more  comfortable
        with his sexuality.


    24. In reply, and with reference to paragraph 59, Mr Bundock  submitted
        that the judge had inverted the burden of proof when  stating  that
        the way the Appellant lived in the past show that it was reasonably
        likely that that is how he would wish to live.

Discussion

    25. When asked in his asylum interview about the time  he  realised  he
        was first gay, the Appellant stated "when I realised I  was  gay  I
        thought I could get into a lot of trouble  and  would  have  to  be
        careful." Later in the interview, when asked why he  did  not  tell
        his family, friends and colleagues about his sexuality, he  stated,
        "I don't want people to call me a freak and end up in trouble."  In
        his witness statement the Appellant said that he "... knew that  it
        was not possible for me to tell people. I was too afraid. I did not
        want trouble."  Whilst  the  judge  does  make  reference  to  this
        evidence (see [8] and [50]), nowhere in the decision does the judge
        undertake any analysis of what the Appellant meant. In the  context
        of an asylum appeal involving a gay man from a country where it was
        accepted being openly gay could expose one to persecution, this  is
        a significant omission.


    26. I accept Mr Bundock's submissions that the judge did not adequately
        analyse what the Appellant meant when he said that  he  could  'get
        into a lot of trouble' and 'would have to be careful'. Nor did  the
        judge address the Appellant's assertion in  his  witness  statement
        that he did not tell people of his sexuality because  he  was  'too
        afraid' and 'did not want to get into trouble'.  These  assertions,
        on  their  face,  and  when  considered  in  the  context  of   the
        Appellant's other evidence, is capable of supporting a finding that
        the Appellant feared he would be subjected to serious ill-treatment
        if his sexuality was publicly exposed. I note that  in  his  asylum
        interview the Appellant said he feared  the  Muslim  government  on
        return because he would be asked why he had been away for  so  long
        and he did not think he could hide his HIV status and would end  up
        in jail. This reference suggests the Appellant held a fear  of  the
        authorities and feared being jailed. The Appellant's fear of  being
        jailed by the authorities can only realistically be ascribed to his
        being gay.

    27. I am satisfied that the judge failed to take account of or  analyse
        relevant evidence  in  concluding  that  the  Appellant  would  act
        discreetly for reasons other than a fear  of  persecution.  I  find
        that  this  error  is  material  as  it  underpinned  the   judge's
        consequential assessment of why the Appellant would choose to  live
        discreetly if returned to Malaysia (at [59]).

    28. The judge's legal error related not to her primary findings of fact
        but to her legal analysis of the evidential matrix accepted by her.
        It is therefore open to me to remake the decision by assessing  the
        Appellant's evidence, as disclosed  in  his  asylum  interview  and
        witness statement, and the evidence of AW, and determine  why  this
        particular Appellant would live discreetly if returned to  Malaysia
        (a finding made by the judge at [58]).

    29. In re-making the asylum aspect of this appeal I have taken  account
        of  the  evidence  addressed  above.  I  am  satisfied   that   the
        Appellant's references in his asylum interview and his statement to
        fearing trouble in Malaysia, to being afraid, and his  concerns  at
        being jailed, strongly indicate that he holds a fear of serious ill-
        treatment in Malaysia, both from the authorities but  also  society
        in general. I am satisfied, on the lower standard  of  proof,  that
        the references to 'trouble' and 'fear' do not relate to feelings of
        shame or to fears of being isolated or suffering discrimination not
        amounting to persecution.

    30. I have taken  into  account  AW's  statement  which  described  the
        Appellant as being  "not  comfortable  with  the  gay  scene".  The
        Appellant preferred to stay at home when his partner  went  to  gay
        clubs and bars, and they did not have house parties  or  gatherings
        with all of their friends  because  the  Appellant  "would  not  be
        comfortable with that." The Appellant  was  described  as  "a  very
        private person" who "hides behind AW a lot" and  had  not  informed
        his friends or family about his sexuality because he did  not  feel
        comfortable with that. The Appellant did "not like to  show  public
        displays  of  affection"  and  was  "still  very  ashamed  of   his
        sexuality." I have also taken into account the Appellant's asserted
        motivation for committing his criminal offences.

    31. This evidence must be considered in the context of the  Appellant's
        biographic history and the treatment to which he was  subjected  in
        the past. The Appellant indicated in his appeal statement  that  it
        took him a long time to  come  to  terms  with  his  sexuality.  He
        described his life in Malaysia as being one of isolation and,  when
        he was a youngster and teenager, harshness and  cruelty.  I  accept
        that it was not easy for him to change his behaviour and to  remove
        the behavioural shackles imposed on him over a very  long  time  by
        uncaring  guardians  and  a  homophobic  society.  The  Appellant's
        unchallenged evidence was that he is  now  able  to  be  open  with
        friends, is beginning to socialise more and more, and is  beginning
        to confide in more people. The judge noted the Appellant's evidence
        that he became more confident in telling people he was gay after he
        went to prison [51]. It would be unrealistic to expect the powerful
        influences that caused the Appellant to act discreetly in the past,
        including a fear of serious ill-treatment, to dissipate even  after
        living several years in the UK. It  is  impossible  to  ignore  the
        particular background of this Appellant and  the  impact  that  his
        upbringing is likely to have had on him when assessing the  reasons
        for his discretion. The reference in the Sentencing Judge's remarks
        to the Appellant wishing to return to Malaysia must  be  considered
        in the context of the Appellant not  having  disclosed  his  sexual
        orientation and his wish to provide mitigation for  his  offending.
        The fact that the Appellant has not lived openly as a  gay  man  in
        the UK is not of itself a determinative indication  that  he  would
        choose to act discreetly in Malaysia for reasons other than a  fear
        of persecution. To conclude that the  Appellant  would  'choose  to
        live discreetly because that is how he himself would wish to  live'
        jars violently with his biographical background.


    32.  In HJ (Iran) the Supreme Court concluded that the  need  to  avoid
        the threat of persecution must be a material reason  why  a  person
        would act discreetly, but it need not be  the  only  reason.  I  am
        satisfied, based on  the  unchallenged  evidence  relating  to  the
        Appellant's  very  difficult  childhood  and   the   isolation   he
        experienced in Malaysia for a very long time, and the answers given
        by the Appellant in his interview, and  having  applied  the  lower
        standard of proof, that a material reason why he was not openly gay
        in Malaysia was due to a fear of persecution.

    33. For the reasons given above I am satisfied that a  material  reason
        for the Appellant living discreetly on his return to Malaysia would
        be a fear of the persecution which would follow if he were to  live
        openly as a gay man. I therefore allow  the  appeal  on  protection
        grounds.


    34. In light of the above conclusion it is  not  necessary  for  me  to
        consider the appeal under Article 8.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of  law.  I
remake the decision allowing the appeal on asylum/protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               14 December 2016
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

