
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01216/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On 22 July 2021                      |On 19 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     VD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders instructed by Oliver & Hasani
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 6 September 1987.



 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 August 2013.   On  21
    February 2014, she claimed asylum.  She claimed that in  November  2012
    she had been attacked when returning from work.  She  had  been  forced
    into a car by a stranger and raped before being left unconscious on the
    roadside.  In June 2013, she was confronted by the same man  who  again
    attacked her and forced her into a car driven by another man where  she
    was taken to a house and repeatedly raped by the two men.  She  claimed
    that she had been held for two  weeks  and  forced  to  have  sex  with
    several men before being taken to Verona in Italy.  She claims that she
    managed to escape from her captors in the airport and went to live with
    her  husband  who,  coincidentally,  was  living  nearby.    She   then
    discovered that she was  pregnant  and  that  the  child  was  not  her
    husband's.  As a result, her husband decided he no longer wanted to  be
    with the appellant and he organised her travel to the UK  clandestinely
    where she arrived on 12 August 2013.  In the UK, the appellant  claimed
    that in 2016 she had attended a party where she had had more  than  the
    usual amount to  drink  and  suffered  memory  loss.   Afterwards,  she
    realised she was pregnant and her son was born on 22 March 2017.

 4. The appellant claimed that because of her circumstances, including that
    she had children born out of wedlock, she would be at risk on return to
    Albania from her family and from those who had trafficked her.

 5. On 31 July 2014, the Secretary of State refused her claim  for  asylum.
    The appellant appealed but her appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Malik) on 1 December 2014 and permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 2  January
    2015 and by the Upper Tribunal on 25 April  2015.   She  became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 28 April 2015.

 6. On 29 September 2017, the appellant lodged further submissions.

 7. Further, on 26 February 2014, a  referral  was  made  to  the  National
    Referral Mechanism (NRM) in order for the Competent Authority to make a
    decision as to whether she was a victim of modern slavery.  On 3  March
    2014, the NRM decided that her trafficking/modern slavery claim was not
    established.

 8. On 24 January 2020, the Secretary of State again refused her claims for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant again appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal
    was heard by Judge Bonavero on 11  February  2021.   At  that  hearing,
    faced with the previous adverse decision of Judge Malik, the  appellant
    sought to persuade the judge to accept her  asylum  claim  relying,  in
    particular upon an expert psychiatric  report  by  Professor  Cornelius
    Katona, an expert report on trafficking by  Ian  Sweet  and  a  country
    expert report by Dr Enkeleda Tahiraj.

10. In his decision, Judge Malik found the appellant not to be credible and
    dismissed her asylum claim based upon her feared risk on return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    three grounds.

12. First, in not accepting that the  appellant's  second  child  had  been
    conceived as she claimed as a result of sex with a stranger at a  party
    in 2016, the judge had failed to take into account supporting  evidence
    in the appellant's bundle contained in the appellant's medical  records
    at pages 286 and 339 where she had described the circumstances  of  the
    conception of her second child.  (Ground 1)

13. Secondly, the judge erred by taking into account that there was a 'gap'
    in the bundle of medical records submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
    covering  the  period  after  27  September  2016  (page  339  of   the
    appellant's bundle).  The judge had inferred  that  the  appellant  had
    deliberately withheld that part of the records which covered  the  time
    in 2016 when her second child was born. (Ground 2)

14. In the course of her submissions on this ground, Ms Sanders relied upon
    a witness statement from the appellant's solicitor which explained that
    the medical records in the appellant's bundle at the  hearing  were  as
    received by the appellant's representatives from her doctors.  They had
    received them directly and they had not  gone  to  the  appellant.   Ms
    Sanders submitted that it was unfair of the judge to count against  the
    appellant the absence of these documents, in particular to  infer  that
    she had deliberately withheld them, in the light of the  evidence  from
    the appellant's legal representative as to the bundles' origins.

15.  Thirdly,  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to  rely  upon  a  number   of
    implausibilities in the  appellant's  account,  relied  upon  by  Judge
    Malik, which in the light of the expert reports  called  into  question
    whether there was, in fact, any implausibility.  (Ground 3)

16. On 22 April 2021, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Gumsley)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

17. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice
    Centre on 22 July 2021.  I was based  in  court  and  Ms  Sanders,  who
    represented the appellant, and Mr Bates, who represented the  Secretary
    of  State,  joined  the  hearing  remotely  by  Microsoft  Teams.   The
    appellant also joined the hearing remotely.

The Submissions

18. In support of the appellant's case, Ms Sanders relied upon the  grounds
    which I have summarised above.  In addition, in  her  reply,  she  also
    criticised the judge taking into account (at para 37 of  his  decision)
    that the appellant's second child  had  "her  husband's  surname".   Ms
    Sanders pointed out that  the  birth  certificate  of  the  appellant's
    second child did indeed have her husband's name but that the appellant,
    herself, used her husband's name also.  The name of  her  second  child
    was, therefore, also the appellant's name.

19. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Bates relied upon the  rule  24
    reply and submitted that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.

20. As regards ground 1, Mr Bates submitted that  the  judge's  finding  in
    relation to the appellant's second child and the circumstances  of  its
    conception was ancillary, and  not  central,  to  the  judge's  adverse
    finding.

21. Mr Bates accepted that ground 2 was, in his words, "the high watermark"
    of the challenge.  He submitted that even if the judge  had  not  found
    that the appellant had deliberately  withheld  the  records,  he  would
    still have been entitled to find that their  absence  was  relevant  to
    assessing the credibility of her claim.  Mr Bates pointed out that  the
    appellant's legal representative, at para 9 of his statement, could not
    say whether the GP had in fact sent all the medical records in relation
    to the appellant.  He pointed out that it  was  still  unknown  whether
    there were other medical records that had not been provided.

22. As regards ground 3,  Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the  judge  had  been
    entitled to rely upon Judge Malik's reasoning which the judge  set  out
    at length at para 24 of his decision by reference  to  paras  58-65  of
    Judge Malik's earlier decision.  He submitted  that  Judge  Malik,  and
    therefore Judge Bonavero in this appeal, had  identified  a  number  of
    implausible aspects to the appellant's evidence which he  was  entitled
    to take into account.  Mr Bates submitted that the judge  had  in  fact
    considered the three expert reports at paras 27-32 (Professor  Katona),
    at para 33 (Ian Sweet) and at paras 34-35 (Dr  Tahiraj's  report).   Mr
    Bates submitted that the trafficking  evidence  went  no  further  than
    saying her account was "consistent with other victims of  trafficking".
    Dr Tahiraj's report, as the judge noted, supports the veracity  of  the
    appellant's claim "to some extent" and the judge gave weight to it but,
    as the appellant's then Counsel accepted, the evidence  did  not  raise
    any challenge to Judge Malik's plausibility findings.   In  respect  of
    Professor Katona's report, Mr Bates acknowledged that it accepted  that
    the appellant had symptoms of PTSD but that did  not  necessarily  mean
    that her condition had been caused as a  result  of  the  circumstances
    that she claimed led to her coming to the UK.

23. Mr Bates invited me to uphold the judge's decision on  the  basis  that
    there was no material error of law.

Discussion

24. The judge, applying Devaseelan, correctly took Judge  Malik's  findings
    and, indeed, his reasoning, as a 'starting point'.

25. As I have already indicated, the appellant  sought  to  persuade  Judge
    Bonavero that that starting point should be departed from on the  basis
    of the three expert reports upon which she relied.   In  addition,  the
    appellant gave evidence concerning the conception of her  second  child
    in 2016, she claimed, as a result of sex with an individual at a  party
    which she could not remember.  Mr Bates invited  me  to  conclude  that
    whatever the judge made  of  this  incident,  and  her  second  child's
    conception, was not central to his ultimate adverse credibility finding
    against the appellant.  The difficulty with that argument is  that  the
    judge not only doubted the appellant's credibility but made a  positive
    finding that she had misled the Tribunal  by  deliberately  failing  to
    provide medical records concerning that incident.   The  judge  treated
    the second conception as being relevant  to  part  of  the  appellant's
    claim which was that her relationship with her husband had broken down.
     On its own, and as part of the judge's  overall  credibility  finding,
    the view the judge took about the conception of the appellant's  second
    child was, in my judgment, material to  his  ultimate  adverse  factual
    findings.

26. Consequently, I must decide whether grounds 1 and 2 taken  individually
    or cumulatively demonstrate  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  and  his
    ultimate finding is unsustainable.

27. In that regard, I accept the substance of Ms Sanders' submissions.  The
    relevant passage in the judge's reasons is at paras 37-39 as follows:

         "37. As for the appellant's circumstances, the key  change  in  her
             life is that she has, since her appearance in the Tribunal  in
             2014,  had  another  son.   The  circumstances  of  her  son's
             conception  are  somewhat  opaque.   As  set  out  above,  she
             contends that she attended a party, where she  may  have  been
             raped, though she remembers nothing about  it.   She  has  not
             provided any evidence from her friend  who  took  her  to  the
             party, or anyone else who might be able to support her case in
             this regard.  The appellant is not  under  any  obligation  to
             corroborate her claim.  However,  in  circumstances  in  which
             Judge Malik did not accept that she  had  separated  from  her
             husband as claimed,  and  where,  several  years  after  their
             alleged separation, she now has another child, again with  her
             husband's surname, I am left with significant doubts as to the
             appellant's account.

         38.  The appellant's account of her interactions with her GP around
             the time are also inherently unlikely.  The appellant says  in
             her witness statement at para 163 (page 93 of the  appellant's
             bundle) that her GP 'told her immediately to get an  abortion'
             and that the doctor went  on  to  book  a  private  doctor  to
             organise the abortion in order to cover up for a mistake  made
             by the GP in providing a particular type of medication.   This
             is a very serious allegation of misconduct.  I  note  that  no
             complaint appears to have been made against this  GP,  despite
             the fact that the appellant is legally represented.  I note in
             this regard that the appellant's health records before me jump
             from December 2014 to 27 September 2016,  when  the  appellant
             visits  the  GP  in  relation  to  her  pregnancy,  with   the
             intervening period omitted.  In other words,  I  do  not  have
             before me the records covering the period of time during which
             the appellant claims that she was instructed by her GP to have
             an abortion and referred against her will to a private  clinic
             for this to take place.  I conclude  that  the  appellant  has
             excluded her medical records from that  period  because  those
             records would have shown that  this  extraordinary  series  of
             events did not in fact occur.

         39.  In short, the appellant has not  satisfied  me  to  the  lower
             standard of proof that the circumstances of her  second  son's
             conception and  birth  were  as  she  claims.   So,  far  from
             supporting her claim, I conclude that the appellant's  account
             in this regard further undermines it".

28. It was, of course, open to the judge to take into account  the  absence
    of supporting documentation that could reasonably  be  expected  to  be
    provided by the appellant (see TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  40
    at [20]-[21]).  Indeed, the appellant had not provided  any  supporting
    evidence from her friend who had taken her to the party.   However,  as
    Ms Sanders submitted, there was evidence in the bundle which  supported
    the appellant's account.  That was contained within the medical records
    that were present in the bundle.  At page 286,  an  assessment  by  the
    Stockport  Common  Assessment  Framework  for  Children  and   Families
    undertaken on 18 October 2016 states that:

         "During a meeting to discuss [her son's] graduated response plan to
         support him within Nursery [the appellant] disclosed that  she  had
         become pregnant as a result of unprotected unconsensual sex and did
         not feel able to cope with her situation".

29. Then at page 339 in an entry in her GP records for 30 September 2016 it
    is stated that:

         "Possibly had sex 3 months ago - very  drunk  withfrineds  (sic)  -
         chat if not able to give consent rap (sic) - pt agree but  declines
         to go to the police".

30. This is, on the face of it, an unsolicited disclosure on two  occasions
    by  the  appellant  in  a  social  work  and  GP   context   relatively
    contemporaneously to the events which she now relies on  in  2016.   Of
    course, the evidence came from the appellant herself and to that extent
    there was no evidence from anybody else (wholly  independently  of  the
    appellant) to support her case.  However, in para 37 the judge  appears
    not to  appreciate  that  there  was  this  relatively  contemporaneous
    evidence of, in effect, a recent complaint made to her GP  and  in  the
    social work context that her second son had, in fact, been  born  as  a
    result of potentially unconsented to sex at a party.

31. In para 37 also, the judge took into account that despite claiming that
    she has been separated for several years from her husband,  her  second
    son has "her husband's surname".  As Ms Sanders pointed out, the  birth
    certificate of the appellant's second son gives him a surname which  is
    also the surname of the appellant who has retained the name of her,  as
    she claims, separated husband.  In para 37, the judge did  not  grapple
    with this possibility but rather springs to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant continues to use her husband's surname  for  her  son  which,
    together with the absence of any supporting evidence,  left  the  judge
    with "significant doubts as to the appellant's account".  That,  in  my
    judgment, discloses an error of law.

32. The second ground relates to the judge's reasoning in para 38 in  which
    he relied upon  a  gap  in  the  appellant's  medical  records  between
    December 2014 and 27 September 2016 (at pages 339 and pages 343)  which
    would cover the time when the appellant says she  went  to  her  GP  in
    relation to her pregnancy and, due to a mistake by the GP, was told  to
    get an abortion.

33. There is undoubtedly a gap in the health records.  That gap was not, as
    I understand both representatives' submissions, raised at  the  hearing
    as being  an  issue.   The  appellant  was,  therefore,  not  given  an
    opportunity to deal  with  the  omission  in  the  appellant's  bundle.
    Without having been given an opportunity to explain, the judge inferred
    that the appellant has deliberately withheld those  documents  because,
    had she not done so, it  would  have  "shown  that  this  extraordinary
    series of events did not in fact occur".  The judge,  in  other  words,
    infers dishonesty by the appellant in the presentation of her case.

34. In a witness statement dated 16 March 2020, Naim  Hasani  of  Oliver  &
    Hasani Solicitors, who is  a  solicitor  and  had  supervision  of  the
    caseworker responsible for the appellant's appeal, indicates  that  the
    medical records  received  from  the  GP  were  sent  directly  to  the
    appellant's legal representatives  who  prepared  the  bundle.   It  is
    stated that, having reviewed the appellant's bundle and  compared  them
    with the original medical records received by the representatives:

         "I am unable to find  any  discrepancies  between  the  records  we
         received and the records  reproduced  in  the  appellant's  bundle.
         Consequently, I submit that there  has  been  no  omission  of  the
         medical records as received from the GP".

35. As Mr Bates pointed out, at para 9 of the witness statement  Mr  Hasani
    fails to say whether the GP in fact sent all the medical  records  held
    on the appellant.  All he can say is that they  requested  the  medical
    records and the bundle of documents  sent  to  the  representatives  is
    reflected in the bundle presented to the First-tier Tribunal.

36. Mr Bates did not seek to object to the admission of this  new  evidence
    which I admit under  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 as relevant to the error of law issue.

37. The evidence, in  my  judgment,  discloses  unfairness  and  procedural
    irregularity by the judge.  He relied upon an omission  in  the  bundle
    without raising it with the legal representatives at the  hearing.   It
    may well be that the discrepancy only became apparent to him after  the
    hearing.  However, fairness required that this matter,  if  it  was  to
    form a significant reason for disbelieving the appellant,  should  have
    been raised with the legal representatives so that they would  have  an
    opportunity to deal with it.  As, of course,  Mr  Hasani  does  in  his
    witness statement.  Had that  been  raised  before  the  judge,  it  is
    difficult to conceive that the  judge  could  have  inferred  that  the
    appellant herself had deliberately (and therefore dishonestly) withheld
    part of her medical records in order to avoid being 'discovered'  in  a
    lie about the GP's dealings with her following the  conception  of  her
    second child.

38. As I have said, the  judge  made  a  very  strong  finding  based  upon
    inference that she had deliberately misled the First-tier Tribunal.   I
    see no reason not to accept what  is  said  by  Mr  Hasani,  who  is  a
    solicitor, and has an obligation to not mislead the Tribunal.  Clearly,
    the appellant had no dealings with her medical records and was not in a
    position, therefore, to deliberately withhold them.  There  appears  to
    have been some  oversight  either  by  the  GP  in  providing  all  the
    documents or in the legal representatives noticing  that  not  all  the
    medical records were in the bundle.  However, of course, the importance
    of that omission would only have become apparent if the point had  been
    raised as a live issue at the hearing.  It was not.   As  a  result  of
    that, the judge's reasoning in para 38 is  unsustainable  and,  indeed,
    arises from unfairness.

39. Whilst I acknowledge that there are a number of reasons given by  Judge
    Bonavero for his adverse findings, including relying upon Judge Malik's
    reasoning which he sets out at para 24 of the decision in this  appeal,
    I am satisfied that the approach of the judge in paras  37  and  38  in
    particular in reaching  an  inference  that  the  appellant  has  acted
    deliberately  and  dishonestly  in  her  dealings  with  the  Tribunal,
    materially affected his approach to the appellant's  evidence  and  her
    credibility.

40. Consequently, I accept Ms Sanders' submissions under grounds 1  and  2.
    I further accept that it is established, on the basis of those grounds,
    that the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse
    credibility finding.

41. I have reached that conclusion without the need  to  resolve  ground  3
    because, even if ground 3 is not sustained, the errors in grounds 1 and
    2 lead me to conclude that  Judge  Bonavero's  adverse  finding  cannot
    stand.

Decision

42. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

43. In the light of the error of law, none of Judge Bonavero's findings can
    stand.  The appeal must be reheard de novo before a  judge  other  than
    Judge Bonavero.

44. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judges Bonavero or Malik.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               2 August 2021

