
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01670/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2nd April 2019                    |On 09th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                Ms G A BLACK


                                   Between

                             MR md fakhar uddin
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Aitken (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Loke) ("FtT") promulgated on
    23.1.2019 in which the  appellant's  claim  for  protection  and  human
    rights was dismissed.





Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 01.01.63.  He  entered
    the UK on 19.12.2011.  He claimed asylum on 8.3.2017. On  26.4.2010  he
    was kidnapped by 5 men who attacked, threatened  and  robbed  him.  The
    offence was reported to the police on 1.5.2010. The appellant  produced
    an FIR and newspaper article which the respondent accepted were genuine
    [7]. There was no dispute that the appellant had been  kidnapped.   The
    issue under appeal was whether or not the motivation for the kidnap was
    for political reasons. The appellant stated in the screening  interview
    that the kidnap was for financial reasons. The appellant later  claimed
    in his substantive interview that he had been a member of the BNP since
    2000, and that the kidnap was carried  out  by  members  of  the  Awami
    League (AL).  The appellant claimed that he has taken part in political
    activities in the UK which would place him at risk on return.

3.   In the refusal letter the respondent considered  that  the  appellant's
    account was inconsistent as to the claimed motivation for  the  kidnap.
    His account in his screening interview made no mention of any political
    motivation.  He introduced this element in his  substantive  interview.
    It was not accepted that he had any political interest or profile.

Grounds of application for permission to appeal

4.   In grounds of  appeal the  appellant  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    failing to  consider  the  background  material  that  was  capable  of
    corroborating the appellant's claim, that kidnappings were carried  out
    and motivated by political reasons, some kidnaps committed  by security
    services and that  the  targets  included  individual  affiliated  with
    opposition parties (USSD Report 2016 6.1.3).

5.   The FtT also failed to take into account that the charges were  dropped
    which was further evidence of political motivation.

Permission to appeal

6.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted  by  FTJ  C
    Andrew.

Submissions

7.   At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Aitken  expanded  on  the  grounds  of
    application. He referred to the skeleton argument that was provided for
    the FtT.  The appellant had given reasons for why  he  had  not  raised
    political motivation at his screening interview and for why he had  not
    provided the further information to the police.

8.   In response Mr Kandola contended that the FtT had made  some  reference
    to the background material at [28].  The material stated that political
    motivation can be a  reason  for  kidnapping.   The  FtT  decision  was
    thorough and reasoned. The FtT found that the appellant's  claim  based
    on political motivation was not credible.  The evidence was  considered
    in the round and  the  conclusion  sustainable  having  regard  to  the
    inconsistencies raised at a later stage by the appellant [20].

Discussion and conclusion

9.   Having heard the submissions and considered the grounds  of  appeal,  I
    am satisfied that if there was an error of law by the FtT, it  was  not
    material.  In a well reasoned and thorough decision and reasons the FtT
    properly considered the evidence in  the  round  and  gave  reasons  in
    support.   I  acknowledge  that  the  FtT's  only  reference   to   the
    background material was at [28] when considering risk on  return  after
    having found the appellant's core claim  lacking  in  credibility,  and
    that the FtT made no explicit reference to any background  material  in
    assessing that credibility. I am nevertheless satisfied that this error
    was not material to the findings  or  decision  made.   The  background
    material (as quoted above in paragraph 4) was set out in  the  skeleton
    argument that was before the FtT and was referred to  in  the  decision
    and so it is clear that the  FtT  had  taken  it  into  account.  I  am
    satisfied that the findings and reasons remain entirely sustainable and
    that there would not have been a different outcome in  the  event  that
    the FtT had  specifically  found  that  the  material  was  capable  of
    corroborating that aspect of the claim.  The effect of  the  background
    material was to confirm that political kidnappings do occur.   The  FtT
    was entitled to conclude that the  appellant's  failure  to  raise  the
    political motivation in his screening interview damaged the credibility
    of his claim.  Indeed the findings were wider than that,  the  FtT  had
    regard to the fact that when asked about the motivation for the kidnap,
    the appellant stated that there was no political  motivation  and  that
    the  kidnap  was  for  financial  reasons.   The  appellant  had  every
    opportunity to give that basic information at the time of his screening
    interview and did not do so.  I acknowledge that the FtT may  not  have
    taken into account the appellant's explanation for  not  informing  the
    police that the kidnap was for political reason when  it  came  to  his
    attention after the issue of the FIR.  His failure to do so would  have
    been reasonable if indeed the motivation was political, but I find that
    this was not material or capable of displacing the overall findings and
    reasons reached by the FtT. Mr Aitken further submitted that the reason
    for the charges being dropped was evidence  that  there  was  political
    motivation; this in my view was entirely  speculative.  The  FtT  found
    that the appellant was not a member of the BNP and that his  sur  place
    activities were an attempt to bolster his claim.   The  FtT  took  into
    account further inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence such as the
    attempts made by the authorities to trace him [23].  The FtT also  took
    into account the appellant's delayed claim for asylum  and  found  that
    section 8 (Immigration & Asylum (Treatment of claimant's etc) Act  2004
    applied.

10.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.

Decision

11.  The appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed   Date 2.4.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



NO ANONYMITY ORDER

NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 2.4.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




