
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01590/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Employment Tribunals       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th February 2018                          |On 6th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 FATHIMA [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Francis Junior (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Harrison (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lloyd Smith, promulgated on 16th  May  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester Piccadilly on 10th May  2017.   In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on [ ]  1988,  and  is  a
    female.  Her partner, [NM], and her two children, [NA] ([ ]  2013)  and
    [RA] ([ ] 2016) were dependants on her claim.  She appealed against the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 3rd  February  2016,  refusing
    her  claim  to  asylum,  humanitarian  protection,  and  human   rights
    violations.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she was born and  grew  up
    in Sri Lanka where she lived with her parents and two younger brothers.
     The family were Muslims but the Appellant attended a Buddhist  school.
    In 2007, she started a relationship with her current partner, who is  a
    Buddhist, and the relationship was  conducted  in  private,  such  that
    after they left school, they communicated via a  mobile  phone.   After
    she completed her A  levels  in  2007,  the  Appellant's  parents  were
    looking to arrange a marriage for  her,  which  she  resisted,  and  in
    January 2010, the couple decided to elope, when the Appellant left  her
    home at 3 a.m. in the morning to join her  partner.   They  fled  on  a
    motorbike.  The father heard the Appellant leave.  He pursued them with
    other family members.  They managed  to  block  the  road  causing  the
    motorbike to stop.  The Appellant was badly beaten by  her  father  and
    the Appellant's relatives beat up her partner.  The Appellant was taken
    to her home and locked up in a bedroom without food for two  days.   On
    the third day, her partner's brother and another man also  entered  her
    room and beat her.  The Appellant was then sent to live with  her  aunt
    where she remained until November 2010.  In August 2011,  she  went  to
    the local police station to report that her parents were forcing her to
    marry another man who she did not like.  They had provided her with  no
    assistance.  On 2nd May 2012 she was taken by four people whilst in the
    street, driven to a location, where she was kept  for  three  days  and
    beaten and questioned.  She was also sexually  assaulted  subsequently.
    This was in a police station.  After she was released from  the  police
    station she managed to obtain a visa to come and study in the UK.   She
    travelled to the UK on 17th May 2012 and attended Ulster University  in
    London for three to four months, but stopped after she became  pregnant
    with her first child.  She then decided to  claim  asylum  before,  she
    believed that her visa ran  out.   This  account  is  set  out  in  the
    determination of the judge at paragraph 9.

The Judge's Determination

 4. The judge  went  methodically  through  the  Appellant's  account  (see
    paragraphs 15 to 17) and concluded that the Appellant was not a witness
    of truth.  It was found that the Appellant's account  was  inconsistent
    and incredible (paragraph 15).  Examples were given  of  this.   First,
    whereas  all  the  objective  materials  described  hostility   between
    Buddhist and Muslims, it was for this reason all  the  more  remarkable
    that the Appellant would have attended, as a Muslim, a Buddhist  school
    (paragraph 15(a)).  Second,  the  Appellant  was  inconsistent  in  her
    account with the account of her partner as to why they came to  the  UK
    (see  paragraph  15(e)).   Third,  it  was  remarkable  that  both  the
    Appellant and her partner contacted their families after the  birth  of
    their first child in June 2013, given that it had been maintained  that
    both sets of parents were hostile to them to the extent that  they  had
    meted physical violence upon them (see paragraph 15(g)).   Fourth,  the
    Appellant did nothing to claim  asylum  until  two  years  further  had
    elapsed (paragraph 15(g)).  Fifth, the judge observed that,  "given  my
    credibility findings I struggle to even accept that the  Appellant  and
    her partner are  members  of  different  faiths.   The  couple  do  not
    practise their religion which  clearly  demonstrates  that  it  is  not
    therefore an  important  aspect  of  their  lives"  (paragraph  15(h)).
    Finally, the judge found  the  Appellant's  account  to  be  inherently
    implausible.  This is clear from the  description  that  following  the
    Appellant's attendance at the police station in  August  2011,  nothing
    had happened until 2012, when on 2nd May she was, clearly walking alone
    "to drop the lunch for my  dad"  when  she  was  bundled  into  a  car,
    mistreated  and  detained  for  three  days  (Q.188).   As  the   judge
    explained, "not only does this account show that she was  not  confined
    to the house, rarely going out alone, but it also is inconsistent  with
    other aspects of her account" (paragraph 15(i)).

 5. The judge ended the determination with the observation that,

         "The Appellant was a poor witness in her own course.  I  found  her
         to  be  inconsistent,  unreliable,  evasive  and   ultimately   not
         credible, as  demonstrated  by  the  examples  set  out  above.   I
         likewise did not find the evidence of her partner to be credible or
         consistent.  I find it  incredible  that,  if  a  risk  existed  as
         claimed, the couple did nothing to get support and  protection  for
         three years after her arrival.  A letter  informing  the  Appellant
         that her leave had been curtailed  was  sent  in  July  2014.   The
         Appellant claimed to have been unaware about this  ..."  (paragraph
         16).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the  judge  erred  in  concluding
    that the Appellant and her partner "are not from  different  religions"
    (paragraph 15(b)).  Second, that the judge erred in concluding that the
    Appellant and her partner "had no intention of studying in the  UK  and
    may not have even studied in the UK at all" (paragraph 15(f)).   Third,
    that the judge erred in concluding that the Appellant  "did  not  leave
    Sri Lanka as soon as her visa was issued" (paragraph 15(f)).

 8. On 14th September  2017,  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 9. On 4th October 2017 a Rule 24 response was entered to the  effect  that
    it was open to the  judge  to  find  that  the  oral  accounts  of  the
    Appellant and her partner differed from each other.   For  example,  at
    paragraph 15(c)(viii) it was open for the judge to find that  the  oral
    account of both the Appellant and  her  partner  differed  because  the
    Appellant was saying a friend of her partner gave her  his  number  and
    told her to contact him whereas  the  partner  said  that  the  initial
    contact was through the friend and after that he would call her on  her
    father's phone.  But more importantly, the Rule 24 response goes on  to
    say that the Appellant  has  not  been  treated  unfairly  because  the
    decision in Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 makes it clear that  "where
    much depends on the credibility of a party and when  that  party  makes
    several inconsistent statements which are before  the  decision  maker,
    that party manifestly has a forensic problem".  The decision goes on to
    say  that,  "usually  the  Tribunal,  particularly  if  the  party   is
    represented, will remain silent and see  how  the  case  unfolds"  (see
    paragraph 5).  It was stated in the Rule 24 response that this  was  an
    approach that the judge was entitled to take.   If  matters  were  left
    ambiguous or unexplained, given that the Appellant was represented,  it
    was not for the judge to enter  the  fray  in  order  to  resolve  them
    because the Appellant ought  to  have  been  well  aware,  given  legal
    representation, that these matters needed proper clarification.

The Hearing

 1. At the hearing before  me  on  7th  February  2018  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Francis  Junior,  a  legal  representative,  and  the
    Respondent was represented by Mr  C  Harrison,  a  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  Mr Junior began by stating that he would "rely  on
    paragraph 19 of the grounds of  application".   First,  the  judge  was
    wrong to say that the parties did not  belong  to  different  religions
    because they plainly did, and this was  the  essence  of  their  claim,
    namely, that they were not allowed to fall in love as they belonged  to
    Buddhist  and  Muslim  religions.   Second,  there  was   actually   no
    conflicting evidence between the Appellant and her partner  as  to  the
    people that were chasing them.  Third, the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    concluded, without asking the Appellant in court about this,  that  she
    had no intention to study in  the  UK.   The  refusal  letter  did  not
    challenge this aspect of the claim and it was not open to the judge  to
    reach an adverse conclusion without enquiring the Appellant to  clarify
    this matter.  Finally, the same applied to whether  the  Appellant  did
    not leave as soon as her visa came through and the explanation for  not
    so leaving immediately.

 2. For his part, Mr  Harrison  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   He
    submitted that the  case  of  Maheshwaran  made  it  quite  clear  that
    fairness did not mean that the judge had to enquire of the  witness  on
    every aspect where the evidence was left deficient.  The Appellant  was
    represented and the judge could in such adjudicative proceedings remain
    silent.

 3. In reply, Mr Junior submitted that the Appellant should have  been  put
    on notice as to what was in issue by the judge  and  should  have  been
    asked to clarify these matters.

No Error of Law

 4. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

 5. First,  insofar  as  the  claim  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    disbelieved the fact that the  Appellant  and  her  partner  came  from
    different religions is concerned, this is a  mis-reading  of  what  the
    judge stated.  The judge did not state that they had not been born into
    Buddhist and Muslim religions respectively.  What the judge  meant  was
    that religion was not a matter of central importance  to  their  lives.
    It was observed that, "they dress in a  western  style"  (paragraph  15
    (h)).  It was observed even that, "the partner in his  evidence  stated
    that the Appellant is very interested in Buddhism"  (paragraph  15(h)).
    In fact what the judge was really stating in  essence  was  that,  "the
    couple do not practise their religion which clearly  demonstrates  that
    it is not therefore an important  aspect  of  their  lives"  (paragraph
    15(h)).

 6. Second, as far as the question of the Appellant  and  her  partner  not
    having an intention of studying in the UK was  concerned,  this  was  a
    conclusion that the judge was entitled to come  to  when  consideration
    was being given at length to the question of how the Appellant utilised
    the grant of a visa to  her,  such  that  the  judge  was  led  to  the
    conclusion that, "there is no proof that either of them  even  embarked
    on any course" (paragraph 15(f)).

 7. Third, the same applies to  the  third  allegation,  namely,  that  the
    Appellant did not leave Sri Lanka as  soon  as  her  visa  was  issued,
    because the judge observed that,

         "Despite fearing an arranged marriage and constant threats from her
         family [she] fails to leave immediately on  that  visa  but  rather
         leaves a month after it was issued.  Those are not the  actions  of
         an individual terrified of the consequences  of  her  actions  ..."
         (paragraph 15(f)).

 8. The same would apply to  the  inconsistent  accounts  given  orally  on
    various matters between the Appellant and her partner.

 9. Ultimately, however, what is significant is that there is, no  material
    error of law in the judge's findings, given the conclusion in  the  end
    that, notwithstanding the claimed risk to them, for three  years  after
    arrival they made no protection claim.

10. There was a letter curtailing their leave sent out in July 2014,  which
    the Appellant claimed to have been unaware of, leaving the judge to  be
    unimpressed with this.  When the first child was born they communicated
    back with their parents informing them of this.

11. Ultimately, these were questions of fact for the judge to determine  on
    the evidence before the Tribunal.   The  grounds  raised  amount  to  a
    disagreement  with  those  findings.   It  cannot  be  said  that   the
    conclusions reached were perverse in any manner  or  irrational.   This
    was how the evidence came  across.   This  was  how  the  evidence  was
    interpreted and the judge was entitled to come to the conclusions  that
    he did.  There is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

12. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

13. No anonymity direction is made.

14. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th February 2018



