
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01833/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th November 2019                |On 12th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                            HIS HONOUR JUDGE BIRD
                  (SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     PF
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel, instructed by Ravi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese, promulgated on 16 August 2019,  in  which
    the appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse  her
    protection and human rights claims dated 13 February 2019 was dismissed
    on all grounds.  The appellant's protection claim was based  on  events
    in Sri Lanka and risk on return there for  forced  recruitment  to  the
    LTTE, in relation to previous detention by the army and  various  later
    issues, the detail of which is not relevant for the  purposes  of  this
    error of law hearing.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal found as damaging the  appellant's  credibility
    the fact that there was a delay in  claiming  asylum  and  a  delay  in
    leaving Sri Lanka such that section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 applied.  It was  further  found
    that the events and claims made by  the  appellant  were  not  credible
    because of inconsistencies and a lack of  detail  in  the  claim.   The
    First-tier Tribunal separately considered the medical report  submitted
    by the appellant and attached little weight to this on the  basis  that
    the report itself was based on the appellant's account of events  which
    had already been found not to be  credible.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    went so far as saying that "the appellant in my view has relied on  the
    report for the sole purpose of bolstering and has indeed hidden  behind
    the report so as not to  provide  evidence  for  the  purposes  of  the
    hearing." (paragraph 24).

 3. Although the First-tier Tribunal  refers  to  the  appellant's  claimed
    vulnerability and reasons for not giving evidence based on the  medical
    evidence, which included findings  of  PTSD  and  other  mental  health
    problems, there was no finding at all by the First-tier Tribunal as  to
    whether the appellant is a vulnerable witness, nor  whether  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note to of 2010  and  Practice  Direction,  First
    Tier  and  Upper  Tribunal,  "Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive
    Witnesses" (the "Guidance") had been applied.  The  formal  grounds  of
    appeal do not raise this, but it is Robinson  obvious  point  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal has not followed the Guidance nor the approach  set
    out by the Court of Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123,  in  relation  to  vulnerable
    witnesses.

 4. The grounds of appeal submitted were on the basis that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in law in the assessment of  credibility,  in
    particular in the assessment of the psychiatric report and  the  expert
    country report as well  as  a  lack  of  consideration  of  the  actual
    protection claim and of the claim  under  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights on mental health grounds.

 5. In our view these grounds are all tied up and linked to the failure  to
    consider the Guidance and whether the appellant is in fact a vulnerable
    witness.  What the First-tier Tribunal should  have  done  is  consider
    this point and specifically the medical evidence  first,  to  determine
    whether that of itself is persuasive and weight should be  attached  to
    it, before a holistic assessment of credibility within  that  framework
    of the Guidance if the appellant is a vulnerable witness.  The  medical
    evidence is relevant to that preliminary assessment and should not have
    been discounted with little  weight  being  attached  to  it  following
    consideration of credibility in  isolation.   In  accordance  with  the
    Guidance the First-tier Tribunal should also have had consideration  to
    the objective evidence and whether the claim was consistent with  that.



 6. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to consider  first  whether  the
    appellant was a vulnerable witness in accordance with the Guidance,  by
    reference to the psychiatric evidence in particular; and then,  if  so,
    to go on to consider the issue of credibility in  accordance  with  the
    same;  is  a  material  error  of  law  which  fatally  undermines  the
    credibility assessment and outcome of the appeal.  For  these  reasons,
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.  It  is  not
    possible to make any preserved findings of  fact  and  given  that  the
    appellant has not had a fair hearing in accordance with  the  Guidance,
    it is appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo hearing.

 7. In these circumstances, we do not need to go on to consider the further
    grounds of appeal in relation to  Article  3  as  the  errors  we  have
    already identified are determinative



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  remit  the  appeal
to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Signed   [pic]    Date 9th December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
