
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01164/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2017                                |On 14 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Raw, Counsel instructed by Caulker & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       respondent. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court.  I  make  this  order  because  the  respondent  has  claimed
       international protection and there is  invariably  a  risk  in  such
       cases that publicity could itself justify the claim.

    2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge  Keane)  allowing
       the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the claimant"  against  a
       decision of the respondent that he was not a refugee.

    3. It is clear that this is a decision  that  troubled  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge; so much so that  he  reconstituted  the  hearing  to
       allow the parties to make further submissions.  Permission to appeal
       was granted by a Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
       commented on the grounds  being  "unusually  lengthy"  and  although
       permission was given on all grounds the  main  reason  for  granting
       permission was that it was:


  "arguable that the judge misunderstood the apparent  concession  made  by
  the [Secretary of State], who had concluded  that  the  entirety  of  the
  [claimant's] unsubstantiated claim was rejected".

    4. I begin by considering carefully  Judge  Keane's  decision  and  his
       reasons for it.

    5. The judge explained that the claimant is a citizen of Egypt who  was
       born in 1987.  He arrived in the United Kingdom  without  permission
       in January 2013 and by September  2014  he  had  been  sentenced  to
       twelve months' imprisonment  for  possessing  a  bladed  instrument.
       Unsurprisingly the claimant was made the subject  of  a  deportation
       order and it was the appeal against  that  order  that  came  before
       Judge Keane.

    6. The judge noted that the respondent's case was outlined in a "Notice
       of Decision" dated 12 May 2015. It was  the  respondent's  case  was
       that the claimant was not truthful and Judge Keane commented on  how
       the claimant's evidence had been clearly  challenged.   It  was  the
       claimant's case that he had told the truth.

    7. At paragraph 9 of his decision the judge explained why he  found  it
       necessary to recall the parties to the hearing.  The judge said:


  "The [Secretary of State] had at length and most helpfully drawn  on  the
  background evidence in respect of Egypt, the extreme harsh stance of  the
  Egyptian authorities towards active members of the  Brotherhood  and  the
  campaign of arrests,  convictions  and  significant  sentences  including
  death  sentences  which  the  Egyptian  courts  have  handed  down.   The
  [Secretary of State] went on to state (second  paragraph  on  the  eighth
  page of the notice of decision):


       'Based on the above country information it  is  considered  that  the
       Muslim Brotherhood constitutes a proscribed  organisation  in  Egypt.
       Based on the information that you have provided it is considered that
       the authorities  in  Egypt  would  be  interested  in  detaining  and
       questioning your uncle, if they have not already done so.'"

    8. The judge then went on to explain that the reference to the  "uncle"
       necessarily  was  a  reference  to  the  person  the  claimant   had
       identified as his uncle in  his  application  and  although  it  was
       perfectly clear that the Secretary of  State  did  not  believe  the
       claimant's own evidence about his own  activities  and  experiences,
       the judge could not see how the claim for  international  protection
       could be resisted because the claimant risked being perceived as the
       close family member of a supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood.

    9. The judge found that being perceived  as  a  family  member  of  the
       Muslim Brotherhood  carried  essentially  the  same  risk  as  being
       perceived to be a member of the Muslim Brotherhood.

   10. All of this was explained in a very carefully worded  letter  which,
       correctly in  the  circumstances,  was  addressed  to  each  of  the
       representatives who appeared before him and was sent to the parties.

   11.  There  were,  in  fact,  two  further  hearings.   The  first   was
       ineffective because of a  failure  to  follow  directions.   At  the
       second the Secretary of State repeated that it was her case that the
       claimant was not truthful.

   12. The judge considered the evidence  and  submissions.   As  indicated
       above, he did not make any finding on the credibility of the  claim.
       He said it was not necessary to do that because of the  "unequivocal
       concession on the part of the [Secretary of State] that the Egyptian
       authorities  were  interested  in  detaining  and  questioning  [his
       uncle]".  He then went on to explain why he took that view given the
       premise  which  in   the   judge's   mind   had   been   established
       unequivocally.

   13. Those parts of the grounds that criticise the  judge's  findings  of
       fact  insofar  as  they  relate  to  the  claimant's   conduct   and
       circumstances are irrelevant.  They are not the  reasons  the  judge
       allowed the appeal. The important question is whether the judge  was
       entitled to find that the  concession  had  been  made  and  if  the
       decision he made was consistent with the concession that he believed
       had been made.

   14. The judge said in paragraph 14:


  "The background evidence demonstrates the very significant extent of  the
  interest of  the  Egyptian  authorities  in  persons  involved  with  the
  Brotherhood.  In addition to the background evidence which the respondent
  sets out in the notice of decision there was in the  [claimant's]  bundle
  of objective evidence a Human Rights Watch report prepared in 2016  which
  stated (page 25 of the [claimant's] bundle  of  documents)  that,  'those
  detained include around the number 29,000 Brotherhood members  ...'   The
  [claimant] would be exposed to a risk of arrest and detention  given  the
  perception of him which I am satisfied  the  Egyptian  authorities  would
  hold, he too would be at risk of an arrest and detention  and  subsequent
  ill-treatment.  He could hardly solicit the protection  of  the  Egyptian
  authorities or secure a safe place of residence."

   15. I am satisfied that the judge was  entitled  to  conclude  from  the
       background evidence that members of the Brotherhood in many, if  not
       all, cases face  a  risk  of  persecution  and  those  suspected  of
       supporting them face a similar risk.  The  fact  that  the  claimant
       denies any such support is irrelevant.  An asylum claim is based  on
       perception not on what  a  person  necessarily  really  believes  or
       thinks.  Similarly the grounds contending that the claimant  himself
       had no relevant profile missed the point.  The  judge's  finding  is
       the claimant is at risk as a relative.

   16. In the refusal letter the Secretary of State said that, based on the
       country information and the claimant's case, it is  considered  that
       the authorities in  Egypt  would  be  interested  in  detaining  and
       questioning  the  claimant's  uncle  and  so  if,  as  the  claimant
       contended, he was at risk  from  his  uncle,  he  could  report  his
       concerns to the authorities in Egypt.  Mr Raw was scornful  of  this
       argument and described it as a "non-runner".  He said the judge  was
       entitled to find that the distaste of the  authorities  towards  the
       Brotherhood was so intense that far from assisting the claimant they
       could be expected to detain and interrogate him  to  find  out  more
       about the claimant's uncle.  The judge understood there  was  enmity
       between the claimant and his uncle but was not able to  accept  that
       the authorities in Egypt would believe the claimant if he  explained
       that to the authorities.

   17. On reflection,  I  find  that  the  judge  erred  in  accepting  the
       claimant's case on this point.  I do not understand how he was  able
       to conclude from the background material that the claimant would  be
       at risk by presenting himself to  the  authorities  and  identifying
       himself as  the  estranged  relative  of  a  member  of  the  Muslim
       Brotherhood.  I wish to emphasise that I am not saying the judge was
       not entitled to reach this  conclusion.   I  say  that  he  has  not
       explained adequately his reasons for accepting  it.  My  finding  on
       this point significantly undermines the Decision and  Reasons  as  a
       whole.

   18. I now turn to the interesting question  of  whether  the  judge  was
       entitled to find that a concession had been made.  It is clear that,
       on a superficial reading of the refusal letter dated  12  May  2015,
       the judge was entitled to conclude that it  was  accepted  that  the
       appellant's uncle was involved in the Muslim Brotherhood and, as  is
       explained in the second paragraph of page 8 of the  refusal  letter,
       "the authorities in Egypt  would  be  interested  in  detaining  and
       questioning your uncle, if they have not already done so".

   19. The grounds supporting the application do  not  address  the  point.
       They give reasons to conclude that the appellant  was  not  truthful
       about the risks facing his uncle but  that  is  a  rather  different
       point.  I do not accept that the Secretary of  State  did  make  the
       concession that the judge thought was made.  The relevant words have
       to be set in context.  The Secretary of State said:


  "Based on the information that you have provided it  is  considered  that
  the authorities in Egypt would be of interest ..."

   20. The letter does not say unequivocally that the information  provided
       was accepted.  This was something on which a finding was needed  and
       the judge has not made a finding.  Judge Keane was clearly concerned
       about where his reasoning was leading and that is one of his reasons
       for ordering a further hearing.  He said in that letter, as  is  set
       out in his decision and reasons:


  "However, such a claim - that [the claimant] might well be  perceived  by
  the Egyptian government as a supporter of Muslim Brotherhood,  given  the
  close association of family members in their cause - was not expressed by
  or on behalf of [the claimant] and the [Secretary of State] would  surely
  be taken utterly by surprise if such a finding was to emerge as  decisive
  in my resolution of the appeal.  I have  decided  that  the  best  course
  would be for me to relist [the claimant's] appeal as a part-heard  appeal
  for possible directions only."

   21. It would have been very simple if the Secretary of State had made it
       clear that the apparent concession was never made but that  did  not
       happen.  However the Secretary of State produced a  letter  dated  1
       June 2016 which was essentially a Further Reasons for Refusal.  That
       letter gives several reasons to conclude that the claimant is not at
       risk.  It notes that it is the claimant's case  that  he  fears  his
       uncle who is involved in the Muslim Brotherhood but the letter  does
       make clear at paragraph 26 that in the opinion of the  Secretary  of
       State the claimant:


  "Has not shown that his Uncle is a leading member of the organisation and
  that the mass arrests of 2013 of Muslim Brotherhood high ranking members'
  relatives is not an ongoing situation.  It  is  not  accepted  that  your
  client is in need of international protection."

   22. The same letter makes clear at paragraph 21 that  it  is  considered
       that "those with a high profile in the  Muslim  Brotherhood  or  who
       have been politically active, particularly in demonstrations, may be
       able to show that they are at risk"  but  it  does  not  repeat  the
       apparent concession that the claimant's uncle is such a  person.   I
       do not know what happened to this  letter.   It  is  clearly  in  my
       papers but there is no mention of it in Judge Keane's  decision  and
       it clearly came as a surprise to Mr Raw.

   23. Something has gone badly wrong here.  The case that the Secretary of
       State decided and wanted to be the basis of an appeal in  the  event
       of there being an appeal has not been considered  by  the  Tribunal.
       There has been a procedural error.

   24. I have to consider carefully if it is right to give the Secretary of
       State another chance.   If  the  only  thing  to  consider  is  this
       particular  case  then  the  answer   is   overwhelmingly   in   the
       affirmative.  There has not been a proper consideration of the  case
       that led to the application being refused.  The applicant is a young
       man who was convicted of a serious  offence  and  there  are  strong
       reasons for his removal from the United Kingdom  but  he  is  to  be
       removed to a country where some people do face persecution.   It  is
       more than ordinarily important to get this right.

   25. This is not a criminal trial.  However the arguments  in  favour  of
       preventing double jeopardy must be considered.  The state cannot  go
       on making decisions if it does not like the outcome of an appeal.  I
       have metaphorically stood back and reflected.  Although  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge's conclusion is perfectly clear I have indicated
       already that I do not see how it is justified.  I find  the  judge's
       reasoning on the essential conclusion that the  claimant  could  not
       look to the Egyptian authorities for protection obscure.

   26. I also note that there has been a procedural irregularity although I
       cannot get to the bottom of the reasons for that.  There is  nothing
       before me to  show  conclusively  that  Judge  Keane  erred  in  not
       considering the Further Reasons for  Refusal.   Something  somewhere
       was not done and it did not come to his attention.   Nevertheless  I
       have not excluded from my mind the fact that the  decision  that  he
       made was unsatisfactory because it  assume  a  concession  that  the
       Secretary of State did not intend to make.

   27. I have decided that the only proper  course  is  to  set  aside  the
       decision partly because of the procedural  irregularity  but  mainly
       because of the lack of reasons.  It  is  now  for  both  parties  to
       prepare for the rehearing.  This should be done  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal because the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal was  not  an
       effective hearing on the issues.

   28. I do wish to acknowledge that in my judgment  Judge  Keane  was  not
       well served here.  He saw a difficulty and  asked  the  parties  for
       help but the Secretary of State, who was in  the  best  position  to
       help, seems to have rather sidestepped the  problem.   Nevertheless,
       taking everything into account I have made the decision I have.  The
       First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I set aside its  decision  and  I
       direct the case be heard again  in  the  First-tier.   None  of  the
       findings have been preserved.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 July 2017                   |




