
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01285/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2018                            |On 23 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                    KEDBd
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Dheva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Maxwell who in a determination  promulgated  on
    27 July 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the
    Secretary of State to refuse him asylum.

2.   The appellant first entered  Britain  in  March  2010  as  a  dependent
    spouse, his wife having a Tier 4 Student visa.  On that basis his leave
    was extended until an application for further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    dependent of a Tier 4 student was refused because a false TOEIC English
    language certificate had been submitted with  his  wife's  application.
    The subsequent appeal,  on human rights grounds,  was  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16 February 2015.

3.   On 16 March 2015 the appellant claimed  asylum.   His  application  was
    refused on 4 September 2017.

4.   The appellant's claim was that he was and never had been interested  in
    politics and had never supported the LTTE.  In April  2005  he  started
    working for a company called Sierra Global Network  Limited  and  there
    became friendly with a colleague, JS, an ethnic Tamil.  They would meet
    from time to time outside work.  Eventually JS asked him to help him by
    transporting medicines to Negombo for onward delivery to Mannar in  the
    north.  As the appellant was Sinhalese he would not draw  attention  to
    himself and could therefore move without his movements  being  hindered
    by the security forces.  The appellant agreed  to  help  and  collected
    medicines from Wellawatte, a  suburb  of  Colombo,  and  took  them  to
    Negombo.  He made seven such deliveries until June 2008  when  JS  said
    that that route was now blocked and it was too dangerous  to  continue.
    He was not asked to help JS further until December 2009 when  JS  asked
    him to take a young boy to the passport office to get a passport  as it
    was easier for him to assist because he was Sinhalese.   The  appellant
    did this.  In January 2010 he learned from JS  that  JS  was  expecting
    money from friends in Switzerland by money  transfer.    The  appellant
    was asked to collect it in his own name and  he  did  so,  passing  the
    money on to JS.

5.   In 2010 he had come to Britain.

6.   In November 2015 he had received a phone call  from  his  mother-in-law
    who told him that army officers had been to her house with  a  copy  of
    the appellant's identity card (he had given a copy to JS) and had asked
    if he had returned from the United Kingdom.  They showed  a  photograph
    which she recognised as being of JS and told her that he  was  an  LTTE
    member, being in fact one of the important  LTTE  members  in  Colombo.
    The army officers said that the appellant had betrayed his country  and
    that he was wanted for further  investigation  and  that  JS  had  been
    arrested and revealed information about the appellant.

7.   On 21 November 2014 the appellant received another phone call from  his
    mother-in-law who said that army officers had visited the previous  day
    and given his father-on-law a letter requiring him  to  report  at  the
    local police station on a monthly basis until the appellant returned to
    Sri Lanka.  The appellant said he did not  know  what  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities might have  been  told  about  him  or  the  basis  of  any
    allegations which might have been levelled against him and he had  been
    too afraid to tell his Sinhalese friends in the United Kingdom of  what
    was going on.

8.   After the appellant's wife's appeal was refused in  February  2015  the
    appellant had started suffering mental health problems.

9.   When interviewed the appellant produced a copy of the letter  from  the
    Sri Lankan police to his father-in-law instructing him  to  attend  the
    police station  monthly.    The  respondent  attempted  to  verify  the
    authenticity of the letter but the Sri  Lankan  authorities  said  they
    would not confirm that a letter had been sent without first knowing the
    name, address and reference number of the letter all of which had  been
    redacted.  However, since the first attempt to verify the  authenticity
    of the letter by the respondent had been made  the  Sri  Lankan  police
    often questioned the appellant's father-in-law about the appellant  and
    in July 2016 the appellant overdosed on  paracetamol,  mirtazapine  and
    diazepam tablets and had made an attempt to jump in front of  a  train.
    He is being treated for depression by his general practitioner.

10.  A considerable amount of medical evidence  was  submitted  including  a
    report from a Dr S Dhumad who said that the appellant was  at  moderate
    risk of suicide and that his condition rendered him unfit to fly.

11.  The judge set out a relevant country guidance,  and  in  paragraphs  35
    onwards set out her findings and conclusions.  The judge said  that  he
    had indicated that if he found the appellant  credible  then  he  would
    find that the appellant was entitled to asylum on the basis that he was
    an individual who, as set out in paragraph 7(a) of the headnote  in  GJ
    Sri Lanka CG [2013]UKUT 319 (IAC)  was perceived to be a threat to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they were perceived to
    have a significant role in relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
    within the diaspora and/or renewal of  hostilities  within  Sri  Lanka.
    The judge found that Section  8  was  engaged  although  that  was  not
    determinative of the appeal.  He  took  into  account  the  appellant's
    earlier claim for leave to remain on human rights grounds and  did  not
    accept his explanation for not having claimed asylum earlier which  was
    that he had believed that as an ethnic Sinhalese  he  did  not  realise
    that he could claim asylum.  He said that the appellant's   failure  to
    raise his fears in his  earlier  appeal  was  highly  significant.   He
    pointed out that at the earlier appeal the appellant and his  wife  had
    been represented by  very  experienced  solicitors  and  Counsel.   The
    reality  was  that  the  appellant  had  not  suggested  any  potential
    difficulties he might  face  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  until  he  had
    exhausted his appeal rights under the Immigration Rules.

12.  He stated that there were inconsistencies within the accounts given  by
    the appellant as to the circumstances giving  rise  to  his  fear.   In
    particular there was a discrepancy  between  what  he  had  said  to  a
    community mental health nurse and in his application.  He then referred
    to the information from the police station to whom the redacted copy of
    the police letter had been sent.  He considered that it  was  a  letter
    which would, if accepted, strengthen the appellant's  claim.   However,
    he noted the reasons given by the  officer  in  charge  of  the  police
    station which indicated concerns about the genuineness of the letter.

13.  Having correctly set out the ratio  of  the  determination  in  Tanveer
    Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439  the  judge  noted  that  the   appellant's
    representative had argued that there had  been  increased  activity  in
    relation to the appellant's father-in-law since verification was sought
    although the appellant had not been aware of  such  verification  until
    the morning of the hearing  and that that supported his claim that  the
    letter was both accurate  and  reliable  evidence  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities having an adverse interest in him.  The judge   said  there
    was nothing in that submission to assist the appellant and  noted  that
    the appellant's father would have reported to the police  on  at  least
    three occasions after the verification had been sought but there was no
    nexus between those  events  to  support  the  assertion  made  by  the
    appellant's representative.   He  found  that  the  letter  had  little
    evidential value.  He wrote in paragraph 47:-

         "47. Given the other credibility issues I have already  considered,
             the letter relied on appearing to be significantly  dissimilar
             to  other  letters  of  this  type  by  reason  of  it   being
             handwritten, using terminology which is out  of  the  ordinary
             and  containing  unexpected  spelling  mistakes,  I  find  the
             appellant had failed to prove,  even  to  the  lower  standard
             required, that the contents of this letter are either accurate
             or reliable and as such it has little evidential value."

14.  Having referred to paragraph 339L of the Rules he stated  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the appellant to not only  make  his  application  in  a
    timely fashion but to have made genuine  efforts  to  substantiate  his
    asylum claim.  He stated that he had not sought to provide any evidence
    from his father-in-law in relation to the claimed reporting  conditions
    he is said to be subject to despite having  had  every  opportunity  to
    have done so, referring to recount that themselves.  He  found  he  had
    not made a genuine effort to substantiate his claim.   He  stated  that
    the appellant therefore could not  be  said  to  have  established  his
    general credibility.

15.  He then dealt with the appellant's mental health  concerns  but  placed
    little weight on those when considering  whether  or  not  his  account
    might or might not be accurate.  He therefore dismissed  the  appellant
    on  both  asylum  grounds  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds.   In
    paragraph 10 of the determination she considered the issue of the right
    of the appellant under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  He  considered  the
    psychiatric evidence in some detail and said that the  appellant  would
    have access to mental health facilities in Sri Lanka  bearing  in  mind
    that his home was in Colombo where such facilities  were  most  readily
    available.  He did not find that  he  fell  within  the  ambit  of  the
    guidance in N (Kenya) [2004] UKIAT 00053.  He therefore  dismissed  the
    appeal.

16.  The grounds of appeal asserted that the judge had erred by  relying  on
    purported  inconsistencies  which  did  not  exist,  particularly  that
    between what the appellant was reported as having said to  a  community
    mental health nurse and in his statement.  It is also stated  that  the
    judge had erred in failing to  have  any  regard  to  the  evidence  of
    interest in the appellant's family  following  disclosure  of  the  Sri
    Lankan authority's evidence relied on by the appellant.  It was  argued
    that he had failed to provide reasons for dismissing the appeal.

17.  Mr Lewis relied on the grounds of appeal and argued that the judge  had
    had not placed weight on any discrepancies  in  the  appellant's  claim
    apart from the asserted differences between what the appellant had said
    to the community nurse and at interview.  There were not  the  numerous
    discrepancies to which the judge had  referred  and  that,  in  effect,
    there were no discrepancies as such that the appellant's  claim  should
    have been disbelieved.  Moreover the judge should have placed weight on
    the appellant's evidence that since the  respondent  had  attempted  to
    verify the document on which he relied with the  police  station  which
    had issued the document there had been increasing difficulties for  the
    appellant's father-in-law.  He  stated  there  could  be  a  number  of
    reasons why the document did not entirely fit in with the usual  format
    of such documents.  There  could  easily  be  spelling  mistakes  or  a
    decision not to type the document but to hand write the document.   The
    judge should not have placed such weight  on  that  when  applying  the
    provisions of Tanveer Ahmed.  He put  forward  the  argument  that  the
    evidence postdated either the appellant's first appeal and  indeed  the
    appellant had given a  good  reason  why  he  had  not  claimed  asylum
    earlier.  In any event he emphasised that the  document  had  not  been
    rejected as a forgery.

18.    I pointed out to him that there was nothing in the grounds  to  argue
    that the judge had erred when considering the issue of the  appellant's
    mental health.  Mr Lewis at that stage sought to amend the  grounds  of
    appeal but I told  him that it was too late to attempt to  do  so.   He
    did however state that I should take into account the mental health  of
    the appellant when considering issues of the appellant's credibility.

19.  Mr Bramble asked me to look at the appeal in the round.  The judge  had
    heard evidence from the appellant and had taken that into account  when
    reaching her conclusions.   He stated that he did not have  a  copy  of
    the actual redacted document that  had  been  sent  to  the  police  in
    Nogombo but in any event the judge had dealt properly  with  that  when
    determining the appeal.

20.  I note that the effect of the document being sent  to  the  police  had
    not been raised in the grounds of appeal but it had been raised in  the
    grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  who  had  granted
    appeal in brief terms saying:-

         "Permission to appeal is granted.  It  is  arguable  that,  as  the
         renewed grounds averred at [11]-[14] the First-tier Tribunal  erred
         in  its  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  been  inconsistent.
         Further, and worryingly, the judge appears not to have  appreciated
         the apparent breach of Article 22 of the Procedures Directive - see
         VT (Article 22 Procedures Directive -  confidentiality)  Sri  Lanka
         [2017] UKUT 368 (IAC)."

21.  In reply Mr Lewis stated it was only on the date  of  appeal  that  the
    document verification report had been handed over and it  was  at  that
    stage  that  the  appellant  could  comment  thereon.   Moreover,   the
    appellant's mental health would be affected if he  were  questioned  on
    return.

Discussion

22.  I note the chronology in this case which  was  that  between  2005  and
    2008 the appellant took some medicines the short distance from  Colombo
    to Nogombo for his friend JS.  That created no difficulties for him nor
    indeed did taking a friend of JS to the passport office to  get  a  new
    passport and indeed not even when he arranged to receive money  for  JS
    did he have any difficulties.  He had no difficulty leaving Sri  Lanka.
    He is, of course Sinhalese.  It is therefore  a   potential  matter  of
    surprise that so many years afterwards the  authorities  should  become
    interested in JS and therefore be interested  in  the  appellant.   The
    appellant quite clearly stated that he had not  believed  that  JS  was
    involved with the LTTE in any way.

23.  I consider that the judge was absolutely correct  to  place  weight  on
    the fact that the appellant, in  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    extension of stay as a student on human rights grounds did not  mention
    that he feared returning to Sri  Lanka.   Indeed  so  many  years  have
    passed since he left Sri Lanka that the judge was entitled to take into
    account the delay in claiming asylum.  I would add that the  judge  was
    not only entitled to place weight on the delay and the other Section  8
    issues but was also entitled to consider the document submitted by  the
    appellant within the context of the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed.  He  was
    assisted by the comments of the police officer when an attempt was made
    to verify the document.  These inconsistencies  were  set  out  in  the
    determination  at  paragraph  44.   The  judge  was  well-placed   when
    considering the context on which the document had been  produced,  that
    is many years after the appellant had been in Britain, and the comments
    by the police officer to consider that little weight should  be  placed
    thereon.  I would add the judge was also right to place weight  on  the
    lack of supporting evidence: not only is there no evidence relating  to
    the claimed importance of JS but  there  is  no  evidence  to  indicate
    anything that has happened to him - he was after all a  work  colleague
    of the appellant and the appellant would surely have been able to  find
    out from former work colleagues if anything had happened  to  a  person
    who had  been  their  line  manager.  Indeed,  there  was  no   witness
    statement from his father-in-law.  I consider, in all,  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach the conclusion that the  appellant's  claim  was  not
    credible and therefore to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

24.  It is unfortunate that the redacted document was not before  me  but  I
    would comment that even if it had been there is no evidence  before  me
    to suggest that either that document having been  sent  to  the  police
    station would lead to the appellant being persecuted on return  -  that
    had never been the basis of his claim - nor indeed that  the  appellant
    should be granted asylum because of the respondent's failure to observe
    any  procedural directive. I would again emphasise that  the  issue  of
    the appellant's mental health was not before me.

Notice of Decision

25.  For the above  reasons I find there is no material error of law in  the
    determination of the Immigration Judge and his decision to dismiss this
    appeal on asylum grounds shall stand.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                      Date:  19 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
