
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01665/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th October 2016                           |On 5th October 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                  JABER [H]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Lynch (instructed by A2 Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Herwald) promulgated on 30th June  2016  by  which  he
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision to refuse his protection claim.

   2. The Appellant claimed to be at risk  because  he  is  an  undocumented
      Bidoon from Kuwait.

   3. The Judge, in a detailed and thorough consideration of the Appellant's
      claim made numerous adverse credibility findings.  At paragraph 13 (d)
      he noted that the Appellant had embarked on  a  series  of  misleading
      answers and downright lies, when he was interviewed. He found  him  to
      be wholly without credibility,  having  told  numerous  untruths.  The
      Appellant has a sister who had been recognised  by  the  Secretary  of
      State as an undocumented Bidoon from  Kuwait.   However,  she  neither
      provided  evidence  to  support  the  Appellant  nor  attended  court.
      Furthermore, her case had not been tested and in any event her Kuwaiti
      nationality did not prevent the Appellant from having  acquired  Iraqi
      nationality.

   4. The Judge made a positive finding that the Appellant was  in  fact  of
      Iraqi nationality, in no small part because of his having travelled to
      Iraq, something else which he had earlier denied, and applying at  the
      US embassy there for a visa using an Iraqi passport.

   5. The grant of permission to appeal did not include a grant in  relation
      to the adverse findings with  regard  to  his  being  an  undocumented
      Bidoon; rather was limited to the fact that the Judge's  Decision  and
      Reasons was silent as to whether the Appellant could return in  safety
      to Iraq. The judge granting permission was mistaken.  The Decision and
      Reasons was not silent on that matter. The Judge  noted  at  paragraph
      12(a) of the Decision and Reasons that there was  no  argument  before
      him but that return to Iraq is feasible following the country guidance
      case and updated information on that country.  He went on  to  say  at
      paragraph 17 that the Appellant had not established  any  subjectively
      genuine or objectively well founded fear of persecution by  Iraq,  its
      agents or any other person.

   6. Mr Lynch, on the Appellant's behalf suggested that the  Appellant  was
      given no opportunity before the First-tier Tribunal to deal  with  the
      situation in Iraq. That however was not the case. The Appellant was on
      notice that the issue was his nationality as the  Secretary  of  State
      made clear in the Letter of Refusal.  He knew that  the  Secretary  of
      State asserted him to be an Iraqi national. No issue was raised before
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge of  any  risk  on  return  to  Iraq  and
      therefore it was not an error of law for the Judge to say so.

   7. Mr Lynch then sought to reopen the grounds in relation to the  Judge's
      adverse credibility findings in relation to which permission  had  not
      been granted. However, it is  clear  from  reading  the  Decision  and
      Reasons as a whole that it  is  fully  and  thoroughly  reasoned.  The
      Appellant had been found out telling quite deliberate untruths and the
      fact that he had been fingerprinted by  the  US  authorities  in  Iraq
      seeking a visa was very strong evidence of both his presence there  at
      the time and his possession of an Iraqi passport. I could  discern  no
      arguable                           error                            of

                                         law in his findings in relation  to
      the Appellant's alleged Kuwaiti nationality.

   8. The judge did not make an error of law in his  Decision  and  Reasons,
      material or otherwise and it shall stand.

   9. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

  10. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.




Signed                              Date 4th October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
