
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01255/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 December 2016                  |On 19 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge L M Shand QC) dismissing his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 7 January 2016 refusing him asylum.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  15  May  1996.   He
    arrived in the UK at the end of July 2015.  On his own account his date
    of arrival was 31 July 2015, but it was on 28 July 2015 that his father
    telephoned the Home Office to arrange for him to claim asylum.  In  any
    event, he claimed asylum on 12 August 2015 when his screening interview
    took place and his full asylum interview was on 21 December 2015.

3.   The reasons for the respondent's decision are set out in  the  decision
    letter  dated  7  January  2016.   The  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant was an Afghan national but the rest of his claim that he  had
    been forced to become a suicide bomber but had escaped but  still  came
    under the suspicion of the authorities was rejected  in  its  entirety.
    In the alternative, if the appellant had had problems with the Taliban,
    it was considered that taking his claim at its highest he would be able
    to relocate away from his home area.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  and  his
    father gave oral evidence.  The appellant said  that  he  was  a  Sunni
    Muslim whose family came from Baro Village in Nangarhar Province.  They
    had lived in Kabul originally, but when he was about 5 the  family  had
    moved to Pakistan.  Towards the end  of  2014  they  returned  to  Baro
    Village in Afghanistan as their house in Kabul had been  attacked  when
    the appellant's father fled Afghanistan.  The appellant  said  that  he
    had attended a madrassa with his brother  in  the  village  of  Baticot
    staying there for ten days at a time and returning home for three days.
     A mullah whose name the appellant did not know used  to  come  to  the
    madrassa once a week and lecture on historical events of early Muslims.
     After about three months the appellant told him that  what  was  being
    taught in the madrassa was basic and things he knew already.

5.   The mullah said that he  could  arrange  for  them  to  go  to  another
    madrassa where they would receive higher education.  The following  day
    the appellant, his brother and three others were taken in a  car  to  a
    place about 30 minutes drive away.  They then transferred into a  pick-
    up truck and were driven through rough terrain at night to  a  compound
    where all the men there were armed.  The appellant wanted to see  where
    they were but at the gate he was told that he could  not  go  out,  and
    when asked why not he was hit with the butt of the gun and thrown  back
    inside.

6.   They spent ten days at this place and were told that if  they  assisted
    the Taliban in the fight against the infidels and died  they  would  be
    promised paradise.  After ten days  they  were  taken  to  a  different
    location by night.  They were blindfolded during the journey which took
    several hours by vehicle.  When they  reached  their  destination  they
    were taken to an upstairs room.  They were told  that  in  the  morning
    they would be taken to the city of Jalalabad, given suicide  vests  and
    would have to blow themselves up.

7.   During the night the appellant's brother and others  fell  asleep,  but
    the appellant heard people talking  until  about  2.00  a.m.   When  he
    realised everyone was asleep he woke his brother and the  two  of  them
    jumped out of the window.  They were not  prisoners  and  so  were  not
    being guarded.  They jumped out into the street and ran until dawn  and
    then hid in the woods until it got dark again.  They walked to a nearby
    village. They then walked for three or four hours and arrived home just
    after midnight.  Their mother told them  that  three  bomb  blasts  had
    taken place in Jalalabad the previous day and that the Afghan Army  had
    come to the house and told the appellant's mother  that  the  appellant
    and his brother were involved in the  attacks.   They  had  taken  away
    their two younger brothers on the morning following  the  night  during
    which the appellant and his brother had escaped from the Taliban.  They
    told their mother they had done nothing wrong.

8.   She contacted her uncle who came and collected  them,  taking  them  to
    Shumali where they stayed in his house for nine to ten days.  They were
    then taken to Kandahar, handed over  to  an  agent  and  taken  out  of
    Afghanistan.  After arriving in the UK the appellant  learnt  that  his
    younger brothers had been released on bail after village people assured
    the army that they were not involved in anything and that the appellant
    and his other brother would be handed over if they came home.

9.    When  assessing  credibility  the  judge  reminded  herself   of   the
    difficulties  an  appellant  might   have   in   relating   distressing
    experiences of persecution,  referring  to  the  Tribunal  decision  in
    Chiver [1997] INLR 212 and the guidance in  the  UNHCR  Handbook.   She
    also reminded herself that when the screening interview, age assessment
    and asylum interview were carried out the appellant  was  a  youth  and
    that she should exercise extreme caution before rejecting as incredible
    an account by an anxious and inexperienced asylum seeker whose  reasons
    for seeking asylum may well contain inconsistencies and omissions.

10.  The judge has set out her review of the  evidence  at  [25]-[45].   She
    summarised her findings in [45] as follows:

         "45. I regard the contradictions which I  have  identified  in  the
             appellant's  evidence  and  the  implausible  aspects  of  his
             evidence referred to  above  as  strong  indicators  that  his
             account is fabricated.  Looking at all  the  evidence  in  the
             round, including the country  guidance  evidence  referred  to
             herein and the further country  guidance  referred  to  in  Mr
             Sills' [Counsel for the appellant at the First-tier  Tribunal]
             Skeleton Argument and submissions, I  am  reinforced  in  that
             view.  Considering all the evidence in the round the appellant
             has failed to satisfy me, to the low standard required of him,
             that his account of events in Afghanistan which he alleges led
             to  him  seeking  refuge  elsewhere  is  true.   In  all   the
             circumstances the appellant has failed to  establish,  to  the
             low standard required, that he has a well founded belief  that
             if he were to return to Afghanistan he would be at  risk  from
             the army or the Taliban."

Assessment of whether there is an Error of Law

11.  In the grounds it is  argued  that  the  judge's  decision  is  legally
    flawed on account of inadequate reasoning and failing to take  material
    matters into account.  The grounds then set out a number of  challenges
    to the judge's findings which I will deal with in turn.

12.  It is argued that at [26] the judge said that the appellant  had  given
    inconsistent evidence about whether he was  recruited  by  the  Taliban
    against his will  and  that  there  is  an  inconsistency  between  his
    statement  that  the  Taliban  considered  the  group  to  be   willing
    participants and the fact that the group were frightened  about  acting
    as suicide bombers.  It is argued that there is no consistency and that
    having fear about  doing  something  is  not  inconsistent  with  being
    willing to do something.  Ms Sanders submitted that the  appellant  and
    his brother had been taken from a madrassa and the fact that they  felt
    fear would not affect what the Taliban might think about the situation.
     Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the point the judge was making  in
    [26] was the contrast in the witness statement between the  appellant's
    assertion that according to the Taliban they were willing participants,
    that he believed the others were willing to martyr  themselves  but  he
    and his brother were not.   Yet  in  the  same  witness  statement  the
    appellant said that when they were told that night they would  have  to
    blow themselves up the group was frightened.

13.  I am not satisfied there is any contradiction in [26]  undermining  the
    judge's findings.  The point the judge was making,  which  was  one  of
    many, was that the appellant had given no explanation why  if  he  knew
    the group of five were frightened on receiving the news that they  were
    expected to blow themselves  up,  he  believed  that  the  others  were
    willing to be martyrs.  That was a point the judge was entitled to make
    on the evidence before her.

14.  The next ground relates to [28] and [29], dealing with the  appellant's
    escape from the house.  The grounds argue that the judge was  wrong  to
    say that it was not credible that the Taliban  would  leave  the  group
    unguarded.  The appellant's account was not that he  left  through  the
    door but jumped out of a first floor window.  Hence the appellant could
    not know if there were guards outside the door of the room  where  they
    slept or elsewhere in the building.  Ms Sanders further argued that any
    knowledge about where the guards were sleeping was something beyond the
    appellant's knowledge.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that  the  judge
    had been entirely alive to the evidence which was summarised  in  [19].
    The judge's comment that no credible  explanation  was  given  why  the
    Taliban would take such measures to hide the location of the house when
    the youths had been taken there blindfolded but  then  not  guard  them
    when they were there was a comment properly open to her.

15.  In my view this ground is simply seeking to re-argue  issues  of  fact.
    It was for the judge to decide what inferences could properly be  drawn
    from the evidence and her comments are ones which could  reasonably  be
    made about the appellant's account.

16.  The grounds then refer to [30] and argue that the judge  misrepresented
    the evidence, which was not that the group of  suicide  bombers  talked
    until 2.00 a.m. and then all bar the appellant fell asleep, but as  set
    out at [19] the group had fallen asleep and the appellant  heard  other
    people talking until 2.00 a.m. and at that point realised that everyone
    was asleep.  Ms Sanders submitted  that  this  inconsistency  indicated
    that the judge was making an assessment on a  misunderstanding  of  the
    evidence  whereas Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the substance  of
    what the judge was saying at [30] was that it was not credible in  such
    circumstances of having learned earlier that they were  to  be  suicide
    bombers that the appellant's brother would simply fall asleep with  the
    others having learned he was to die the following day or that there was
    no crying or external expression of fear by his brother or anyone else.
      I  am  satisfied  that  even  if  the  judge  did  misunderstand  the
    appellant's evidence about whether others outside  the  room  or  those
    within the room were talking until 2.00 a.m., that has  no  bearing  on
    the substance of  the  judge's  comment  about  the  apparent  lack  of
    reaction to being told only a short time previously that they  were  to
    be suicide bombers.

17.  The grounds argue that at [32] there was no  credible  explanation  why
    the army would wish to look for the appellant and his brother after the
    attack, whereas the most obvious  explanation  is  that  the  army  had
    intelligence about their involvement in the  attack,  and  that,  given
    that  involvement,  it  was  unsurprising  the  authorities  would   be
    interested in them.  Ms Sanders submitted that the judge's reasoning on
    this issue was not particularly clear and that the  attack  could  have
    involved the others who had been taken.  She submitted that  the  judge
    had been wrong to focus on something that would not  have  been  within
    the appellant's  knowledge.   Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  submitted,  and  I
    agree,  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  may  not  know  why  the
    authorities had come to look for him and his brother did not mean  that
    it was not open to the judge to make findings on that evidence.

18.  In [32] the judge  analysed  the  evidence  about  the  escape  of  the
    appellant and his brother.  She said that no credible  explanation  was
    offered for how the army would have known where to look for them or why
    they would have any interest in them given that they had  committed  no
    crime or terrorist act.  It was the appellant's case that the army came
    in the morning following the night when  he  and  his  brother  escaped
    after the suicide attacks had taken place in Jalalabad.  The judge  was
    entitled to comment that it was inherently incredible that if he had no
    prior affiliation with the Taliban before being  taken  away  that  the
    army would have come to his mother's house  immediately  after  suicide
    attacks took place in Jalalabad.  At interview the appellant said  that
    he could give no explanation for this and had speculated that  probably
    someone had given false information or the army was suspicious, but  as
    the judge commented that that begged the question of why the army would
    be suspicious.

19.  The grounds argue  that  at  [33]  the  judge  said  that  it  was  not
    plausible that the appellant would not know what had happened to  other
    members of the group, but she failed to appreciate the difficulties the
    appellant  would  face  in  obtaining   this   information   and   that
    establishing whether the individuals involved acted as suicide  bombers
    or remained with the Taliban would clearly be very difficult  for  him.
    Ms Sanders submitted that the fact that the appellant did not know what
    had happened to them was not at all implausible as  there  may  be  all
    sorts of reasons why. The judge considered  this  issue  at  length  in
    [33], making the point that if there was  any  chance  that  the  three
    youths were taken with the Taliban along with  the  appellant  and  his
    brother were not the people used in the suicide bombings in  Jalalabad,
    it would have been of the  upmost  importance  to  find  out  what  had
    happened to them so that they could vouch  for  the  innocence  of  the
    appellant and his brother, particularly as they had attended  the  same
    madrassa, and it would seem on the face of it that it would  have  been
    possible to make enquiries of  their  whereabouts.  This  ground  again
    simply seeks to reopen issues of fact where the judge has made comments
    properly open to her.

20.  The ground dealing with (34) concerns a comment made  by  the  judge  g
    that Sharia law is applied in Afghanistan without giving any  authority
    for this statement.  Ms Sanders submitted  that  it  was  unclear  what
    point the judge was seeking to make about this, whereas Ms  Brocklesby-
    Weller said that the comment had to be looked at in the context of  the
    paragraph as a whole. The judge was dealing with a document  relied  on
    by the appellant, purportedly from a court issued in Nangahar  Province
    stating that the  arrest  of  the  two  younger  brothers  was  not  in
    accordance with Sharia law.  The  judge  was  considering  whether  the
    document was reliable and commented that on the appellant's account the
    reason why his two younger brothers were released was not  because  the
    court held their detention to be unlawful, but  because  villagers  had
    vouched they were not involved in the shootings.  The judge  considered
    the implications of the appellant's evidence that his brothers had been
    taken in for questioning, not only in [34] but also  in  [35]-[36]  and
    gave further sustainable reasons in [37] why she did not find the court
    document to be reliable.

21.  It is then argued that at [39] the judge said the  appellant  had  been
    inconsistent about whether the Taliban had been to his house  and  that
    nowhere does the judge record the appellant as stating that the Taliban
    had not been  to  his  house  and  therefore  failed  to  identify  the
    inconsistency in the evidence.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the
    paragraph had to be considered in the light of the  complexity  of  the
    appellant's narrative which had included evidence that the  appellant's
    mother had moved to Shumali and was  in  hiding  there  from  both  the
    Taliban and  the  police  [36].   In  [39]  the  judge  considered  the
    appellant's evidence about the Taliban coming to his house in the light
    of his evidence in cross-examination that this had happened.  The judge
    then considered whether the house referred to was  the  house  in  Baro
    where he had never said that the Taliban had come looking for him or to
    the house in Shumali, but the appellant had said that  his  mother  had
    had no problems with the army or Taliban there.   I  am  not  satisfied
    that this ground raises any arguable challenge  based  on  law  to  the
    judge's analysis of the evidence.

22.  The grounds argue that at  [41]  the  judge  said  that  there  was  no
    plausible explanation why  the  Taliban  would  be  interested  in  the
    appellant and that she misconstrued the country evidence on this  point
    and in particular the UNHCR Guidelines cited which state  that  persons
    who resist recruitment and their family members are reportedly at  risk
    of being killed or punished and  that  this  risk  is  not  limited  to
    children or areas under the effective control of the Taliban.  I am not
    satisfied there is any substance in this ground. The  judge  considered
    the extracts from the UNHCR Guidelines produced at  the  hearing.   She
    noted that it was emphasised that whether there was a  risk  of  forced
    recruitment  in  any  given  case  would  depend  on   the   particular
    circumstances of the case.  She also took into account the  information
    in the COI Report "Afghanistan: Taliban Strategies -  Recruitment  July
    2012" which noted that the recruitment of  children  was  generally  by
    methods of training and indoctrination of young adults between  12  and
    17 as in general children were  not  recruited  by  force.   I  am  not
    satisfied  that  the  judge  either  misconstrued  or  disregarded  the
    background evidence.

23.   Finally,  the  grounds  argue  that  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of
    protection  and  internal  relocation  the   judge's   assessment   was
    predicated on adverse credibility findings and that she failed to  have
    regard to evidence submitted  to  show  the  state  could  not  provide
    protection against the Taliban  and  erred  when  considering  internal
    relocation  by  confining  consideration  to  the   reasonableness   of
    relocation.

24.  These grounds presuppose that the appellant would be at  real  risk  on
    return to Afghanistan but the judge for reasons properly  open  to  her
    found that this was not the case. In any event, I am not satisfied that
    there is any substance in the challenge to the judge's findings in  the
    alternative.  She was entitled to comment that it was  the  appellant's
    evidence that his mother and siblings lived  in  Shumali  which  was  a
    journey of seven to eight hours by  car  from  Baro  and  that  in  his
    evidence he had said that his mother had not suffered any  difficulties
    there from the army or the Taliban.

25.  The judge was entitled to find for the reasons she has set out in  [47]
    that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  relocate  without  it  being
    unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to do so.  Finally, she considered
    the issue of whether there was a risk of harm from generalised violence
    under article 15(c), but for the reasons which she gave in [48] she was
    not satisfied this was the case.

26.  In summary, the grounds do not satisfy me that the judge erred  in  law
    in her assessment of the evidence.  In substance, they are  an  attempt
    to reopen and reargue issues of fact.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    criticisms of her analysis of the evidence have been made out  for  the
    reasons I have given.  When the decision is  read  as  a  whole,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge analysed the evidence  carefully  and  reached
    findings and conclusions properly open to her.



Decision

27.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  the  decision  stands.
    The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains in force.


Signed   H J E Latter  Date: 16 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

