
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01824/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2019                           |On 22 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     hnl
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bennie, counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cohen, promulgated on 19 August 2019. Permission to appeal was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith on 14 October 2019

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 28 June 2016 with  leave
    to enter as a Tier 4 migrant valid until 15 April 2018. She returned to
    Vietnam on 20 January 2017, returning on 2 February 2017. On  26  March
    2018 the appellant applied for asylum.

 4. The appellant's asylum claim was based on belonging  to  a  politically
    active family, her father being a member of the  Viet  Tan  party.  She
    stated that she was detained for two days in Vietnam when she  returned
    there in January 2017, after visiting her father who had been  arrested
    at a demonstration. The appellant left Vietnam  after  she  was  served
    with a summons to appear before  the  authorities.  Shortly  after  her
    departure from Hai Phong, individuals came looking  for  the  appellant
    and assaulted her mother and  brother-in-law.  On  20  June  2018,  the
    appellant gave birth to a son 'L,' in the United Kingdom.

 5. By way of a letter dated 12  February  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant's asylum claim. In general, the respondent  found
    that the credibility of  her  claim  was  undermined  in  a  number  of
    respects. Consequently, it was not accepted that she was at risk of ill-
    treatment on return to Vietnam. Nor was it accepted that she  would  be
    at risk on account of being a single mother. Neither the appellant  nor
    her son met the requirements of the Rules relating to  Article  8.  The
    Secretary of State did not accept that the medical issues affecting  L,
    because he was born  with  a  brain  tumour,  amounted  to  exceptional
    circumstances nor that the high threshold in Article  3  medical  cases
    had been reached.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The First-tier Tribunal judge noted that the only treatment received by
    L were quarterly scans which he could have in Vietnam. He also rejected
    the expert opinion as to the existence of social  stigma  against  lone
    mothers. The remainder of  the  appellant's  account  was  rejected  on
    credibility grounds.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal argued  that  the  Tribunal  made  the  following
    errors;

    a. Making material mistakes of fact

    b. Failing to take matters included in the expert report into account

    c. Unlawfully dismissing evidence as being uncorroborated

    d. Drawing conclusions of inherent incredibility

    e. Failure to take into account or resolve conflicts

    f.  Wednesbury irrational reasoning

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought

 9. The respondent filed no Rule 24 response.







The hearing and Decision on error of law

10. Mr Whitwell helpfully indicated that he did not oppose the first ground
    which concerned the mistakes of fact in the First-tier Tribunal judge's
    decision and reasons.

11. The mistakes of fact included that the  judge  was  mistaken  regarding
    several features of the  appellant's  return  to  Vietnam  as  well  as
    wrongly  believing  a  medical  report  regarding   injuries   to   the
    appellant's brother and mother, concerned the  appellant,  consequently
    making adverse credibility findings.

12. As I agreed with Mr Whitwell's submission, there was no  need  to  hear
    from Mr Bennie.  The judge's decision  was  rendered  unsafe  by  these
    errors. The decision is set aside in its entirety for remaking  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal as the appellant has yet to have a fair hearing  of
    her appeal.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of one day by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Cohen.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 21 November 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


