
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01403/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 September 2019                           |On 22 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     EJ
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. By a decision promulgated on 6 August 2019, the President of the  Upper
    Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber), Mr Justice Lane, found  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was flawed by legal  error  and
    set it aside. On 9 September 2019, I conducted the resumed  hearing  in
    the appeal Bradford.

 2. The reasons for refusing the appellant's application for asylum are set
    out in the  respondent's  letter  dated  17  January  2019.  Respondent
    accepted that the appellant is  an  Iranian  citizen  and  is  also  of
    Kurdish ethnicity. However, the respondent not accept  the  appellant's
    claim that he was at risk from the authorities in Iran due to his  pro-
    Kurdish  activities.  The  respondent  accepted  that   the   appellant
    demonstrated knowledge of the aims and values of the Kurdish Democratic
    Party of Iran (KDPI).  However,  the  respondent  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claim to have been active with  the  KDPI  in  distributing
    leaflets nor did he accept the appellant's claim that  in  August  2015
    the appellant's colleague, Bilar, had been attacked by unknown  persons
    and abducted. The appellant claimed  that  his  home  had  been  raided
    following the abduction of his friend and the KDPI leaflets  have  been
    removed from his room. The appellant fled Iran  and  claims  that  this
    family in Iran had been harassed by the authorities subsequently.

 3. The burden of proof is on the appellant. The appellant must prove  that
    there are substantial grounds for believing that he will  face  a  real
    risk of persecution or  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 ECHR if he is returned to Iran.

 4. I heard evidence from the appellant who spoke in  Kurdish  Sorani  with
    the assistance of an interpreter. He was cross-examined by Mr  Diwnycz,
    who appeared for the Secretary of State, only in  respect  of  his  sur
    place activities with the KDPI in the  United  Kingdom.  The  appellant
    claimed that he had attended demonstrations against the Iranian  regime
    in London and Manchester, most recently in July and April 2019. He  had
    produced photographs which appeared to show his attendance at a  number
    of  meetings.  He  was  cross-examined  by  Mr  Diwnycz  regarding  the
    whereabouts of the Iranian and Austrian Embassies in  London.  However,
    in his submissions, Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that no credibility  issues
    arose from the answers given by the appellant.

 5. I also heard evidence from  Mr  Kadir  Ibrahim  Tarbiat.  He  spoke  in
    Kurdish Sorani  and  gave  his  evidence  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter. Mr Tarbiat was granted asylum in the United Kingdom  after
    his arrival in 2007 and claims to be a senior member  of  the  KDPI  in
    this country, a  claim  which  was  not  challenged  at  all  in  cross
    examination. He stated that he had met the appellant at  a  meeting  in
    Manchester in January 2018 and that he had  seen  the  appellant  at  a
    number of KDPI meetings subsequently, most recently  in  Manchester  in
    August 2019. He stated that, to  his  knowledge,  the  appellant  is  a
    committed supporter of the KDPI who also operates  a  Facebook  account
    which exhibits postings hostile to the Iranian government.

 6. In his submissions, Mr Diwnycz stated only that the crux of this appeal
    rested upon the appellant's Facebook account. He submitted  that  there
    was no evidence that the account had been or would be accessed  by  the
    Iranian authorities and that the appellant might, in any event,  delete
    the account to avoid detection.

 7. Mr Holmes, who appeared for the appellant, submitted that criticisms of
    the appellant's account contained in the refusal letter were of  little
    merit. Those criticisms consisted of a series of suggestions as to  how
    various events detailed in the appellant's account might have  happened
    differently. Mr Holmes submitted that such a analysis failed to produce
    any valid reason for doubting the appellant's account by  reference  to
    the relevant standard of proof; the fact that events may  have  evolved
    in more than one way did not in itself show that  the  appellant's  own
    account was untrue. Secondly, Mr Holmes submitted that there  had  been
    no challenge in cross examination to the genuineness of the appellant's
    political beliefs and, in particular, his adherence to the cause of the
    KDPI. Notwithstanding what  may  appear  on  the  appellant's  Facebook
    account by the time he reaches Iran, the likely 'hair trigger' response
    of the Iranian authorities charged with interrogating a  failed  asylum
    seeker from  the  United  Kingdom  who  is  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  was
    reasonably likely to lead to the appellant being asked questions  about
    both his political  beliefs  and  political  activities  whilst  living
    abroad. Since the appellant's  commitment  to  the  Kurdish  cause  was
    genuine, he could not be expected to lie in order to avoid  persecution
    (see HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31).

 8. I have considered the evidence both oral and written very carefully.  I
    agree with Mr Holmes that there was no inconsistency  whatever  in  the
    oral evidence given  by  the  appellant;  that  evidence  was  entirely
    consistent with his previous written evidence and with the written  and
    oral evidence of the witness. In particular, I note that  no  challenge
    was made either to the credibility of the appellant's account  of  past
    events or that of the witness; Mr Diwnycz confined his challenge to the
    appellant's appeal to the Facebook  account  which  he  submitted  will
    either not come to the attention of the authorities or could be deleted
    before the appellant entered Iran. I find that I agree with  Mr  Holmes
    that the challenge to the  appellant's  credibility  contained  in  the
    refusal letter is without merit for the reason which  he  has  advanced
    whilst I find, moreover, that the appellant is a genuine  supporter  of
    the KDPI and has been such both in Iran and in his sur place activities
    here in the United Kingdom.  I  find  it  reasonably  likely  that  the
    account which he has given of the  abduction  of  his  friend  and  the
    aftermath  of  that  abduction  is  accurate.  Having  regard  to   the
    background material and country guidance, I find it  reasonably  likely
    that the appellant will be questioned on  arrival  in  Iran  about  his
    political beliefs and activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Because  I
    consider that he is a genuine supporter of Kurdish separatism,  I  find
    that he will reveal the truth about his opinions to  his  interrogators
    and, as a consequence, you will be exposed to the real  risk  of  harm.
    Accordingly, his asylum and Article 3 ECHR appeals are allowed.







    Notice of Decision

    I have remade the decision. The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum
    and human rights (Article 3 ECHR) grounds.



Signed                              Date 30 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





































