
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01928/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 November 2019                           |On 22 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     M Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, Counsel, instructed by David Benson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R Hussain ("the judge"), promulgated on 30 August  2019,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 21 January 2018, refusing his protection and  human  rights
    claims.  These claims were "fresh claims" pursuant to paragraph 353  of
    the Immigration Rules: the Appellant had previously had an unsuccessful
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal in 2013  (AA/03322/2013  -  Judge
    Courtney).

 2. The Appellant's claim now is broadly speaking what it  was  previously.
    He asserted that he had been  suspected  of  assisting  the  LTTE,  the
    result of which he had been detained and tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities before being released upon payment of a bribe.  He then had
    been able to leave the country and come to the United Kingdom.

 3. Subsequent to the unsuccessful appeal in 2013, the Appellant  had  been
    informed that there was an arrest warrant against  him  in  Sri  Lanka.
    Documents supporting this assertion were obtained through a Sri  Lankan
    lawyer.  These, together with detailed representations  were  then  put
    forward to the Respondent.  Having  considered  the  new  material  the
    Respondent accepted that there was a fresh claim giving rise to a right
    of appeal.



The judge's decision

 4. Under the sub-heading "Findings", the judge makes reference to the well-
    known case of Devaseelan  *  [2002]  UKIAT  00282  and  the  principles
    governing  subsequent  appeals  involving  the  same  individual.   The
    previous findings of the First-tier Tribunal  were  deemed  to  be  the
    starting point  for  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence.   New
    documentary evidence relied upon, namely  court  documents,  an  arrest
    warrant, a letter from the Sri Lankan lawyer in question,  and  medical
    reports, are all referred to.

 5. At  paragraph  18  the  judge  deals  with  the  report  of  Consultant
    Psychiatrist Dr Balasubramaniam, dated 13  October  2018.   He  made  a
    diagnosis of PTSD with a recommendation of  additional  treatment.   It
    was said that a negative outcome in respect  of  the  protection  claim
    would be likely to  worsen  the  prognosis  than  increase  a  risk  of
    suicide.  The judge then finds as follows:

         "However, I do not accept the opinion that  the  Appellant  suffers
         from PTSD or is at increased risk of suicide if he is  returned  to
         Sri Lanka.  This is  because  the  report  relies  heavily  on  the
         account given by the Appellant himself and  fails  to  address  the
         many inconsistencies in the Appellant's account, either as found by
         IJ Courtney or by this Tribunal.  Furthermore, the report  suggests
         that the Appellant should begin a course  of  anti-depressants  and
         Psychological treatment, however the Appellant  confirmed  that  to
         date no treatment was in place or had been pursued."

 6. The judge then turns to the issue of the  court  documents  and  arrest
    warrant.  In paragraph 19 he concludes that it was not credible that  a
    lawyer would have gone to the trouble to pay a fee to retrieve relevant
    documents unless he had been specifically instructed and authorised  to
    do so by the Appellant.  As the Appellant's evidence was  that  it  was
    the father that had had dealings with the lawyer and not  himself  (due
    to language barriers) and that the lawyer's letter did not make mention
    of this and nor was there evidence from the father himself,  the  judge
    found against the credibility the Appellant and in turn the reliability
    of the documents.

 7. In the next paragraph the judge finds that  an  additional  reason  for
    undermining the reliability of the documents was the evidence  relating
    to their provenance.  It is said that the Appellant's evidence was that
    his United Kingdom-based solicitor had requested the documents from the
    lawyer, although an e-mail from those  solicitors  suggested  that  the
    Appellant had already received the documents from that  lawyer.   There
    was, therefore, an inconsistency in the evidence.

 8. The judge goes on to deal with the evidence of an individual called  Mr
    F (said to be the Appellant's brother-in-law).  The  judge  found  that
    the Appellant was not  linked  to  Mr  F  as  claimed,  and  that  this
    individual's circumstances had no material bearing on  the  Appellant's
    case.

 9. At paragraph 24 the judge purports to make an  alternative  finding  by
    stating:

         "Even if I was to accept that the Appellant  was  perceived  as  an
         LTTE member as claimed I find that Appellant does not  come  within
         the profile of individuals whom the Sri Lankan authorities have  an
         on-going interest in (GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri
         Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)."

10. The protection claim is dismissed on all grounds and it  was  concluded
    that there was nothing in the Article 8 claim.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

11. The somewhat lengthy grounds of appeal  were  drafted  by  Counsel  who
    appeared at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  (not  Mr  Georget).   In
    essence it is said that:

          i) The judge erred in his assessment of the medical evidence;

         ii) This error  was  relevant  to  the  Appellant's  history,  his
             ability to recall events in a consistent manner and  also  the
             reliability of the court documents and arrest warrant.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on 10 October 2019.



The hearing

13. At the hearing before me, Mr Georget relied on the grounds.  In seeking
    to refine them somewhat, he submitted that the judge's error as regards
    the report of Dr Balasubramaniam went  to  the  overall  issue  of  the
    Appellant's credibility.  This in turn had an  impact  on  the  judge's
    assessment of what the Appellant had said about, amongst other matters,
    the procurement of the court documents and arrest warrant.

14. Ms  Bassi  submitted  that  the  reasons  provided  for  rejecting  the
    diagnosis of PTSD  were  adequate.   She  further  submitted  that  the
    reasons set out in paragraphs 19 and 20 for rejecting  the  reliability
    of the relevant documents were also sufficient.  The  PTSD  issue  was,
    she submitted, irrelevant  to  the  reliability  of  the  documents  in
    question.

15. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Error of law decision

16. Having considered this matter with care, I conclude that the judge  has
    materially erred in law.  I say this for the following reasons.

17. Having recognised Dr Balasubramaniam's  expertise  (and  therefore  his
    ability to assess the Appellant  for  mental  health  conditions),  the
    judge was bound to provide sufficiently good reasons  for  rejecting  a
    core conclusion reached by the expert.  Paragraph  18  of  the  judge's
    decision contains the three reasons offered.

18. The first of these is that the report relied  heavily  on  the  account
    given by the Appellant. In and of itself, this is  inadequate.   It  is
    the case that to an extent any mental health assessment must  be  based
    upon a history given by the  subject.   However,  as  is  clear  in  Dr
    Balasubramaniam's  report,  he  had  in  addition  to  considering  the
    Appellant's own account,  applied  his  professional  judgment  to  the
    Appellant's circumstances as a whole, including  presentation  and  the
    answers given to  specific  (and  clinically  relevant)  questions  put
    during the assessment interview.  In addition, whilst the  judge  fails
    to state this in terms (I have some concerns as to whether it  actually
    factored as a relevant issue at  this  stage),  the  Appellant  had  of
    course been believed in respect of a detention and torture by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities in March 2012 (see paragraph 40 of Judge  Courtney's
    decision).

19. The second reason is the apparent  failure  by  Dr  Balasubramaniam  to
    address the  "many  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  account"  in
    relation to Judge Courtney's decision or, as I read paragraph  18,  the
    judge's current decision.  This reason is also flawed.  It is  not  the
    role of an expert to "address"  inconsistencies  in  terms  of  factual
    findings made by a Tribunal, at least not  as  a  form  of  commentary.
    This would be stepping into forbidden territory, as  it  were.   If  Dr
    Balasubramaniam had sought to follow that path he may  well  have  been
    open to the criticism that he was trespassing upon the Tribunal's fact-
    finding role.  Further, on one reading of the second reason  the  judge
    appears to be criticising Dr Balasubramaniam for not  having  addressed
    inconsistencies found by the judge himself.  If that were the case,  it
    would of course be impossible for the author  to  have  pre-empted  any
    adverse credibility issues deemed by the judge to exist.   There  is  a
    further point here, which is that whilst the "many inconsistencies" are
    stated to have existed, there is no actual identification of what these
    were.  Finally, Dr Balasubramaniam's report does  in  fact  contain  an
    opinion that the Appellant's poor concentration, deemed to be a symptom
    of the PTSD, may  result  in  him  being  unable  to  provide  a  clear
    recollection of events.   This  conclusion  would  have  been  directly
    relevant to the issue of the "many inconsistencies" said  to  exist  in
    the Appellant's account.

20. The third reason is the lack of additional treatment undertaken by  the
    Appellant following the report.  It is the case that there has been  no
    such treatment and this final reason would on the face of it be  sound,
    but for the flawed nature of its associates.

21. I therefore conclude that  the  judge  has  erred  in  respect  of  his
    rejection of a court aspect of the medical evidence.

22. The next issue is whether this error is  material  to  the  Appellant's
    case as a whole.  It would be very unlikely to be material  in  respect
    of any Article 3 and/or Article 8 claim.  It would not be  material  to
    the issue of whether the Appellant had ever been detained  or  tortured
    in the past, as  these  events  had  already  been  accepted  by  Judge
    Courtney.  However, and with a degree of hesitation,  I  conclude  that
    there is sufficient merit in Mr  Georget's  submission  that  the  PTSD
    issue did go to the Appellant's  overall  credibility,  which  in  turn
    created a Nexus with the assessment of the evidence going to the  issue
    of the court documents.

23. The reliability of the court documents, and in  particular  the  arrest
    warrant, was of central importance to the Appellant's  claim.   Without
    them, it would clearly have been very difficult indeed to  establish  a
    significantly adverse profile to  bring  him  within  a  relevant  risk
    category.  At paragraph 19 the judge  did  not  believe  that  the  Sri
    Lankan lawyer would have taken the step  of  retrieving  the  documents
    unless he had been specifically instructed and  authorised  to  do  so.
    This adverse finding was  underpinned  by  the  lack  of  corroborative
    evidence.  Corroborative evidence is never of course a  requirement  in
    protection claims.  Whilst the absence of potentially readily available
    evidence can be a relevant factor, in this case the  flawed  assessment
    of the medical evidence and  its  effect  on  the  Appellant's  overall
    credibility does provide a causal link to the judge's consideration  of
    the Appellant's evidence on the obtaining of the court documents, as  I
    have already found.  In addition, the letter from the lawyer  dated  23
    May 2014 clearly states that those  documents  had  been  sent  to  the
    Appellant directly.  Whilst the letter does not state in terms that the
    lawyer had been in contact with the Appellant's father, the  fact  that
    the documents had been sent to the Appellant himself provides a  fairly
    clear evidential platform that the lawyer had acted on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant: why else would he have sent the documents  directly  to  the
    Appellant?

24. The further reason given by the judge for finding  that  the  documents
    were not reliable is the manner in which they were  obtained  from  Sri
    Lanka.  Having looked at the judge's Record of Proceedings with care, I
    note that the Appellant had been questioned  about  who  had  requested
    certain documents at certain times.  As I read the record,  it  appears
    as though  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  his  United  Kingdom-based
    solicitors had requested documents from the Sri Lankan lawyer  in  fact
    referred to a  request  made  by  them  for  additional  identification
    documents from the lawyer, namely his Bar membership certificate.   The
    questions did not relate to any request by the solicitors for the court
    documents themselves.  Indeed, the e-mail from the solicitors  at  page
    18 of the bundle, dated 6 May 2014, confirms that the  court  documents
    had previously been sent to the Appellant and that  the  request  being
    made was for identification documents only.  The upshot of this is that
    I am satisfied  that  the  judge  has  misunderstood  the  evidence  or
    potentially confused one aspect of  it  for  another  when  giving  his
    reasons in paragraph 20 of his decision.

25.  Therefore,  the  judge's  overall  assessment  of  the  crucial  court
    documents is unsustainable.

26. The errors  are  not  rendered  immaterial  by  the  judge's  purported
    alternative conclusion on  the  Appellant's  case.   What  is  said  in
    paragraph 24 does not take into account  the  existence  of  an  arrest
    warrant against the Appellant.  It is not therefore a  true  reflection
    of the Appellant's case "at its highest".

27. For the reasons set out above, the judge's decision must be set aside.



Disposal

28. Having found there to be material errors, I have gone  on  to  consider
    the issue of disposal.  In the ordinary course of  events  this  matter
    would be retained in the Upper Tribunal for the decision to be  remade.
    However, this is a case which involves  a  number  of  factual  issues,
    including not least the question of the court documents.  The extent of
    the fact-finding required leads me to the conclusion that  this  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  afresh.   In
    saying that, the Devaseelan  principles  continue  to  apply  to  Judge
    Courtney's 2013 decision.  They are a starting point,  but  a  starting
    point only.

29. I would add a further point. The judge's findings in respect  of  Mr  F
    have not been specifically challenged.  There is an argument  that  the
    findings set out in paragraphs 22 and 23 should be preserved.  However,
    in  remitting  this  appeal  there  is  a  real  danger   of   creating
    difficulties for the judge who will be hearing  this  appeal  again  if
    specific findings are preserved.  In all  the  circumstances,  no  such
    findings are preserved.






Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision involves a material error of  law  and  I
set it aside.

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

 1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  afresh,
    with no findings from Judge Hussain's decision preserved;


 2) The remitted hearing shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  R
    Hussain;


 3) The time estimate for the remitted hearing shall be 3 hours;


 4) A Tamil interpreter will be required for the remitted hearing.




Signed   [pic]         Date: 19 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



