
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA019792015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23rd May 2017                      |On  7th June 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     r s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood of Counsel instructed by UK & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Freer of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 15th November 2016.

 2. The Appellant claims to be an Iranian citizen of Kurdish ethnicity born
    in September 1997.

 3. He entered the United Kingdom illegally, hidden  in  a  lorry  on  15th
    April 2016 and claimed asylum.  The basis of  his  claim  is  that  his
    father had been arrested in Iran on suspicion of helping the  YPG  (the
    People's Protection Unit) which is a  Kurdish  group  fighting  against
    Islamic State in Syria and Iraq.  The Appellant claims that his  father
    was arrested and taken away and never seen  again.   Approximately  two
    years later the Appellant was arrested, detained, ill-treated and asked
    questions about his father in the YPG.   He  was  then  released  after
    money was paid by his mother.  He then left Iran with the assistance of
    an agent.

 4. The Appellant's application for asylum was refused on 8th October 2015.
     His appeal was heard on 4th November 2016.

 5. The FtT did not find him credible.  It was  not  accepted  that  he  is
    Iranian, and it was not accepted that his father had been detained  due
    to YPG support, nor  was  it  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    detained and questioned.   The  FtT  did  not  find  that  the  Iranian
    Government had any reason to have any adverse interest in the YPG,  and
    found that the Appellant was an economic migrant and would  not  be  at
    risk if removed from the United Kingdom.

 6. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch and I set out the  grant  of  permission  in
    part;

         There was objective evidence to show that the YPG  was  the  Syrian
         Kurdish People's Protection Unit and that Iranian Kurds had  joined
         its forces in opposing the Syrian Government.  It also  made  clear
         that the Iranian Hezbollah are fighting for the Syrian  Government.
         This showed that there was motivation for the  Iranian  authorities
         to ask about support  for  the  YPG.   The  failure  to  take  this
         objective evidence into account undermines the First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's findings as  to  the  Appellant's  nationality  or  overall
         credibility.

         The standard of proof applied by the First-tier Judge was in excess
         of the applicable lower standard of proof and he did  not  have  to
         provide independent proof of past harm or a risk of future harm.

         As a consequence, I am satisfied  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Freer's decision and reasons did contain arguable errors of law and
         that it is appropriate to grant the Appellant permission to appeal.

 7. Following the grant of permission to appeal  the  Respondent  lodged  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 contending that the FtT did not materially err in law.   The
    Respondent contended that the FtT considered  the  background  evidence
    which unequivocally reveals that the YPG operate  in  Syria.   The  FtT
    considered the Appellant's lack of basic knowledge with respect to Iran
    and was entitled to conclude that he is not Iranian.

 8. The FtT decision did not end there, and the FtT went on to consider the
    case at its highest and made  negative  credibility  findings  and  was
    entitled to conclude that the Iranian authorities would have no adverse
    interest in the Appellant.

 9. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Submissions

10. Mr Mahmood relied upon the grant of permission to appeal and  submitted
    that the FtT had failed to take into account  objective  evidence  that
    related to the YPG.

11. There was evidence to indicate that the Appellant's  home  address  was
    within Iran.  With reference to objective evidence Mr Mahmood  referred
    to page 122 of the Appellant's bundle which made reference  to  Iranian
    Kurds bolstering anti-IS forces in Iraq.  It specifically  referred  to
    YPG, and page 126 which referred to Iranian  Kurds  bolstering  anti-IS
    forces in  Syrian  Kurdistan  and  Iraqi  Kurdistan.   Again  there  is
    reference to the YPG.

12. Mr Mahmood submitted that  the  FtT  had  erred  by  finding  that  the
    Appellant is not Iranian, and by applying too high a standard of  proof
    at paragraphs 61-64 where there was reference to  lack  of  independent
    evidence.  It was submitted that the FtT decision must be set aside.

13. Mr Bates relied upon the rule 24 response.  He accepted that  objective
    evidence indicated that Iranian Kurds do fight for the YPG.  It was not
    accepted that the FtT had made a material error of law, although it was
    conceded that there may be inadequacy of reasoning at paragraphs 51-53,
    where the FtT concludes that the Appellant is not Iranian.

14. If that was an error, it was not material because the FtT  went  on  to
    consider the case at its highest.  The FtT gave  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding that the Appellant has not proved anybody in his family  had
    any connection to the YPG, and the Iranian Government had no reason  to
    take an adverse interest in the YPG, which was  an  organisation  which
    did not operate within Iran.

15. It was not accepted that the FtT had applied an incorrect  standard  of
    proof, as the FtT had set out the correct standard in the decision, and
    there was no evidence to indicate that too high  a  standard  had  been
    applied.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusion and Reasons

17. In my view the FtT does not provide adequate reasons for concluding  at
    paragraphs 52-54 that the Appellant  is  not  Iranian.   Guidance  upon
    adequacy of reasoning is given in Budhathoki [2014]  UKUT  00341  (IAC)
    the head note of which I set out below;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

18. It is not clear from reading paragraphs 52-54, why  the  FtT  concludes
    that the Appellant is not Iranian.

19. However I do no find that error to be material because the FtT  did  go
    on to consider the Appellant's case at its highest.

20. I could find no objective evidence that was before the FtT, to indicate
    that the YPG operated in Iran.  Objective evidence indicates  that  the
    YPG fights against Islamic State, in areas of Syria.

21. There is objective evidence within the Appellant's bundle of documents,
    at page 124 which indicates that Iranian Kurdish fighters believe  they
    have Tehran's blessing to fight for the Kurds against IS.  At paragraph
    131 of the Appellant's bundle there is an article which  confirms  that
    "Iran has never branded the PYD and YPG as terrorist organisations.  On
    the contrary, it has lauded their struggle against the Islamic State."

22. The FtT was entitled, in my view, at paragraph 67  to  make  a  finding
    that the YPG is not a relevant resistance group in Iran.

23. The FtT was entitled at paragraph 59 to make a finding that neither the
    Appellant or his father had ever helped the YPG.  The reasons for  this
    conclusion are set out at paragraphs 55-58.

24. At paragraph 55 the FtT found that the YPG is the main  force  fighting
    Islamic State in Syria, and the FtT was entitled to find  at  paragraph
    56 there was no reason for the YPG to interest  adversely  the  Iranian
    authorities.

25. The FtT noted at paragraph 58, that if the Appellant's father had  been
    fighting with the YPG, there would be evidence that he had been  absent
    from the family home for  a  considerable  period  of  time.   No  such
    evidence was forthcoming.  There was  no  adequate  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's father had supported the YPG by  fighting  against  Islamic
    State in Syria or Iraq or in any other way.

26. The credibility findings made by the FtT are supported  by  sustainable
    reasons, and in my view it was entirely open to  the  FtT  to  conclude
    that neither the Appellant nor anybody in his family had any connection
    to the YPG, and the Iranian Government had no reason to take an adverse
    interest in the YPG.  The FtT was entitled to find that  the  Appellant
    had not proved that either he or his father had ever been  detained  as
    suspected YPG activists.

27. I do not accept that the FtT applied too  high  a  standard  of  proof.
    There is reference to the  Appellant  failing  to  produce  independent
    proof at paragraphs 61 and 62 that he suffered any physical  or  mental
    harm caused by police violence in Iran.  At paragraph  65  there  is  a
    reference to the Appellant failing to produce independent proof that he
    was or still is wanted by the Iranian authorities.

28. In my view the FtT was well aware that there is no legal requirement of
    independent proof, and was entitled when  considering  credibility,  to
    observe the lack of any independent evidence.  Observing that there  is
    no independent evidence does not, without more, indicate that  the  FtT
    was requiring independent evidence, and the FtT made it  clear,  in  my
    view, in paragraphs 16 and 17 that it  was  well  aware  of  the  lower
    standard of proof that should be applied, and how evidence in an appeal
    such as this should be considered.

29. There is further reference to the low threshold  and  low  standard  of
    proof at paragraphs 64 and 65 of the FtT decision.

30. The FtT's conclusion that the Appellant is not Iranian lacked  adequate
    reasoning, but that is not a material error, as the FtT considered  the
    Appellant's claim, assuming that he is Iranian, at its highest,  taking
    into account all material evidence, making findings that were  open  to
    it on the evidence, and which are supported by adequate  reasons.   The
    decision of the FtT stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT did not involve the making of a  material  error  of
law such that the decision must be set  aside.   I  do  not  set  aside  the
decision and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

I continue the anonymity direction made by the FtT pursuant to  rule  14  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date: 30th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date: 30th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

