
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01102/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 August 2021                         |On 06 October 2021               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SNA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bradshaw instructed by JD Spicer Zeb.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. In a  decision  promulgated  on  24  May  2021  the  Upper  Tribunal,  by
   agreement between the parties, found an error of law and  set  aside  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
2. The matter  comes  back  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  enable  it  to
   substitute a decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.

Background


     3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 2 October 1996.
     4. The First-tier Tribunal Judges credibility findings, together  with
        those relating to the appellant's identity, ethnicity as  an  Iraqi
        Kurd, his immigration history, and the finding he faces a real risk
        on return to his home area as a member of a Particular Social Group
        (PSG)  -  victim  of  an  honour  crime  in  Iraq,  the  applicable
        Convention reason, are preserved findings.
     5. As the appellant is  in  possession  of  his  CSID  and  his  Iraqi
        Identity Card no issues arise in relation to documentation in  this
        appeal.
     6. The core issues are whether there is anywhere in Iraq to which  the
        appellant can relocate geographically and, if  so,  whether  it  is
        reasonable in all circumstances to expect him to go there.
     7. In his recent witness statement filed  for  the  purposes  of  this
        hearing, dated 4 August 2021, the appellant writes:


        6.   I cannot return to Iraq as I still fear persecution in Iraq. I
             have not had any contact with anyone in Iraq and have not  had
             any contact with my family. If I am returned to Iraq,  I  know
             that I will be killed as soon as I return  to  Iraq.  This  is
             because these were the terms of the family agreement.  I  will
             either be  killed  by  her  family  or  my  family.  I  cannot
             internally relocate to somewhere like Baghdad  as  I  will  be
             found. The family have people who they have paid  to  try  and
             find me and to kill me. The authorities are  corrupt  and  the
             families will be told as soon as I return to Iraq as they have
             influence within the authorities. I cannot return and  live  a
             life in Iraq as I  would  face  persecution  and  I  would  be
             killed. I live with this fear everyday.


        Human Rights


        7.   I believe that if l am forced to return to Iraq, this will  be
             a breach of my human rights under the European  Convention  of
             Human Rights.
        8.   If I were forced to return to Iraq, this would be a breach  of
             my Article 2 rights under the  European  Convention  of  Human
             Rights, that is the right to life.
        9.   If I were forced to return to Iraq, this would be a breach  of
             my Article 3 rights under the  European  Convention  of  Human
             Rights, that no one shall be subjected to torture, inhumane or
             degrading treatment or punishment. If I am forced to return to
             Iraq, I will once again be arrested and  be  punished.  It  is
             inevitable  that  during  detention  I  will  once  again   be
             subjected to the inhumane and degrading treatment.
        10.  There is no effective system of  justice  in  Iraq.  If  I  am
             forced to return to  Iraq,  this  would  be  a  breach  of  my
             Articles 5 & 6 rights under the European Convention  of  Human
             Rights, that is the right to  liberty  and  security  and  the
             right to a fair trial.
        11.  If I were forced to return to Iraq, this would be a breach  of
             my Article 8 rights under the  European  Convention  of  Human
             Rights, that is the right to a family life.


        Compassionate Factors


        12.  I have now been in the United Kingdom for over 3 years. For  a
             long time, I have been feeling very stressed and  anxious  and
             continue to do so. I now feel safer and more secure in the UK.
             If I am forced to return to Iraq, I fear that my  life  is  at
             risk and my health will undoubtedly deteriorate.  I  therefore
             seek asylum in the United Kingdom.


     8. An updated psychological  report  dated  3  August  2021  has  been
        prepared by Peter Thorne BSc (Hons), BPS  DipClinPsychol,  CPsychol
        DipCogTher, AFBPsS Associate Fellow of  the  British  Psychological
        Society and a Consultant Clinical Psychologist.
     9. In the section of  the  report  headed  "Clinical  Opinion"  it  is
        written:


        37.  Clinical Opinion


        38.   Based  on  his  self-reported  reported   history,   clinical
             screening, and formal assessment, my  opinion  is  that  [SMA]
             continues to meet formal criteria for  a  diagnosis  of  Major
             Depressive Disorder. I assess this as being present to a  mild
             to moderate degree of severity. [SMA] continues to report some
             symptoms associated with PTSD, such as intrusive memories  and
             some disturbing dreams. He described survivor guilt  -  a  key
             feature of his condition.
        39.  I then re-assessed using the full DSM-V 2013 criteria for PTSD
             (see Appendix B) are as follows.
        40.  Criterion A: The  person  was  exposed  to  death,  threatened
             death, actual or  threatened  serious  injury,  or  actual  or
             threatened sexual violence. (See Appendix C for  full  details
             of the criteria for PTSD). (One required).
        41.  -[SMA] claims he was beaten and threatened by the brother  and
             cousins of his girlfriend [S] when they visited his shop.  His
             injuries required hospital treatment.
        42.  -The  brother  and  cousins  threatened  to  kill  him  if  he
             continued to have contact with  [S]  (the  young  woman  [SMA]
             claims to have been his girlfriend and later  his  wife  after
             eloping).
        43.  - Some time  after  eloping  with  [S],  he  was  subsequently
             contacted urgently by a friend by phone informing him that she
             had been killed by members of her family. [SMA]'s  family  had
             informed  them  of  [S]'s  whereabouts.  This  event  hastened
             [SMA]'s plans to leave Iraq as he believed  his  life  was  in
             danger.
        44.  Criterion A is satisfied.
        45.  Criterion B: Intrusion symptoms (one  required).  He  reported
             that he still has some intrusive mental images. He  still  has
             some disturbing dreams.
        46.  Criterion B is satisfied.
        47.  Criterion C: Persistent avoidance of stimuli  associated  with
             the trauma (one required). He still suppresses memories,  with
             limited benefit. This is his main coping strategy for managing
             intrusions.
        48.  Criterion C is satisfied.
        49.  Criterion D: Negative alterations in cognitions and mood  that
             are associated with the traumatic  event  (two  required).  He
             still has survivor guilt arising from the fact that he escaped
             from Iraq, but his wife was killed.
        50.  Criterion D is satisfied.
        51.  Criterion E: Alterations in arousal and  reactivity  that  are
             associated with the traumatic  event  (two  required).  He  is
             rarely  startled  by  sudden  noises  now,  but   he   becomes
             emotionally reactive when going over what happened to his wife
             and the threats he fled from.
        52.  Criterion E is partially satisfied.
        53.  Criterion F: His symptoms have existed for years now  and  are
             therefore chronic in nature.
        54.  Criterion F is satisfied.
        55.  Criterion G: His symptoms  continue  to  cause  impairment  of
             normal  functioning.  His  mood  is   mildly   to   moderately
             depressed.
        56.  Criterion G is satisfied.
        57.  Criterion H: His symptoms are  not  due  to  another  illness,
             substance abuse, or medication.
        58.  Criterion H is satisfied.
        59.  Based on his self-reported history, clinical screening, and my
             formal reassessment, my opinion is  that  [SMA]  continues  to
             present with chronic  symptoms  of  PTSD  and  fulfils  formal
             criteria for the disorder. I believe his condition remains  at
             a mild to  moderate  degree  of  severity.  He  has  secondary
             depression because of past traumatic experiences, particularly
             linked to survivor guilt, and lack of hope.
        60.  Instruction (b) What treatment [if any] he requires.
        61.  The treatment I recommended in my first report dated  04.11.19
             still  applies,  as  follows:  'The   psychological   sequelae
             following exposure to violence,  threatening  experiences,  or
             episodes of degrading treatment can be complex and long  term.
             [SMA] seems to have coped largely by suppressing his  emotions
             and memories, but with minimal benefit.  The  NICE  Guidelines
             (2005) for the treatment of PTSD recommend a  phased  approach
             to treatment.  The  first  phase  involves  stabilisation  and
             symptom management.  In  [SMA]'s  case,  I  believe  achieving
             stabilisation  will  be  unlikely   without   securing   legal
             immigration  status  ...   NICE   guidance   recommends   that
             management of PTSD should involve an evidence-based treatment,
             such as Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy  (CBT)  or  Eye-Movement
             Desensitization & Reprocessing (EMDR) for symptoms of PTSD and
             co-morbid depression. Medication may also play a part  in  his
             recovery but is unlikely to achieve  full  resolution  of  his
             symptoms used alone, without psychological treatment.'
        62.  So far, he has not received any counselling or therapy for his
             mental  health  problems.  He  has  not  been   treated   with
             appropriate medication.
        63.  Instruction (c) What his prognosis would be with  and  without
             treatment.
        64.  Continuing uncertainty about his immigration  status  and  the
             threat of removal are likely to obstruct attempts  to  resolve
             his mental health problems.  The  combination  of  chronically
             depressed mood and PTSD symptoms, plus the fear of  return  to
             Iraq, continues to place his mental health at risk of  further
             decline. I do not expect  his  psychological  difficulties  to
             resolve easily because of the  complexity  of  survivor  guilt
             arising from his wife's killing. If he was unable to access or
             engage  in  treatment,  then  his  condition  is   likely   to
             deteriorate further over  time.  I  do  not  believe  he  will
             achieve spontaneous resolution of his mental health  condition
             without professional help. If he  simply  carries  on  without
             addressing his underlying survivor guilt, then he is likely to
             remain vulnerable to depression for the foreseeable future.
        65.  Instruction (d) What impact his mental health problems have on
             his ability to participate  in  an  appeal  hearing  and  give
             evidence.
        66.  He is fit to give evidence. As at the first assessment,  [SMA]
             was able to recall  the  major  details  of  past  experiences
             without any apparent difficulty. I remain of the view that  in
             any situation he is likely to perceive as threatening, such as
             a formal immigration interview or courtroom, emotional arousal
             and fear could result in cognitive errors  and  problems  with
             recall of remote events and specific details, such as names or
             dates. If [SMA] sensed threat or hostility during questioning,
             he is likely to become anxious and overwhelmed and this  could
             increase cognitive errors and recall difficulties, and to that
             extent I regard him as a vulnerable witness.
        67.  lnstruction (e) What steps should be taken to  enable  him  to
             give evidence.
        68.  As recommended in my first report, he should  be  prompted  to
             take breaks to regain composure  and  focus  when  upset.  His
             mental state should be checked from time to time to  check  he
             is actively engaged in  the  process.  Those  representing  or
             supporting him should ensure he  fully  understands  questions
             put to him and their implications, along with the implications
             of his replies. These measures should bolster his  ability  to
             give evidence and should allow the Tribunal to feel  confident
             that the witness is engaged.
        69.  Instruction (f) Whether he is at risk of self-harm or suicide.


        70.  [SMA] reported intrusive suicidal ideas in 2019. He is now  of
             the view that he must live to  honour  his  wife's  death.  As
             stated in my first report, prediction of risk  of  suicide  is
             complex  and  notoriously  difficult,  because   the   factors
             associated  with  risk  are  often  volatile  and  can  change
             rapidly. It remains possible that if he became convinced  that
             all hope was lost, or  if  he  was  unable  to  find  ways  of
             reducing feelings of survivor guilt, then  in  desperation  he
             may begin to think seriously about plans to  act  on  suicidal
             thoughts. Much would be dictated by [SMA]  perception  of  the
             availability of safety, or  the  lack  of  it.  I  assess  his
             current risk as low.
        71.  (a) In the UK: If told he was to be returned,  I  predict  his
             risk would increase in proportion to the amount of  threat  he
             envisaged, offset  against  any  safety  assurances  he  could
             secure, and any signals of hope he could trust in.
        72.  (b} During removal:  [SMA]  continues  to  experience  trauma-
             related mental health problems of Depression and PTSD, so  far
             untreated. The stress involved in a forced removal  is  likely
             to have a serious and negative impact on his�  chronic  mental
             health conditions. I remain of the  view  that  if  [SMA]  was
             forcibly removed against his will, a worsening of  his  mental
             condition is likely to follow.  Suicidal  risk  is  likely  to
             remain low for as long as [SMA] can see reason to hope.
        73.  Instruction (q) How any such risks would be  affected  by  his
             removal to Iraq.
        74.  [SMA] re-stated his belief  that  Iraq  is  a  very  dangerous
             country where his life would be  under  threat.  He  is  still
             unable to identify anything that would reassure him  in  terms
             of safety. He said he would mistrust any bodies that might  be
             available to him in Iraq. I predict his mental health would be
             under severe strain. He is likely to experience  the  negative
             consequences of extreme  stress,  such  as  increased  threat-
             focused  thinking,  increased  depressogenic  rumination,  and
             increased anxious thoughts about the future. Such  changes  to
             his thought processes are likely to  result  in  him  becoming
             incapacitated by depression and a strengthening  of  intrusive
             symptoms  of  PTSD,  such  as  difficulty  sleeping   due   to
             nightmares,  increased  hypervigilance,   and   avoidance   of
             anything he associates with threat.
        75.  [SMA] reaffirmed that he would avoid seeking professional help
             in Iraq as he is convinced this would put him at greater risk.
             If he was returned, he would focus on  survival  and  escaping
             from the country again at the earliest opportunity.
        76.  Instruction (h) Please provide any other opinion you  consider
             relevant.
        77.  I know that it is my duty to be alert to  the  possibility  of
             malingering at all times and I take that duty seriously. I  am
             obliged to  document  any  suspicions  of  malingering  in  my
             reports, and I do so when evidence of such  becomes  apparent.
             As far as possible I followed guidelines  outlined  by  Easton
             (2012), Halligan (2003), and Rogers (2008) to be  vigilant  to
             the possibility that [SMA] exaggerates or feigns  symptoms.  I
             found [SMA]'s account of mental health problems authentic, and
             in keeping with other traumatised clients I have assessed.
        78.  His account of symptoms remains consistent with  his  reported
             trauma history. His description  of  current  functioning  and
             response to everyday stressors was again  reasonable  and  not
             exaggerated. With  regard  to  depression  and  trauma-related
             anxiety, he again reported  difficulties  across  a  range  of
             severity levels. I did not find that he claimed symptoms in an
             obviously response-biased way. As at our first meeting, he did
             not describe symptoms, behaviours, or poor  functioning  at  a
             level of severity out of keeping with his history. He did  not
             report bizarre symptoms, or a level  of  cognitive  or  memory
             impairment that aroused my suspicion or was inconsistent  with
             his presentation. He did not try to convince me  of  increased
             suicidal risk or a worsening of PTSD symptoms.

    10. The appellant also seeks to rely upon a country expert report dated
        30 July 2021 from Dr Fatah, a recognised country expert in relation
        to Iraq.  After  setting  out  the  country  information  and  data
        relating to honour  killings  Dr  Fatah  sets  out  his  concluding
        paragraph in relation to this issue in the following terms:

Conclusion

        196.      Honour killings are fairly  prevalent  in  Iraqi  Kurdish
             society, and there  is  widespread  evidence  that  women  are
             killed due to their being perceived to have dishonoured  their
             family. This occurs throughout the Kurdish autonomous  region,
             though mainly outside of  the  main  cities.  While  the  true
             number of women who have been killed due  to  "honour"-related
             issues  is  deemed  to  be  much  higher  than  the   official
             statistics, the figures released by the KRG denote that  there
             has been a sharp increase in the  number  of  honour  killings
             inside the IKR since 2019.
        197.      It is not considered that the  authorities  are  able  to
             provide sufficient protection to victims of  honour  violence.
             While there are few organisations that are able to house women
             at risk of violence, they can only do so with  a  court  order
             from the judge.  Moreover,  at  least  three  of  the  victims
             mentioned in this section were  killed  after  being  released
             from safehouses.
        198.      The evidence for male victimhood  is  less  well-founded,
             but this may be due to issues in collecting data, or the  fact
             that men are more mobile and may be able to  escape  potential
             honour killings more easily. I have found some examples of men
             being targeted in honour crimes.  However,  it  is  considered
             that this is to a lesser extent  than  women.  Where  men  are
             targeted, this is usually  in  addition  to  the  woman  being
             killed.
        199.      If [SMA] is wanted for  an  honour  killing,  it  is  not
             likely that he would be afforded  sufficient  protection  from
             the authorities.
        200.      The geographical extent of the risk to [SMA] would depend
             on the ability and motivation of the people he fears.  If  his
             family  or  [S]'s  family  have   political   connections   or
             influence, it is plausible that they  would  be  able  to  use
             these to attempt to locate and  pursue  [SMA]  with  impunity.
             Outside of the IKR, it is less likely that they would be  able
             to use these connections or influence, as Kurdish  communities
             are sparser outside of the IKR and the  disputed  territories.
             However,  in  these  areas,  [SMA]  would   face   significant
             obstacles to integration, if he does not speak Arabic, and  is
             not able to rely on family or social support networks.


    11. In relation to the question of internal relocation, it is written:

        234.      As a Kurd from the IKR, [SMA] would not face obstacles to
             relocation within the IKR. If [SMA] is not able to rely  on  a
             support  network  in  the  IKR,  he  may  face  obstacles   to
             integration in addition to the ability  to  secure  employment
             and accommodation. If [SMA] is wanted by his or  [S]'s  family
             for an honour killing,  and  they  have  the  motivations  and
             ability to pursue him within the IKR, it is not likely that he
             would be able to obtain sufficient protection within the IKR
        235.      Civilians in Baghdad are at risk from both indiscriminate
             violence and targeted violence. The renaissance of conflict in
             mid-2014 has recreated the permissive security environment  of
             2004-2007 where murders were rife, and scores executed on some
             point of identity or over some grievance.  Should  [SMA]  face
             targeted violence, it is not considered that safety  could  be
             found with any certainty anywhere in Gol territory.
        236.      [SMA] may face difficulties in his  relocation  to  Iraq-
             proper due to his position as a Kurd, lack  of  documentation,
             lack of family or social network, and limited Arabic skills.


    12. Mr McVeety accepted it was not credible to claim on the facts  that
        the appellant could relocate to Baghdad for the  reason  stated  in
        the  report  and  the  country  guidance  caselaw,  and   made   no
        submissions arguing it was reasonable for the appellant to relocate
        elsewhere in Iraq outside the IKR, such as the South, on the  facts
        of this appeal. I agree that is a fair summary of the position with
        the issue of internal relocation only being relevant in relation to
        the IKR from where the appellant originates.
    13. In relation to the provision of mental  health  services  Dr  Fatah
        writes:

        396.       The  deterioration  of  Iraq's  healthcare   system   is
             ultimately leaving Iraqis who are impacted by violence without
             the support or treatment needed to recover. In  addition,  the
             delivery of basic services, including health services, remains
             weak. The objective evidence shows that counterfeit  medicines
             are widespread in Iraq and it has led to fatalities.  This  is
             primarily due to corruption and the use of bribes and the lack
             of domestically produced  medicine.  Objective  evidence  also
             shows that the Iraqi Ministry of Health is aware of  the  lack
             of availability of medicine and  the  selling  of  counterfeit
             medicine in pharmacies and on the streets, and has  failed  to
             respond adequately. Despite the on-going operations  to  cease
             faulty goods and fake medicines, there  has  not  been  enough
             effort done to stop corruption, which according to the  report
             is the primary reason for the low-quality healthcare in Iraq.
        397.      Mental healthcare in  Iraq  is  hindered  by  a  lack  of
             professional training,  stigmas  around  sufferers  of  mental
             illnesses  and  a  severe  lack   of   capacity.   Therapeutic
             approaches to  mental  healthcare  are  uncommon  compared  to
             medicating approaches to treatment. This is true of treatments
             for  depression.  Counselling  appears  to  be  available  but
             extremely limited in Central Iraq. Counselling  has  not  been
             adequately provided by the state, but rather has  been  driven
             by NGOs such as MSF and ICRC. Stigma around mental  healthcare
             persists in Iraqi society and can hinder effective  treatment.
             While some reports have documented a decrease in stigma  since
             ISIS, there are notable obstacles in  convincing  patients  to
             return for long-term treatment. In addition to the shortage in
             psychiatrists and psychologists, Iraq is still facing violence
             and security challenges post-lSIS.  Also,  people  who  suffer
             from mental illness the concept  of  mental  illness  are  all
             stigmatised in public perception in  Iraq  and  often  receive
             very negative publicity. According to Medecins Sans Frontieres
             (MSF), shame, fear of discovery, fear of  being  abandoned  or
             ostracised are all frequently mentioned by patients  in  Iraq.
             It should also be noted that frontline  practitioners  believe
             that the Covid-19 pandemic in  Iraq  is  exacerbating  current
             mental health issues in addition to challenging  the  capacity
             of the Iraqi healthcare system
        398.      Regarding the provision of mental health in the  Disputed
             Territories, this  area  faces  similar  challenges  to  those
             throughout Iraq. Due to the high levels of conflict here, many
             health facilities  here  have  been  rendered  non-functional.
             Moreover, the objective evidence provides that much of the NGO
             work here focusing on  healthcare  and  mental  healthcare  is
             limited to IDPs. In the IKR, there are  only  four  government
             mental-health hospitals - one each in Erbil and Duhok, and two
             in Sulaymaniyah. Here, the majority of the  burden  of  mental
             healthcare falls on NGOs such as MSF.
        399.      Data shows that there is  a  general  lack  of  awareness
             regarding mental health treatment options  and  illness  among
             the general population. Also, due to the shortage  in  medical
             personnel, and the growing caseload; doctors tend to over-rely
             on drugs, which are often expensive and hard to  find,  rather
             than directing patients towards therapy or counselling.  Based
             on the objective evidence, it is plausible that [SMA] may  not
             receive adequate treatment for any  mental  health  conditions
             that he may have.  Furthermore,  he  may  face  stigmatisation
             within Iraqi society.
        400.      It should be noted that while there  are  facilities  and
             drugs available for the treatment of mental health problems in
             Iraq, as stated in the CPIN, there  are  significant  problems
             with capacity and availability, as addressed above.

    14. The Secretary of State's position set  out  in  a  'speaking  note'
        filed by Mr Tan, another Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
        prior to hearing is in the following terms:

         It is not  accepted  that  any  risk  posed  to  the  appellant  is
         prevalent across the entirety of the IKR, nor across  the  rest  of
         Iraq. In relation to the accepted area of risk in Koyasinjaq  (IKR)
         where the appellants family and his wife's  family  reside,  whilst
         this is situated in Erbil governorate the evidence does not suggest
         that such a risk exists across the entirety of the governorate.

         The account of the appellant demonstrates a period of time spent in
         Hawler/Erbil city prior to leaving the country. The  appellant  was
         assisted by a family friend (Mr Anwar)  and  to  a  degree  by  his
         younger brother. He was able to obtain funds to  arrange  his  exit
         and arrange for a passport to be issued to him within  this  period
         of time, and leave through the airport to Turkey without problems.

         As set out  in  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument  (para  8)  on
         reflecting  upon  his  evidence,   the   appellants   location   in
         Sulaymaniyah was disclosed by his own family to  members  of  [S]'s
         family. Whilst the FTTJ found that the appellant  was  at  risk  in
         Sulaymaniyah this is clearly premised on information and  direction
         provided to his pursuers as  to  his  location,  rather  than  them
         locating him through their own means or network of contacts. It  is
         noted that the account of the appellant is that he was  located  in
         Sarchnar (interview Q130), an area of Sulaymaniyah city. It is  not
         accepted that  the  evidence  establishes  that  the  appellant  is
         specifically at risk in Sulaymaniyah city or the governorate  as  a
         whole.

         As reflected in the report of Dr Fatah (para 195), the geographical
         extent of any risk within  the  IKR  depends  on  the  ability  and
         motivations of the people the appellant fears. Dr Fatah  points  to
         political connections or influence as potential avenues  to  locate
         the appellant with impunity. It is noted that none of these avenues
         appear have been used to  locate  the  appellant  in  Sulaymaniyah,
         Erbil City, or prevent his accrual of  travel  documents  and  exit
         from IKR. Dr Fatah makes no comment on this point despite it  being
         a matter of relevance in the decision of FTTJ Howarth [32].

         As to other areas of Iraq, the FTTJ decision and the  evidence  set
         out within it does not appear to consider or cover  this  issue  at
         all.  It  is  anticipated  that  evidence  arising  out  of   cross
         examination will be supportive of any submissions made on the above
         points. As noted by Dr Fatah, the level of risk to the appellant is
         significantly less outside of the IKR.

         The appellant has benefitted from significant assistance  not  only
         from his younger brother, his friend in Sulaimaniyah, but  also  Mr
         Anwar. The Tribunal will have to  take  in  to  account  why  these
         useful sources of support would not be of  benefit  in  the  future
         either directly or remotely within the IKR or in Iraq.

         The appellant is educated and has previously worked in the IKR. The
         appellant has retained his CSID [B51-53], and his Iraqi Nationality
         Certificate (INC) [B54-55]. It  is  not  clear  how  the  appellant
         obtained his INC (issued 07/12/15) at a time when the appellant was
         in Europe. Nevertheless,  documentation  and  it's  requirement  to
         assist the return of the appellant  is  not  considered  to  be  an
         issue; it is somewhat unclear  why  Dr  Fatah  refers  to  lack  of
         documentation as an issue (para 236).

         In relation  to  his  medical  condition,  it  is  noted  that  the
         conclusion of Mr Thorne is predominantly informed by the  appellant
         and without sight of any medical records beyond the  report  of  Dr
         Arnold. In concluding that the appellant suffers from a  depressive
         episode and PTSD, and would  benefit  from  counselling  and  anti-
         depressant medication it is wholly unclear why the appellant having
         been diagnosed as such in 2019,  has  not  sought  to  take  up  an
         appropriate  course  of  treatment  despite  referring  to  support
         systems in the UK which could assist with access. It is noted  that
         the appellant is registered with a GP [B37] yet has not  considered
         it appropriate to  disclose  his  medical  records.  Whilst  mental
         health treatment is available in Iraq at a lower level than in  the
         UK, it is available nonetheless. It is not accepted that relocation
         is unduly harsh or unreasonable in light of the above points.

    15. The appellant in his oral evidence confirmed that after  the  death
        of his wife he stayed with his friend and that friend is likely  to
        be willing and able to accommodate him if he is returned  to  Iraq;
        but claimed he did not think  that  his  friend  will  be  able  to
        provide support for him long term.
    16. It is right that the family in Iraq, despite the appellant's  claim
        that they wish to kill him, were unable to track him down  when  he
        was in Erbil for the period of time in which he was able  to  apply
        for a visa to enable him travel to Turkey  and  an  Iraqi  passport
        which, if an  A  Passport,  would  have  required  him  to  provide
        biometric details unless the same were already  held  digitally  by
        the authorities in Iraq. No evidence has been provided to show this
        would have been a quick process, especially in  the  light  of  the
        history of Iraqi bureaucracy.
    17. The chronology of events accepted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
        summarised in the Reasons  for  Refusal  letter  in  the  following
        terms:

              . Your father  is  an  administrator  in  the  Department  of
                Agriculture.
              . In March 2013 you met SBA and you started a relationship.
              . A year later SBA's brother saw your contact  details  on  a
                mobile phone you  had  bought  her.  Unknown  dates,  SBA's
                brother, who was a policeman, started threatening  you.  On
                the third occasion on 6 June 2014 SBA's brother and  cousin
                came and fought you.
              . He reported this to the local police on 6  June  2014,  but
                they told you it was a tribal matter,  and  they  will  not
                interfere.
              . On 2 June 2015 you and SBA ran away to Sulaimaniyah.
              . On 20 August 2015 you had a religious wedding ceremony.
              . Six days after the wedding ceremony, SBA was killed by  her
                family in  Sulaimaniyah.  SBA's  family  had  visited  your
                family before this and told them that they should kill you.
                You believe your family told SBA's  family  that  you  were
                located in Sulaimaniyah.


    18. The first issue to be identified is the actual area  in  which  the
        appellant has been found to face a credible real risk of harm.   It
        is not disputed that this will be his home town of Koya  Sanjaq  in
        Erbil province which is located  to  the  east  of  Erbil  City  at
        approximately 73 km or 45 miles distance. It was not made out  that
        despite the killing of SBA and indications that her family believed
        the appellant's family should kill him, that any effort was made to
        locate him or that  SBA or his  family  were  able  to  locate  him
        whilst he stayed at his friend's house in Erbil  and  was  able  to
        engage with the authorities to seek  documentation  and  leave  the
        country through the international airport.
    19. The distance between Sulaimaniyah and Koya is approximately 115  km
        or 72 miles.  The appellant's home area lies to the  north-west  of
        this Kurdish city.
    20. It also appears to be the case on the evidence  that  although  the
        appellant and SBA ran away on 5 June  2015  to  Sulaimaniyah  SBA's
        family were only able to find them after they had been  tipped  off
        by the appellant's own family as to their location.
    21. Dr Fatah referred to the  ability  of  SBA's  family  to  find  the
        appellant in the IKR being dependent  upon  their  motivations  and
        ability to pursue him within the IKR. That is accepted.
    22. Notwithstanding the evidence of SBA's brother being in  the  police
        force,  past  family  peshmerga  membership,  and  the  appellant's
        father's employment in the Ministry of  Agriculture,  the  evidence
        does not support a finding it has been made out that the power  and
        reach of the prospective agents of persecution  is  such  that  the
        appellant will face a real risk of discovery and harm  outside  his
        home area.  Their power and/or influence within Iraq  and  the  IKR
        has not been shown to be as the appellant alleges it to be.
    23. The next issue to be considered is whether  relocation  within  the
        IKR away from the appellant's immediate home area is reasonable  in
        all the circumstances.
    24.  It  is  for  the  appellant  to  make  good  the  assertion  that,
        notwithstanding the general conditions in  the  proposed  place  of
        relocation, it would not be reasonable to relocate there.
    25. In VNM v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 47 the Court of Appeal said that  the
        reasonableness of relocation would  require  consideration  of  the
        practicability of an appellant settling elsewhere.
    26. It is not suggested  that  conditions  in  the  place  of  intended
        relocation could not be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  unless  they
        were liable to infringe an applicant's rights under  article  3  or
        its equivalent, as that was found to be an incorrect approach in AH
        (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49.
    27. The view of the UNHCR before the Court in AH (Sudan) was that " . .
        . the correct approach when considering the reasonableness  of  IRA
        [internal  relocation   alternative]   is   to   assess   all   the
        circumstances  of  the  individual's  case  holistically  and  with
        specific  reference  to  the  individual's  personal  circumstances
        (including past persecution  or  fear  thereof,  psychological  and
        health  condition,  family  and  social  situation,  and   survival
        capacities). This assessment is to be made in the  context  of  the
        conditions in  the  place  of  relocation  (including  basic  human
        rights,    security    conditions,    socio-economic    conditions,
        accommodation, access to  health  care  facilities),  in  order  to
        determine the impact on that individual of settling in the proposed
        place of  relocation  and  whether  the  individual  could  live  a
        relatively normal life without undue hardship."
    28. As found above, is accepted by the appellant that if he is returned
        to Erbil his friend is likely  to  be  able  to  provide  him  with
        accommodation and meet his needs, at least in the short term.
    29. In relation to the reasonableness of any further stay one  relevant
        issue is the appellant's subjective fear of  harm,  which  is  also
        referred to in the medical evidence as being a potential barrier to
        the appellant seeking  medical  assistance  for  his  psychological
        needs due to a belief that this would expose him to a real risk  of
        harm. In  Dragas  (Tribunal)  01/TH/0724  (Ockelton)  the  Tribunal
        found, in effect, that subjective fear may  be  a  relevant  factor
        when considering undue harshness. That was also  the  view  of  the
        House of Lords in AH Sudan [2007] UKHL 49.
    30. The report from Dr Fatah refers to the limitations on the available
        services in Iraq but does not support a finding that such  services
        are not available or not accessible to those  who  seek  them.  The
        issue of stigma is  noted  but  that  is  not  a  matter  that  the
        appellant has placed great weight on in this  appeal.  It  was  not
        made out that if the appellant sought the assistance of the medical
        authorities, including NGOs such as MSF that there  is  a  credible
        risk of this fact  or  his  identity  being  discovered  by  family
        members or anybody who would wish to do him harm.  The  appellant's
        stance of avoiding seeking  treatment  due  to  a  subjective  fear
        related to a matter not objectively made out on the evidence.
    31. I find the appellant has, despite accepted difficulties,  not  made
        out he will not be able to safely and securely availing himself  of
        the albeit limited assistance in  dealing  with  his  psychological
        needs  including,  over  time,  the  underlying  survivor's   guilt
        identified in the medical report. I do not find the  appellant  has
        established an entitlement to a grant of leave on  medical  grounds
        having considered the criteria set out in AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] UKSC
        17.
    32. The comments in relation to suicide are noted but it  is  not  made
        out the appellant will not receive suitable treatment if this issue
        arises in the United Kingdom, both prior to and during removal,  or
        that there is an objectively  established  real  risk  of  harm  on
        return to Iraq such as to give rise to real  risk  of  suicide,  or
        that  adequate  medical  facilities  would  not  be  available  and
        accessible within Iraq to assist the appellant if required.
    33. It is also relevant to the health issues that the appellant has not
        sought  assistance  with  his  mental  health  since  his   initial
        diagnosis as noted by Mr Thorne  in  the  updated  report,  despite
        being in the UK where no subjective fear of harm should  he  choose
        to do so could credibly arise.  Mr McVeety  submitted  it  was  not
        made out that if  returned  to  Iraq  the  situation  will  be  any
        different from that in the United Kingdom so  far  as  his  seeking
        assistance is concerned. Whilst that may be so, it is  relevant  to
        have  considered  whether  such   assistance   is   available   and
        accessible, which I find it is  should  the  appellant  change  his
        mind.
    34. In relation to the practicability of  settling  elsewhere,  in  his
        screening interview the appellant confirmed he had been educated to
        a higher level  and  had  obtained  a  Diploma  in  Computing.  The
        appellant stated he started the course in 2014 and traded in a shop
        he opened in 2010 of which he became the sole owner  in  2013.  The
        appellant stated he had run the business for approximately 5 years.
        The appellant therefore has experience in commerce  and  retail  as
        well as a recognised qualification and it was not made out that  he
        could not secure employment and generate the level of  income  that
        he will need to enable him to meet his reasonable costs of  living,
        including accommodation if his friend was not able  to  assist  him
        any longer.
    35. As noted  above,  the  burden  of  establishing  that  a  place  of
        relocation is unreasonable falls upon the appellant. Whilst  it  is
        understood in light of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that
        the appellant may have a subjective belief that  he  faces  a  real
        risk on return and that he will not  be  able  to  safely  relocate
        anywhere within Iraq, he has failed to establish, even to the lower
        standard applicable to an appeal of this nature, that that  is  the
        case. It may be difficult for him, and it may take  time,  but  the
        evidence does not establish it is appropriate in the  circumstances
        of this appeal for me to make a finding  that  internal  relocation
        will be unreasonable in all the circumstances. It was not made  out
        when all the circumstances of the case are considered holistically,
        including  his  personal  circumstances  in  the  context  of   the
        conditions in the place of  relocation,  that  the  impact  on  the
        appellant of settling in the IKR away from his home  area  is  such
        that he will not be able to live a relatively normal  life  without
        undue hardship.

Decision

    36. I dismiss the appeal.

   Anonymity.


    37. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 13 September 2021












