
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01131/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st December 2017                         |On 20th December 2017         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                            Mr Lawrence Thompson
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Chukwudolue of Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Liberia whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as 13th June 1974.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State made  on  17th  January  2017  refusing  his  application  for
    international protection.

 2. There was a long history behind this Appellant.  He originally  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 12th July 2004, claimed asylum, it was refused
    and his appeal  was  refused  on  7th  January  2005.   He  made  fresh
    submissions.  They were received on 10th November 2012 and refused with
    right of appeal.  Further submissions were made in  February  2014  and
    refused without a right of appeal.

 3. The current matter relates to submissions received by the Secretary  of
    State on 13th November 2015.  They were accepted as a fresh  claim  and
    resulted in the decision, the subject matter of this appeal.

 4. The appeal at first instance was listed at Taylor House and the  matter
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Paul on  15th  March  2017
    when the Appellant did not  attend.   The  Appellant's  solicitors  had
    written to the Tribunal requesting an adjournment on the basis that the
    Appellant was unable to attend their offices  because  of  ill  health.
    The appeal proceeded.  Consideration was given by  Judge  Paul  to  the
    application to adjourn and he came to the view that the  matter  should
    proceed.  In part, he took into account what appeared to be a  lack  of
    preparation by the Appellant's solicitors in advance  of  the  hearing.
    The judge also took into account the paucity of medical evidence before
    the Tribunal sufficient to support the Appellant's contention  that  he
    was not well enough to attend.  In the event Judge Paul  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 5. Not content with that decision, by notice dated  23rd  March  2017  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The  matter  was  considered  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lambert and in a decision which appears  to  have  been  dated
    31st July 2017 she refused to grant permission.  She came to  the  view
    that the  mere  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  in  hospital  was  not
    sufficient grounds necessarily for the judge to grant the  application.
    There  were  significant  factors  in  the  refusal  relevant  to   the
    background  of  this  case  including  a  failed  historic  claim   for
    international protection.

 6. A renewed application was made to the Upper Tribunal dated 18th  August
    2017.  The application was considered by a very  senior  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, Judge Jordan, who noted from the medical  evidence
    that was available and which I have seen, that the Appellant  was  seen
    in hospital and discharged with musculoskeletal pain for which  he  was
    prescribed ibuprofen and there was no follow-up.

 7. Of course, it is possible that the Appellant was feigning in  order  to
    avoid a hearing.  On the other hand,  I  have  medical  evidence  which
    shows that the Appellant was not only admitted to hospital but remained
    in hospital overnight.  He was admitted on 15th March  2017,  the  very
    date of the hearing, and not discharged until the following day.  I can
    take judicial notice of the fact that the  medics  concerned  with  the
    Appellant were unlikely to have thought  it  necessary  to  detain  the
    Appellant in hospital unless they were concerned enough, and thought it
    appropriate at the very least, to carry out some investigations.

 8. The test for whether or not there  should  be  an  adjournment  is  not
    reasonableness.  That is an error into which unfortunately a number  of
    judges fall.  The test for an adjournment is fairness and the authority
    for that proposition can be found in the cases of Terluk  v  Berezovsky
    [2010] EWCA Civ 1345 and has been repeated, to reinforce the matter for
    the benefit of this Tribunal, in  the  case  of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418. It is a basic tenet of common law that  an
    individual must be given an opportunity to present their case.

 9. Mr Melvin made the point that there  was  no  evidence  supporting  the
    substantive claim being made by the Appellant so that whatever happened
    was not material.  The difficulty with that  proposition  is  that  the
    Appellant himself is capable of  giving  evidence,  which,  subject  to
    cross-examination, may be believed.  I know not.  He was not given  the
    opportunity.

10. Of course, having highlighted the fact that it is possible, given  this
    Appellant's history, that he may "conveniently" find himself  suffering
    from some condition which gives him excuse not to attend  on  the  next
    occasion, it may well be that a judge considering a further application
    to adjourn will have the same mindset as suggested by Judge  Jordan  in
    which he said at paragraph 3 of the  grant,  "Were  history  to  repeat
    itself on the next occasion this appeal is listed  for  hearing,  might
    well reach a  different  conclusion  because  the  inference  that  the
    Appellant is using this as a device to avoid the hearing would be  that
    much stronger."

11. In all the circumstances I find that there was procedural unfairness in
    this case.  The decision is set aside.  There will have to be  a  fresh
    hearing before a judge other than Judge Paul.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.

Consequential Directions

 1. This appeal is remitted to Taylor House.

 2. There shall be an expedited hearing of this appeal (the matter has been
    going on far too long).

 3. This matter shall be placed before the Resident Judge at  Taylor  House
    for further directions and listing having regard to the direction  that
    this matter shall be expedited.

 4. The Appellant shall file and serve such evidence upon which he seeks to
    rely including any witness statement or statements from such person  or
    persons that he may wish  to  call  in  support  of  his  claim  within
    fourteen days of the date of  promulgation  of  the  decision  in  this
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal.

 5. No interpreter is required.

 6. The failure to comply with these directions by the Appellant will mean

 a) that the Appellant will not be entitled  to  call  any  other  evidence
    other than that which he has filed by that date  without  the  specific
    leave of the Resident Judge at that Taylor House  or  any  other  judge
    nominated by him.

 7. I note, in case it becomes a matter of  concern,  that  I  specifically
    asked the Appellant's solicitor who attended before  me  whether  those
    directions were reasonable and he agreed that  they  were  and  I  just
    observe that I hope that both sides' concerns are thereby met.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date: 18 December 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

