
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01001/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th May 2016                              |On 7th June 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     M H
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Hussain,
    who dismissed [MH]'s appeal against the  respondent's  decision  of  26
    August 2015 refusing his asylum claim.

2.   The judge accepted that the appellant had  converted  to  Christianity.
    I should say in passing that it is particularly relevant that he  is  a
    national of Bangladesh  and  therefore  the  claim  would  have  to  be
    considered in the context of  background  evidence  regarding  risk  on
    return to Bangladesh as a Christian and as a Christian convert, and  Mr
    Harding refers back to the skeleton argument that was before the  judge
    and emphasises the two particular ways in which he  contends  that  the
    judge went astray in this case.  The  first  of  those  is  failure  to
    assess the case on the basis that [MH] was a convert rather than having
    been a Christian throughout his life and also  failing  to  assess  the
    claim on the basis of the HJ (Iran) test as to whether  he  would  feel
    free to practise his religion on return.   The  judge  addressed  these
    matters, or at least addressed matters in the context of the background
    evidence from paragraph 54 through to paragraph 67.

3.   The first point I think is a point which was touched  on  at  paragraph
    58, which is the question of  the  conversion  and  the  background  in
    relation to that.  There  was  background  evidence  before  the  judge
    concerning the risk to converts in Bangladesh.   It  is  a  mixture  of
    evidence of that risk to Christians and generally risk to converts.

4.   Particularly, the evidence, does indicate that there could be  said  to
    be an enhanced level to risk to converts and there are  examples  given
    of that.  That is not a matter that the judge considered when  he  went
    on to consider the background  evidence,  in  particular  paragraph  61
    onwards.  He refers to  evidence  of  the  number  of  Christians,  the
    different denominations, the rights to practise  religion  freely  that
    people have in Bangladesh,  an  example  from  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report about the Awami League occupying land belonging to a
    Christian mission and efforts being made for a peaceful  resolution  of
    that and  reference  to  evidence  of  attacks  against  Christians  in
    Bangladesh increasing.

5.   That to my mind does not contain an adequate evaluation either  of  the
    evidence generally or the evidence specifically on this point,  nor  is
    it  possible  to  discern  from  the  judge's  decision  any  effective
    evaluation of the particular position, the HJ (Iran) position,  of  the
    appellant having to be in a position where he can practise his religion
    freely.  Instead, at paragraph 59:

         "His claim to be unable to  practise  his  religion  in  Bangladesh
         because it is made up of people who  are  predominantly  Muslim  is
         simply outlandish.  The background material produced  by  him  does
         not suggest that there is no freedom for the Christian community to
         practise  their  faith,  prevented  either  by  the  state  or  the
         population."


    This does not take the required account of the full picture revealed by
    the evidence.


6.   I have had  helpful  submissions  from  Mr  Harding  about  the  future
    conduct of the appeal.  It is to be reheard de novo  at  Hatton  Cross.
    Two hours time estimate.  No interpreter.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              07.06.2016


