
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01198/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 June 2017                               |On 31 August 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                  mr M A U
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel instructed by Pillai &
Jones Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national  of  Bangladesh,  appealed  the  Respondent's
    decision, dated 19 January 2017, to refuse recognition as a refugee and
    claims relating to those based on Humanitarian Protection and the ECHR.
     The appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R  L  Walker  (the
    Judge)  who,  on  5  April  2017,  dismissed  all  grounds  of  appeal.
    Permission to appeal that decision [D] was given on limited grounds  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on 3 May 2017 and the Respondent made a
    Rule 24 response on 22 May 2017.

2.   The principal basis on which the attack is  mounted  is  the  assertion
    that the Judge applied the wrong standard of proof in  considering  the
    protection claim.

3.   It is clear that at [D10] the Judge in somewhat  pro  forma  style  set
    out the burden and standard of proof being  to  the  lower  level.   It
    seems to me, in  view  of  [D11]  where  the  Judge  was  referring  to
    immigration cases and the balance of probability being  the  burden  of
    proof, that that was a pro forma template  but  it  shows  plainly  the
    material difference between a balance  of  probabilities  and  a  lower
    standard of proof as referred to  by  the  Judge  to  be  applied.   It
    therefore seems to me that [D11] actually shows that the lower standard
    was being applied because it was not an immigration case.

4.   Equally, the Judge correctly recited the limited basis on  which  there
    is a burden of proof of showing that Article 8 or other  ECHR  Articles
    are engaged other than in a protection  sense,  and  that  is  not  the
    subject of an appeal.

5.   The gravamen  of  the  complaint  is  that  essentially  the  Appellant
    answered a number of questions in  interview  correctly  and  that  the
    Judge has failed to properly reflect that in the  decision.   In  fact,
    what the Judge does, given paragraphs 20  to  26  of  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter, is note that the  Secretary  of  State  has  identified
    shortcomings in the Appellant's claim to have been part of  and  active
    in the student wing of Jamaat-e-Islami which was  called  the  'Chhatra
    Shibir'.   The Respondent in the Reasons for Refusal Letter  does  note
    answers given and identified, with reasons, why some of  those  answers
    are disputed: As a result of which, rejected the claim of activities by
    the  Appellant  in  Chhatra  Shibir  qualified  the  extent   of   such
    activities, even taking his evidence at its highest, gave rise  to  any
    interest in him in Bangladesh.  In addition the Appellant had  claimed,
    having been in the United Kingdom since 2009, that in mid 2016  he  was
    subject to a false accusation of being involved in a murder and that he
    was accused of such matters arising from events in 2014 or thereabouts.



6.   It is of note that the Judge looked at this evidence in the  round  and
    it was notably lacking in any confirmation that  seemingly  would  have
    been available from his  father  or  from  Jamaat-e-Islami  or  Chhatra
    Shibir of his activities.  There was no issue of a  refugee  sur  place
    claim arising from the Appellant's activities in the United Kingdom.

7.   It seems to me that the Judge did the best he could  with  the  limited
    available information and did not apply a  higher  standard  of  proof.
    The paragraphs particularly recited on behalf of the Appellant  do  not
    evidently display a higher standard of proof being applied so  much  as
    reasons, even if they could  be  improved  upon,  why  the  Appellant's
    credibility was not accepted.  In these circumstances the  Judge  doing
    the best he could on the  evidence  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant's claim was not credible, the  Appellant  did  not  have  the
    political profile claimed and  there  were  no  fabricated  proceedings
    against him in Bangladesh sitting there.  The Judge made the point, for
    what it be worth, that the Appellant through his family and connections
    in Bangladesh, let alone his party if he was a supporter as he  claimed
    to be, had not taken steps to tackle the fabricated case.

8.   It is plain, historically, that the Awami League returned to power  for
    a second term in January 2014  and  contrary  to  the  usual  turn  and
    turnabout of political parties, the BNP  did  not,  in  coalition  with
    Jamaat, or indeed any other party, obtain power as they may have hoped.
     Thus, there was a continuation of  Awami  League  control,  even  from
    2014, and yet it is not until significantly  later  in  2016  that  any
    adverse proceedings are commenced against the Appellant as claimed.

9.   There plainly were fundamental reasons why the Judge had  doubts  about
    the Appellant's credibility.  In the circumstances I find there was  no
    material error of law made by the Judge and it seems  to  me,  even  if
    there had been, on the same material any other Judge dealing with  this
    would have reached, in all likelihood, the same conclusion.

10.  The grounds attacked the Judge  for  failing  to  consider  Article  8.
    That ground was not given permission but it is  quite  clear  that  the
    Judge considered both Article  8  and  the  Appellant's  wife's  health
    which, regrettably, is poor.  In the circumstances the criticisms  made
    of  the  Judge  generally  by  whoever  drafted  the  application  were
    misguided.  The original Tribunal made no error of law as claimed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

11.  The appeal is dismissed.

12.  Anonymity direction continued.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 8 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date 8 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

