
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01767/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2019                  |On 06 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   Mr K S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, Counsel, instructed by Elaahi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   In a decision posted on 20 December 2018 Judge Ross of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan, against the decision made by the  respondent  on  22  January
    2018 refusing his protection claim.  The basis of the appellant's claim
    was that he would be at risk on return by  virtue  of  his  gay  sexual
    orientation.

2.   The appellant's main grounds of appeal are two-pronged, the  first  (1)
    challenging the judge's treatment of the issue of  interpretation,  the
    second (2) taking issue with the judge's treatment of the evidence  the
    appellant had produced to show he had been in a gay relationship in the
    UK.

3.   I can be brief because both parties agree  with  me  that  the  judge's
    decision is legally flawed.

4.   The crux of ground (1) centres on what the judge stated  at  paragraphs
    25-26:

         "25. When the hearing  resumed  after  the  short  adjournment,  Ms
             Dayken made an application that the hearing be adjourned.  She
             said that she had received  instructions  from  the  appellant
             that his answers were not being properly  interpreted  by  the
             interpreter.   She  said  that  one  example  arose  when  the
             appellant was being asked whether  his  mother  had  told  him
             about the FIR in the same conversation in  which  she  accused
             him  of  indulging  in  activities.   She  referred   to   the
             appellant's answer that he had  not  understood  the  question
             leading to him giving inconsistent answers.  Ms Brown objected
             to  the  appeal  being  adjourned  and   observed   that   the
             appellant's evidence had actually flowed very well.  Ms  Brown
             also observed that the appellant's English was good enough for
             him to notice that  the  questions  were  not  being  properly
             translated however, the appellant had not anytime said that he
             did not understand a question before answering it.

         26.  I refused Ms Daykin's application.  I  considered  that  there
             was no material upon which I could conclude  that  either  the
             questions were not  being  properly  translated  or  that  the
             appellant's answers were not being properly translated".

5.   Ms Daykin who represented the appellant at the  hearing,  has  sworn  a
    statement which states that  the  actual  state  of  affairs  was  that
    problems with the interpreter became apparent about a third way through
    the hearing.  In response to perceived difficulties, Ms  Daykin  raised
    with  the  judge  concerns  that  the  interpreter  was  not  correctly
    interpreting questions being put to the appellant.  Ms  Daykin  records
    that in relation to a question the appellant was asked  about  how  his
    parents sent him money in  the  UK,  the  interpreter  gave  an  answer
    indicating that they paid money to someone in Pakistan who then gave it
    to a relative in the UK.  The appellant interrupted, stating  that  was
    not what had been said and "[t]he interpreter then stated he could  not
    continue with the hearing".  Ms Daykin's second submission to the judge
    arose at the end of the evidence-taking and was to ask for the  hearing
    to be abandoned and start with  a  new  interpreter,  alternatively  to
    adjourn.  The grounds continue:

         "11. The application to adjourn was  based  on  the  interpretation
             issues observed in court summarised above.   Furthermore,  the
             Appellant was uneasy and confused by the interpreter  and  not
             satisfied  that  he  had  interpreted  questions  exactly  and
             particularly when asked questions about the conversations with
             his mother the interpreter distinguished between the first and
             second conversation which was not the actual question.

         12.  The  application  to  adjourn  was  in  order  to  obtain  the
             recording and check the  accuracy  of  the  interpretation  in
             light of the issues that had arisen.   The  FTTJ  refused  the
             application and stated that he had to consider  the  interests
             of justice and that we had been going since 11.30 and  it  was
             now 2pm.  That he hadn't picked up interpreter problems.   The
             FTTJ was satisfied that the Appellant understands and couldn't
             see how an adjournment would help.

         13.  The hearing concluded and  the  decision  was  reserved.   The
             appellant's representative requested a copy of  the  recording
             immediately after the hearing and was informed how to make the
             request in writing.  This was  done  prior  to  receiving  the
             FTT's determination but has yet to be received.  A  transcript
             of the recording will be produced when the recording  is  made
             available.

         14.  It goes without saying  that  accuracy  of  interpretation  in
             protection cases that turn on credibility is fundamental to  a
             fair hearing.  The recording of FTT hearings is relatively new
             but the advantage of such recordings is that the  issues  that
             arose in this hearing could have been effectively  dealt  with
             by a short adjournment and it was appropriate in the interests
             of justice and fairness and was the proportionate step in  all
             the circumstances".

6.   Produced in time for the hearing  before  me  was  a  bundle  of  email
    correspondence   relating   to   the   efforts   of   the   appellant's
    representatives to obtain the audio transcript of the hearing.

7.   In deciding ground (1) I face several  difficulties:  first,  no  audio
    transcript has been made available; second, the Home Office  Presenting
    Officer's  note   does   not   even   record   that   the   appellant's
    representatives sought an adjournment; third,  the  judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings only covers the adjournment request summarily.  The  upshot
    is that the only detailed record of what happened is that  produced  by
    Ms Daykin and, in  the  absence  of  any  record  contradicting  it,  I
    consider it would be unsafe to reject it.  I further note that the Home
    Office Presenting Officer's submission as recorded in paragraph  25  of
    the decision appeared to accept at one point that  questions  were  not
    properly  being  translated.   For  the  HOPO  this  showed  that   the
    appellant's English was good enough not to need an interpreter, but the
    appellant had elected to give his evidence through an  interpreter  and
    the judge did not suggest that he should not be afforded interpretation
    facilities.  Also, to  have  sought  to  rely  on  the  fact  that  the
    translating "flowed quite well" does not  assist  if  it  was  in  fact
    inaccurate.

8.   I also consider ground (2) properly identifies  a  shortcoming  in  the
    judge's treatment of the documentary evidence concerning  an  ex  parte
    non-molestation order that had  been  issued  against  the  appellant's
    friend in 2015.  Regarding this the judge stated at paragraphs 43-44 as
    follows:

         "43. I accept that  an  ex-parte  non-molestation  order  was  made
             against the appellant's  friend  on  30  January  2015  and  a
             substantive order was made on 4 March 2015 which expired on 30
             July 2015.  The documents relating  to  that  application  are
             contained in a separate bundle headed 'Applicant's bundle'.  I
             note that appellant or his representative  has  ticked  box  6
             which describes the relationship as  'were  cohabiting'.   Box
             13, which describes where, 'you are having,  or  have  had  an
             intimate personal relationship which is or was of  significant
             duration', has not been ticked.  In his witness  statement  in
             support of that order, the appellant stated that they were  in
             a homosexual relationship with each other from  January  2013.
             That statement is dated 12 January 2015.  The  appellant  also
             stated he left the 'cohabitation home' on 10 November 2014.  I
             regard a  relationship  which  lasted  from  January  2013  to
             November 2014 to be one which was of a  significant  duration.
             The fact that the relationship was described  as  one  of  co-
             habitation rather than being an intimate personal relationship
             also casts doubt  on  the  truth  of  the  relationship  which
             existed.  It is also recorded in the Order that  at  the  time
             the court dealt with the case, the respondent had not attended
             court and had not booked in with the court  usher.   Once  the
             case was concluded at 10.35am and the parties had left  court,
             the respondent then walked into court and stated that  he  had
             seen his name on the court list and had come into court.   The
             respondent confirmed that he had  no  issues  with  the  order
             remaining in force.

         44.  I find that the non-molestation  order,  whilst  probative  of
             cohabitation, is not probative  of  a  same  sex  relationship
             between the appellant and the respondent to that  application.
             Nor is the non-molestation order proof of  the  truth  of  the
             appellant's statement provided in support, which was  untested
             and not challenged".

9.   The difficulty with this assessment is  first  of  all  that  the  form
    instructs that only one box is ticked, and second that the court's  own
    guide to non-molestation orders defines a  cohabiting  relationship  as
    one involving a couple living together and the form provides a separate
    box (box 7) for the situation where "Both of you live or have lived  in
    the same household".  In assessing this evidence, the judge should also
    have taken into account that the appellant's first  witness  statement,
    dated 12 January 2015, described the appellant as being in a homosexual
    relationship with this person.

10.  Nothing I have said to this point should be taken to suggest a view  as
    to whether the appellant should be accepted as credible or not, but the
    difficulties I have identified in the judge's decision necessitate that
    I set it aside for material error of law and  remit  to  the  FtT  (not
    before Judge Ross) and not before the same interpreter.

11.  To conclude:

    The decision is set aside for material error of law.

    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Ross).

12.  An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 28 February 2019

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

