
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01808/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 May 2019                               |On 17 May 2019                |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                                 ANTHONY [S]
                              (AKA ANTHONY [W])
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr. T. Lindsey, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:         Mr. G. Lee of counsel, instructed by Liberty &
                      Co Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS



BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent  is  a  national  of  Jamaica.  He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom, as a visitor, on 9 February 2002 and was subsequently  granted
    leave to remain, as a student, until 31 May 2003. He married a  British
    citizen on 23 April 2003 and they had three children together.  He  was
    initially refused leave to remain as  her  spouse  but  his  subsequent
    appeal was successful and he was granted discretionary leave to  remain
    from 28 August 2007 until 28 August 2010. This was then extended  until
    28 August 2013.

2.    On  15  July  2013,  the  Respondent  was  sentenced  to  four   years
    imprisonment on each of two counts of possession with intent to  supply
    a Class A drug,  namely  crack  cocaine.  The  sentences  were  to  run
    concurrently.

3.   On 5 September 2013 he  was  served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
    automatic deportation and a decision was  made  to  deport  him  on  18
    September 2014. His appeal against  this  decision  was  allowed  on  3
    February 2015 on the basis that the Secretary of State  had  failed  to
    consider whether  he  was  entitled  to  a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

4.   Meanwhile, in 2012, the Respondent had met and  formed  a  relationship
    with his present partner, NL. Their first child was born on  14  August
    2016.  NL also has a son from a previous relationship who was  born  in
    2005 and who has complex special needs.

5.   On 29 January 2018 the Respondent's protection and human rights  claims
    were refused and a deportation order was made in relation  to  him.  He
    appealed and the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith who
    allowed his appeal on human rights grounds in a decision promulgated on
    24 January 2019.  On 18 February 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer
    granted the Secretary  of  State  permission  to  appeal  against  this
    decision.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

6.   The Secretary of State filed a skeleton argument on 16 April 20919  and
    the  Respondent  had   previously   submitted   a   skeleton   argument
    incorporating a Rule 24 Response, dated  2  May  2019.  Both  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer and counsel  for  the  Respondent  made  oral
    submissions and I have referred to the content  of  these  submissions,
    where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

7.    At  the  hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Keith,   those
    representing the Respondent confirmed that the Respondent was no longer
    asserting that he  was  entitled  to  refugee  status  or  Humanitarian
    Protection or that his deportation to Jamaica would breach  his  rights
    under Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

8.   He relied on a submission  that  his  deportation  would  amount  to  a
    breach of Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.  The
    Appellant has had children with three women since his  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom and he has eight children with whom he plays a  parental
    role, although not  to  the  same  extent  in  relation  to  his  older
    children.

9.   In paragraph 60 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith  found
    that "the appellant has...   an  on-going  parental  relationship  with
    children 1 to 5 as a non-resident parent, and whilst it  would  not  be
    realistic for them to return to Jamaica  with  him,  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh on them if the appellant were deported to Jamaica".

10.  However, in paragraph 61 of his decision, he also found that "the  real
    focus lay in respect of children 6 to 8 and the impact on NL. As I have
    already outlined,  given  child  6's  complex  behavioural  issues  and
    medical needs and NL's own vulnerability, the question whether  it  was
    not only unduly harsh, but beyond that that  there  were  powerful  and
    irresistible factors which despite the public interest being clear,  it
    was one of those rare cases where the public interest was outweighed by
    article 8 considerations".

11.  When he gave permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
    found that it was arguable that  the  Judge  had  materially  erred  in
    finding that the factual matrix he had determined  met  the  very  high
    threshold required  to  avoid  the  consequences  of  a  4-year  prison
    sentence.

12.  However, I note  that  in  paragraph  38  of  his  decision  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Keith had reminded himself of  the  content  of  Section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which sets out
    "additional considerations in cases involving  foreign  criminals"  who
    have submitted that it would amount to a breach of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights to  deport  them  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  Its sub-sections state:

         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of   imprisonment of four years or more,
             the  public   interest   requires   C's   deportation   unless
             Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C had been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying   partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the  effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child  would
             be unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".


13.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Keith had in practice not applied the  correct  test  because  in
    paragraph 23 of his decision he had referred to the test being  one  of
    "compelling circumstances". However, he  was  correct  to  do  so  when
    referring to  the  test  contained  in  paragraph  399A(b)(ii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Furthermore, when setting out the four legal  issues
    to be addressed in his  decision,  he  was  correct  to  identify  that
    different tests to applied to those who can bring themselves within the
    exceptions contained in paragraphs 399  and  399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and those who cannot. He also made it clear that where  a  person
    did not fall within these exceptions, because of the length of  his  or
    her  sentence  the  test  was  whether  there  were  "very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A".

14.  I have also noted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith referred to  the
    test as being one of very compelling circumstances  in  paragraphs  11,
    20, 32, 33, 36, 62 and 63 of his decision. Therefore, I find that First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Keith was well aware of the test which  he  had  to
    apply.

15.  It  is  correct  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keith  referred  to
    "powerful and irresistible factors" in paragraph 61 of his decision but
    this phrase derives from  paragraph  28  of  Lord  Justice  McFarlane's
    judgment in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Garzon  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1225 where he concluded that:

         "The present case is, in my view,  different.  As  Mr  Lee  rightly
         submits, an appellant court must afford due deference  and  respect
         to the evaluation of an expert tribunal charged with administrating
         a complex area of law in challenging  circumstances  (per  Baroness
         Hale in AH (Sudan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [20018] 1 AC 678 at paragraph 30). As Miss Rowlands accepts, in the
         present  case  the  FTT  identified   each   and   every   relevant
         circumstance, both for and against deportation. There is  no  error
         of law in terms of the identification of  the  relevant  provisions
         and the structure of the tribunal's  decision  making.  The  appeal
         solely turns on the attribution of weight. The tribunal  had  heard
         oral evidence over the course of 3 separate days from  a  range  of
         witnesses,  including  a  police  officer.  As  the  terms  of  its
         decisions demonstrate, at all times the tribunal kept in  mind  the
         seriousness of the respondent's criminal behaviour, conducted  over
         a period of years, and had in mind the  "great  weight"  that  must
         attach  to  the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign  national
         criminals. In its final  paragraph,  the  tribunal  refers  to  the
         phrase  "very  compelling  circumstances",  observes  that   "very"
         indicates  a  very  high  threshold  and  observes  that  the  word
         "compelling"   means   circumstances   which   have   a   powerful,
         irresistible, and convincing effect. It is hard to contemplate  how
         the tribunal could have  demonstrated  any  greater  focus  on  the
         public policy factors in favour of deportation".


16.  It was also a phrase that was very apt  to  part  of  the  task  to  be
    undertaken by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith in the appeal before  him
    and did not indicate that he had re-formulated the overall test  to  be
    applied. In addition, in a very detailed and cogent  decision  he  gave
    appropriate weight to the seriousness of the Respondent's offending and
    the public interest in deporting foreign  criminals.  For  example,  in
    paragraph 59 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith stated:

         "I was very conscious that the public interest was unequivocally in
         favour of the appellant's deportation", which indicated that he had
         taken into account section 117C (1) of the 2002 Act.  He  was  also
         aware of the content of section 117C(2) of the Act,  as in the same
         paragraph he noted the seriousness of the Respondent's offence  and
         the fact that he had received two concurrent  prison  sentences  of
         four years and added that "the seriousness of the offence cannot be
         overstated in the circumstances. He is not an honest man and  seeks
         to absolve himself from responsibility".


17.  However, his finding in relation to the public interest  could  not  be
    determinative of the appeal, as suggested by the Home Office Presenting
    Officer in paragraph 29 of his skeleton argument. In  paragraph  38  of
    Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC  60
    Lord Reed, giving judgement on behalf of the Supreme Court, found that:

         "... Cases not covered by those rules  (that  is  to  say,  foreign
         offenders who have received sentences of at least  four  years,  or
         who have received sentences  of between 12 months  and  four  years
         but whose private or family life does not meet the requirements  of
         paragraphs 399 and 399A ) will be dealt  with  on  the  basis  that
         great weight should generally be given to the  public  interest  in
         the deportation of such offenders, but that it can  be  outweighed,
         applying a proportionality test, by very compelling  circumstances:
         in other words by a very strong claim indeed".


18.  He also went on to find that:

         "... The Strasbourg jurisprudence  indicates  relevant  factors  to
         consider, and paragraph 399 and 399A provide an indication  of  the
         sorts of matters which the  Secretary  of  State  regards  as  very
         compelling.  As  explained  at  para.26  above,  they  can  include
         factors bearing on the  weight  of  the  public  interests  in  the
         deportation of the particular offender, such as his  conduct  since
         the offence was committed, as  well  as  factors  relating  to  his
         private or family life..."


19.  In this particular case, these factors  related  to  child  6  and  the
    ability of his mother to care for him as a single mother. As  was  made
    clear by Sir Patrick Elias in paragraph 21 of Forrester v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 2653:

         "... in a sufficiently strong case there may be factors relating to
         a particular exception which can amount to something over and above
         the exception  constituting  compelling  circumstances  within  the
         meaning of the statute.  This point was made by Jackson  LJ  in  NA
         (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
         Civ 662 where he explained that circumstances over  and  above  the
         exceptions do not necessarily  mean  that  the  test  can  only  be
         satisfied where there are circumstances or considerations which are
         independent of the  exceptions.   There  may  be  cases  where  the
         circumstances are compelling because the exception  is  not  merely
         satisfied but is engaged in a particularly  robust  way  so  as  to
         provide a very strong  article  8  claim  capable  on  its  own  of
         amounting to compelling circumstances...".


20.  In the current appeal, the very  compelling  circumstances  related  to
    the effect on child 6 if the Respondent was deported,  which  would  be
    triggered by his own special needs  and  the  fact  that  his  mother's
    mental health would impact on her ability to parent him on her own.

21.  The Home Office  Presenting  Officer  also  submitted  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to give sufficient weight to the Respondent's
    past immigration history. However, as made clear by the Upper  Tribunal
    in MS (s.177C(6): "very compelling circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]
    UKUT 00122 (IAC):

         "In determining pursuant to section  117C(6)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 whether there are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2
         in subsections (4) and (5), such as to outweigh the public interest
         in the deportation of a foreign criminal, a court or tribunal  must
         take  into  account,  together  with  any  other  relevant   public
         interests considerations, the seriousness of the particular offence
         of which the foreign criminal was convicted; not merely whether the
         foreign criminal was or was not sentenced to imprisonment  of  more
         than 4 years".


22.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith had already found  that,  even  if  the
    Respondent had not been sentenced to four years in prison, he would not
    have been able to bring himself  within  the  exceptions  contained  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A. It was when considering those exceptions  that
    the Respondent's past immigration history  would  have  been  primarily
    relevant. His serious offending eclipsed his immigration  history  and,
    therefore, any lack of reasoning about  his  past  immigration  history
    could not have a  material  effect  on  the  lawfulness  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Keith's decision.

23.  The Home Office Presenting Officer also  submitted  that  the  evidence
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith was  insufficient  to  meet  the
    necessary very exceptional circumstances test.  However, I  have  taken
    into account the wealth of evidence before him and the fact that he had
    the benefit of hearing oral evidence from the three witnesses about the
    likely effect of the Respondent's deportation on child  6  and  NL  and
    their children. In addition, the evidence supported First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Keith's findings in paragraph 46 of his  decision  that  Child  6
    suffers from dyspraxia, dyslexia and attention deficit disorder and  is
    being assessed as a child who may be  on  the  autistic  spectrum.  The
    evidence also indicated that he was at  risk  of  self-harm  and  going
    missing and that his behaviour towards NL was increasingly  aggressive.
    This  coupled  with  NL's  parents  developing   medical   difficulties
    indicated that if the Respondent  was  deported  the  family  would  no
    longer be able to keep Child 6 safe. In this context, it was not merely
    speculative  for  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keith  to  conclude   in
    paragraphs 52 and 62 of his decision that the  evidence  taken  in  its
    totality indicated that the family unit would break down  and  child  6
    may be taken into care.

24.  In the light of the evidence when viewed holistically, it could not  be
    inferred  that  the  health  visitor  was  merely  referring   to   the
    possibility of the family unit being broken up by the Respondent  being
    deported.

25.  The Home Office Presenting Officer also noted that NL  had  coped  with
    child 6 when the Respondent was in prison but the evidence was that  at
    that time she was receiving a level of  support  from  her  own  mother
    which  was  no  longer  available  due  to  her  mother  and   father's
    deteriorating health.   NL's  own  evidence  also  indicated  that  her
    depression and anxiety was capable of preventing her from  coping  with
    difficult and challenging situations, such as child 6's complex special
    needs.

26.  It is my view that the decision, read as  a  whole,  was  well-reasoned
    and sustainable in law and could not be undermined by concentrating  on
    discrete parts of the decision. I have remined myself that in paragraph
    7 of VHR (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT  00367  (IAC)  Mr.
    Justice Haddon Cave found that:

         "In our judgment, the problem with Mr. Chelvan's approach and  this
         appeal is that he has sought to comb through the judgment as if  it
         were a statute and pick bits here and there out of  context  whilst
         ignoring the overall findings of the Determination and reasons  and
         the conclusions".


27.  In the light of the evidence before the Judge, the fact  that  child  6
    has been referred to CAMHS and that NL's mother may be able to  provide
    her with a small amount of support were not factors which were  capable
    of themselves of ameliorating the serious consequences for child  6  if
    the Respondent were deported.  In addition, there was  no  evidence  to
    support the contention that the Respondent could  be  able  to  provide
    child 6 with the support he needed  by  means  of  telephone  calls  or
    social media, given the complex  and  serious  nature  of  his  special
    needs.

28.  It was also not the case that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Keith  failed
    to address the tests in  paragraph  399  and  399A  before  considering
    whether there were very compelling circumstances over and  above  these
    exceptions. In paragraph 60 of his decision he found that it would  not
    be unduly harsh on children 1 to 5 for the Respondent to  be  deported.
    He also made it clear that the very compelling circumstances related to
    children 6 to 8 and, in particular, child 6. His findings  in  relation
    to child 6's mother concentrated on the impact of her mental ill-health
    on her ability to keep child 6 safe not on her  relationship  with  the
    Respondent and any impact on her of him being deported.

29.  I have also taken into account the fact that at paragraph 17 of MS  the
    Upper Tribunal found that:

         "... the issue of whether "there are very compelling circumstances,
         over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2" is not in any
         sense a hard-edged question. On the contrary, it calls for a  wide-
         ranging evaluative exercise. As NA (Pakistan) holds, that  exercise
         is required, in each such case..."


30.  I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith undertook such an  exercise
    before concluding at paragraph 62 of his decision that "it was  one  of
    those rare cases. This was a case that went beyond mere normal distress
    at the impact on separation which deportation  would  entail.  It  also
    went beyond being unduly harsh, in the  sense  of  being  'bleak'.  The
    impact was factually that child 6 was likely  to  become  unmanageable,
    with the consequence that that family unit would simply  fragment...The
    consequences for  child  6  would  be...catastrophic.  The  risks,  for
    example, of child 6 going into care or completely running off the rails
    would be real and the breakup of that family unit...would be  so  grave
    as to amount to very compelling circumstances".

31.  For all of these reasons, I find that there were no material errors  of
    law in First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith's decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

(2)  There were no material errors  of  law  in  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Keith's decision and his decision is not set aside.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 16 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

