
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/01713/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|from George House                    |                                     |
|on 25 August 2021                    |On 8 September 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    M E S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt, aged 24.  FtT Judge Bell dismissed
    his appeal by a decision promulgated on 23 February 2021.  His  grounds
    of appeal to the UT assert error in assessing credibility at [19 -  37]
    of the decision.

 2. The grounds focus on absence or inadequacy of reasons in respect  of  a
    psychological report stating that inconsistencies might be expected  in
    the appellant's account, and in respect of both the appellant  and  his
    brother being vulnerable witnesses.

 3. Designated Judge Shaerf granted permission on 16  April  2021,  on  the
    view that the judge "... arguably erred in her  treatment  of  the  two
    medical reports in her  assessment  of  credibility  ...  the  scarring
    report stated that scarring is consistent with claimed torture and ill-
    treatment but the judge arguably failed adequately to explain  why  she
    did not accept this part of the report.  Similarly, she arguably  erred
    in not explaining why she rejected the psychological report  diagnosing
    PTSD or why she accepted it but did not find it an adequate explanation
    for the inconsistencies ... in the evidence".

 4. Under the heading "medical evidence", the "scarring" report,  by  Mr  R
    Crawford, is summarised, briefly but accurately, at [16 -  17].   Under
    the heading "conclusions on the medical evidence" at [40-41], the judge
    accepts the principal finding in that report, but declines to find that
    the injury was sustained as described by the appellant.

 5. Mr Winter, correctly, accepted that this report was not "rejected", and
    did not further press this aspect of the challenge, except  to  observe
    that it would have been open to the judge, and would  be  open  in  any
    rehearing, to find that it supports the appellant's account of events.

 6. Mr Winter concentrated on the judge's treatment of the report of  Dr  F
    Morrison, consultant clinical psychologist.  This  report  states  that
    the appellant "presented with difficulties including concentration  and
    memory problems" and  with  "difficulties  with  regards  to  providing
    detailed account of events he had experienced".  In his conclusion,  Dr
    Morrison  says  "...  it  is  reasonable  to  assume   there   may   be
    inconsistencies"  in  recollecting  events  from  when  he  experienced
    trauma.  His memory of those events is "likely to be incomplete, and he
    may present in an inconsistent manner".

 7. This report is noted, again briefly but accurately, at [18].

 8. Under the heading "credibility" and the sub-heading  "date  of  arrest"
    the judge deals with the appellant saying firstly that he was  arrested
    in January 2013 but later that it  was  in  July  2013.   At  [23]  she
    records that he blamed his  poor  memory.   She  deals  next  with  his
    brother's oral evidence, changing the date from July 2013 to July 2014,
    and says that he "could not have been clearer."  At [26-27]  she  finds
    that the dates "simply do not fit together"; takes  into  account  "the
    factors  set  out  in  [23]  above";   and   finds   such   significant
    inconsistency that "some adverse weight must be attached".

 9. Mr Winter  observed  that  this  reasoning  refers  back  only  to  the
    appellant saying he had a poor memory and says  nothing  about  whether
    the medical  evidence  summarised  at  [18]  played  any  part  in  the
    assessment.  He said that there was either an omission to  explain  why
    the report was not accepted, or if it was accepted, what part it played
    in the  conclusion  reached.   He  further  submitted  that  there  was
    uncontested evidence that the appellant's brother suffered from  mental
    health issues (which had led to his appeal being allowed) but that  was
    not taken into account.

10. Under her next sub-heading, "reporting  to  the  authorities  in  Egypt
    after  leaving   hospital",   the   judge   deals   with   "significant
    inconsistencies" over timing and frequency,  and  at  [31]  finds  that
    although she takes into account "his difficulty with memory" she  finds
    it "very unlikely that he could  fail  to  recall  whether  or  not  he
    reported to the police before leaving Egypt and the difference  between
    3 weeks and several months is a significant one".

11. Mr Winter said this finding was flawed in the same ways as the  finding
    at  [27],  and  that  the  flaws  were  not  cured  by   reference   to
    psychological symptoms at [42] and by "looking at the evidence  in  the
    round" at [43].

12. Mr Whitwell observed that the medical reports did not say the appellant
    was unfit to give evidence, or liable to give "an  entirely  discrepant
    account".  He said that the judge directed herself correctly at [15] on
    approaching the evidence in  context  of  medical  evidence  about  the
    mental health of both the appellant and his brother, and applied  those
    directions at [27, 31 and 34], "bookended" at  [37]  by  the  justified
    conclusion that medical and other evidence did not  adequately  account
    for the major discrepancies.   He  acknowledged  that  apart  from  the
    section headed "section 8" on failure to claim in other  countries  for
    several years, he could not point to reasoning based  on  anything  but
    discrepancies.  He submitted that there is no rule that the case of  an
    appellant with mental health  issues  must  be  taken  at  its  highest
    possible value, and  that  the  grounds  resolved  into  no  more  than
    disagreement with adverse credibility  findings  for  which  a  legally
    adequate explanation was given.

13. Mr Winter in reply said that the decision at [37] did not add  anything
    to fill in the gaps  between  the  medical  evidence  and  the  judge's
    findings, and reasoning to support those conclusions was absent.

14. I reserved my decision.

15. The appellant presented evidence that he was liable, for mental  health
    reasons, not  to  be  a  consistent  witness.   I  readily  accept  the
    submission that there is no rule that he was thereby  entitled  to  the
    most favourable possible reading of his evidence.  However, in  such  a
    case care needs to be taken not to found  only  on  discrepancies  over
    timing and frequency of events, and to look  at  whether  discrepancies
    are of a nature not explained  by  psychological  issues,  and  whether
    there are other reasons to find an  account  unreliable.   Mr  Whitwell
    identified other reasoning only under "section 8".

16. The reasoning under the heading "date of arrest", read  closely,  opens
    the way to the criticism  that  [27]  takes  account  only  of  claimed
    difficulty of recollection, and not of support for that in  the  expert
    evidence.

17. That finding is only of "some adverse weight", but the  same  criticism
    attaches to the finding at [31], "very unlikely", which is so trenchant
    as to be near to determinative.

18. Decisions should not be undermined by too minute a search for errors or
    omissions.  The judge was bound in parts of her decision to go  into  a
    series of details.  In the decision as a whole, she repeatedly  reminds
    herself to view the  evidence  in  the  context  of  the  psychological
    report.

19. The judge's point about "section 8" is  quite  strong.   Oddly,  it  is
    dealt  with  only  after  stating  an   overall   adverse   credibility
    conclusion.  The judge may have had in mind the  need  for  caution  in
    reaching conclusions based on failure to claim promptly, or  elsewhere;
    but this remains a matter to be considered  in  the  round  along  with
    everything else.   If there was an error in that respect, it  does  not
    in itself tend against the appellant, but it does  perhaps  reflect  an
    approach which in reality reached decisive  conclusions  point-by-point
    rather than in the round.

20. At [42] the  judge  finds  that  "if"  the  appellant  experiences  the
    psychological symptoms reported to Dr Morrison those are more likely to
    result from difficult circumstances rather than his claimed experiences
    in Egypt.  It was obviously the judge's task to resolve  whether  those
    experiences were reasonably likely to have happened, but she  does  not
    explain her apparent doubt whether the symptoms were  genuine,  and  it
    was not in dispute that he had suffered serious trauma.

21. At [50], under the heading "article 3 -  medical  grounds",  the  judge
    says that although the appellant has "reported symptoms of  PTSD  there
    is no formal diagnosis" and he is  not  being  treated.   However,  the
    report by Dr Morrison (a  highly  qualified  expert)  states  that  the
    appellant "meets the diagnostic criteria for PTSD".

22. The judge took evident care in reaching her decision, and had  to  deal
    with matters  in  some  order.   However,  drawing  the  above  matters
    together,  the  appellant's  grounds  and  submissions   reach   beyond
    disagreement on the facts.  They disclose a misunderstanding of whether
    the report included a diagnosis; an absence of explanation  whether  or
    why the judge had reservations about  the  report;  and  a  deficit  in
    reasoning why it did  not  sufficiently  resolve  doubts  arising  from
    inconsistencies in the evidence.

23. Parties agreed that if error were to be found, the outcome should be as
    follows.

24. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and the case is  remitted  for  a
    fresh hearing, not before Judge Bell.

25. An anonymity direction is in place.

        Hugh Macleman

      26 August 2021
      UT Judge Macleman






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

