
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01038/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th August 2019                  |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     HA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  in  the  light  of  the
    circumstances surrounding this claim.  Unless and until a court directs
    otherwise the Appellant is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly refer to  her  or  her  family
    members.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
    Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")
    who, in a determination promulgated on the 27 March 2019, dismissed her
    protection and human rights claim.

 3. The background to the Appellant's claim is set out in the determination
    of the FtTJ which made reference to her earlier  claim  made  in  2009,
    which had been refused and dismissed by Immigration Judge Mensah and in
    the decision letter of the  Secretary  of  State  issued  on  the  10th
    January 2019.

 4. The Appellant asserted that she had been denied  Ethiopian  citizenship
    and that whilst resident in Ethiopia she had become interested  in  her
    Eritrean background from her father and this had led to her actions  at
    school and being accused of being a spy for Eritrea and  that  she  had
    been arrested, detained for 3 months and subjected to  sexual  violence
    before her release. She then travelled to Sudan before arriving in  the
    UK via France on the 10th December 2008.  She made a claim  for  asylum
    and that claim was refused by the Secretary of State on the 5  February
    2009.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal came before IJ Mensah on the 26th March 2009 and in  a  decision
    promulgated on the 14th April 2009 her appeal  was  dismissed.  The  IJ
    considered the issue of nationality  in  accordance  with  the  country
    materials that were relevant at that date and found  that  she  was  an
    Ethiopian national. The IJ rejected her account of the events that  had
    occurred in Ethiopia and did not accept that she had been  arrested  in
    2008 for the reasons that she had given and that it  was  not  credible
    that the school would provide students with Eritrean newspapers or that
    it would be necessary to involve the police when they had intercepted a
    letter a student had written in response  to  a  page  in  one  of  the
    newspapers provided by the school. Judge also found  that  it  was  not
    credible the police would take any interest in such a  letter  or  that
    she would be deemed a spy. The judge therefore found that  she  had  no
    political profile and was not risk on return.

 6. Permission to appeal that decision  was  sought  and  refused  and  she
    became appeal rights exhausted by 28  July  2009.  Further  submissions
    were provided which included further evidence which resulted in a fresh
    decision to refuse her asylum claim but with an  in  -county  right  of
    appeal (see decision of the 10th January 2019).

 7. The appeal was heard by the FtTJ  on  the  5  March  2019  and  in  his
    decision promulgated on the 27 March 2019, her  appeal  was  dismissed.
    The FtTJ began his assessment of the evidence by  making  reference  to
    the previous claim for  asylum  that  are  been  refused  in  2009.  At
    paragraph 59 he recorded that whilst the previous determination was his
    starting point (applying the decision in Devaseelan), he accepted  that
    there were "various significant matters" that  has  arisen  since  2009
    that could reasonably permit departure from that decision and  that  he
    was not bound by the previous determination and conclusions in light of
    the further evidence which included the  promulgation  of  the  country
    guidance of ST (promulgated since 2009),  the  further  evidence  which
    included the visits to the embassy  and  the  expert  evidence  in  the
    medical report. Whilst he found that she had given a broadly consistent
    account which was  prime  facie  plausible  in  light  of  the  country
    evidence which enhanced her credibility, he  found  that  she  had  not
    taken reasonable steps to establish her nationality (see paragraphs  61
    - 64), that there were  material  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    account which he did not accept  were  as  a  result  of  her  previous
    history and her mental health problems and  that  whilst  there  was  a
    medicolegal report, the report accepted the appellant's account at face
    value, had not adequately addressed the inconsistencies and that it was
    not unlikely that her symptoms were as a result of wishing to  stay  in
    the UK, as a result of her earlier experiences in childhood and  having
    been assessed by a doctor (see paragraph 69). Thus, whilst he  accepted
    that she suffered from some mental  health  difficulties,  he  was  not
    satisfied that she had lost Ethiopian  nationality,  or  that  she  was
    arrested, detained or  ill-treated  as  she  claimed  (see  summary  at
    paragraphs 72 - 73). He therefore dismissed her appeal.

 8. Permission to appeal that  decision  was  sought  and  granted  on  all
    grounds by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Scott-Baker) on the 20th June
    2019 for the following reasons:

         "The finding at [72] that  the  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
         evidence are not due to mental health or memory problems  but  were
         made to embellish the claim is arguably against the weight  of  the
         evidence before the judge and is inadequately reasoned.  The  judge
         failed to have regard to all of the evidence  before  him  relating
         the appellant's mental health and the diagnosis of PTSD. The  judge
         has arguably failed to give due regard to  the  possible  different
         spellings of the appellant  surname  and  in  the  context  of  the
         interview with the Ethiopian embassy  and  is  arguably  failed  to
         consider as to whether the appellant  has  done  all  that  can  be
         reasonably expected  of  her.  There  may  be  some  merit  in  the
         assertion that  there  is  an  argue  error  of  law  for  lack  of
         reasoning. Permission is granted."

 9. The appeal was therefore listed before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  At  that
    hearing the appellant was  represented  by  Mr  Greer  of  Counsel  who
    appeared  before  the  FtTJ,  and  had  drafted  the  grounds,  and  Ms
    Petterson,  Senior  Presenting  Officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.

10. I was able to hear detailed submission from  the  advocates  and  I  am
    grateful to Mr Greer and Ms  Petterson  for  their  assistance  on  the
    issues that arise in  the  four  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant. I confirm  that  I  have  considered  those  submissions  in
    accordance with the decision of the FtTJ and the grounds which had been
    filed before the Upper Tribunal. I further confirm that  I  have  given
    full consideration to those submissions  which  I  have  heard,  and  I
    intend to incorporate those submissions into my analysis of the grounds
    that are relied upon by the appellant.

Decision on the error of law:

11. Having the  opportunity  to  hear  those  detailed  submissions,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant has made out a case that the  decision  of
    the FtTJ involved the making of an error of law. I  shall  set  out  my
    reasons for reaching that decision below.


12. Dealing with ground 1, Mr Greer submits that the FtTJ gave undue weight
    to an immaterial matter (see written grounds). The ground  is  directed
    to the appellant's attendance at the embassy on two occasions in  order
    to satisfy the requirements set out in the country guidance decision of
    ST (Ethnic Eritrean-nationality-return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT OO  252
    (IAC).

13. He submits that the appellant submitted unchallenged evidence that  she
    had attended the Ethiopian embassy in London on two separate  occasions
    but was denied evidence of her entitlement  to  Ethiopian  citizenship.
    Whilst he submits that  it  was  refused  due  to  her  mixed  Eritrean
    heritage, that was not  expressly  a  reason  stated  by  the  embassy,
    however I accept that it could be an inference drawn from  the  refusal
    to provide her  with  the  relevant  documentation.  His  referred  the
    Tribunal to paragraph 62 of the FtTJ's decision where the judge set out
    his finding on this issue and whether she had taken reasonable steps to
    establish her nationality but expressly considered that by missing  out
    a letter from her father's name, the appellant had deliberately  sought
    to frustrate the process at the embassy by  giving  such  an  incorrect
    spelling (as set out at paragraph 45 of the decision).

14.  Mr  Greer  therefore  makes  three  submissions;  firstly,  that   the
    inconsistency identified is so minor "to be trifling",  secondly,  that
    it is inherently unlikely that the appellant would seek to conceal  her
    identity by giving her true  name  but  with  one  letter  missing  and
    thirdly, that the name given was a  different  transliteration  of  the
    name.

15. By way of reply Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent  submits  that
    the FtTJ correctly set out at paragraph 62 the evidence by reference to
    the document submitted and that whilst it might be seen as trivial,  it
    was not the only reason the FtTJ gave, as  at  paragraph  63  the  FtTJ
    referred to the appellant's failure to trace her family  and  also  her
    school. Therefore it was understandable  why  the  embassy  refused  to
    provide a with documents she had not established who she was.

16. Mr Greer responded by referring to specific paragraphs in  the  country
    guidance decision of ST (as cited) that dealt with the availability  of
    documentation in Ethiopian and also the stance taken by  the  Ethiopian
    authorities.

17. I have therefore considered those submissions in  the  context  of  the
    decision of the FtTJ. At paragraph 62, the FtTJ properly had regard  to
    paragraph 5 of the headnote of the country guidance decision in ST  and
    by reference to approaching the embassy with documents  emanating  from
    Ethiopia. At  paragraph  63,  the  FtTJ  took  into  account  that  the
    appellant had difficulty in establishing her identity  as  she  had  no
    documentation with her but went on to  find  that  she  had  not  taken
    reasonable steps to otherwise establish her identity. The reasons given
    at paragraph  62  related  to  the  incorrect  spelling  given  by  the
    appellant when attending at the embassy. I cannot accept the submission
    made that this was the sole basis for the FtTJ discounting her  attempt
    to obtain documentation from the embassy. As Ms Petterson submits, that
    submission fails to take into account the FtTJ's decision at  paragraph
    63 where he gave other reasons by reference to the appellant's  failure
    to seek to contact her mother for supportive documents and at paragraph
    64, failure to contact school.

18. The inconsistency identified  by  the  FtTJ  in  the  spelling  of  her
    father's name is also properly recorded by the FTT J at  paragraph  62.
    He correctly identified the written evidence set out in the application
    form exhibited in the papers at B37. It was open to the  FtTJ  to  take
    into account her oral evidence as to how the mistake  occurred  and  to
    reach the conclusion that the  explanation  provided  by  her  was  not
    credible and to reject her account that on two different occasions  the
    appellant and an  official  would  both  independently  make  the  same
    spelling error. The finding made that the appellant  on  two  occasions
    had given the embassy an incorrect spelling was therefore open  to  the
    judge to make.  Whilst  Mr  Greer  submits  that  the  spelling  was  a
    "mistranslation" in Amharic, there  is  no  evidence  to  support  that
    submission and it was not suggested by the appellant  or  supported  by
    any evidence reference to the Amharic language.

19.  What  is  not  so  clear  is  whether  that  difference   (either   by
    intentionally doing so or by way of mistake) would have frustrated  the
    process, which is the overarching finding made by the judge. The reason
    given for the refusal by the embassy is set out  at  B40  where  it  is
    recorded that "the applicant does not attach supportive documents  with
    her application for an Ethiopian passport. Therefore there is no  valid
    reason for the embassy to issue her with an Ethiopian passport."  There
    is  no  reference  made  to  any  other  information  provided  in  the
    application form such as the details  given  by  her  relating  to  her
    parents, and education. Nor is there any reference to any inconsistency
    in the spelling of her father's  name.  Whilst  paragraph  105  of  the
    country guidance decision makes reference  to  an  appellant  producing
    documents and in the alternative such a person should  put  in  writing
    all the relevant details,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  refusal  to
    recognise her nationality was as a result of the misstated spelling. To
    that extent, the inconsistency relied on by the judge is not by  itself
    sufficient to undermine the appellant's attempt to obtain  confirmation
    of her nationality.

20. Furthermore, I am satisfied that the other reasons given  at  paragraph
    63 - 64 failed to take into account the context of the evidence set out
    in the country guidance case of ST (as cited). As Mr Greer points  out,
    while the judge  criticised  the  appellant  for  failing  to  ask  for
    supporting documents from her mother, this failed to take into  account
    whether such documents  in  fact  existed.  At  paragraph  106  of  the
    decision  in  ST,  reference  is  made  to  documents  such  as   birth
    certificates  noting  that   most   Ethiopians   do   not   have   such
    documentation. At  paragraph  107  (D  62),  it  is  stated  the  birth
    certificates are not usual for Ethiopians and that 95% of  births  were
    not registered. The FTT J did not take into account the  evidence  that
    out in the  CG  decision  as  to  the  availability  of  the  documents
    generally in reaching his decision overall as to the reasonableness  of
    her conduct.

21. At paragraph 107, there is also reference to the expert evidence  given
    before the tribunal in ST which refers to anyone who had  been  out  of
    Ethiopian for 10 years would not be expected to be taken back.  On  the
    factual chronology, this arguably applied to the appellant but was  not
    taken into account in assessing the reasonableness of  the  appellant's
    conduct and the decision reached by the embassy as reflected at  B  40.
    Consequently  none  of  those  issues  have  been  factored  into   the
    assessment paragraph 62 - 64. Therefore I am satisfied it  demonstrates
    an error of approach sufficient to undermine the finding  made  by  the
    FtTJ particularly when at paragraph 61 he had found her account to have
    been plausible and consistent with the country materials.

22. Ground 2 to set out  in  the  written  grounds  as  "giving  weight  to
    immaterial matters: delay in  disclosing  sexual  violence."  Mr  Greer
    submits that the FtTJ noted the applicability of the guidance  relating
    to vulnerable and sensitive witnesses (the presidential  guidance)  but
    failed to apply it or in the alternative paid "lip service"  to  it  by
    taking against the appellant  that  she  did  not  mention  when  first
    interviewed the full extent of the sexual violence during  her  claimed
    detention (see paragraph 66 of the FtTJ's decision).  He  submits  that
    the judge failed to recognise  that  women  who  have  suffered  sexual
    violence may be reluctant to  disclose  their  experiences  when  first
    interviewed and particularly when interviewed by  males  and  that  the
    judge by attaching weight to that  delay  as  thereby  undermining  the
    credibility of her account was giving weight to  an  immaterial  matter
    (see paragraph 9 of the written grounds).

23. Ms Petterson submits that the FtTJ at paragraph 66 was not  complaining
    about the delay but the point made was that she had  been  inconsistent
    as to the timing of the misconduct. The evidence before  the  judge  in
    2009 was that the ill-treatment  had  occurred  on  the  way  to  being
    detained rather than as explained in the evidence before  the  Tribunal
    in 2019 and it was this that the FtTJ was considering at paragraph  66.
    Therefore she submits that the FtTJ was not complaining about the delay
    in the  timing  of  the  disclosure,  but  the  issue  related  to  the
    inconsistent evidence of when the ill-treatment occurred.

24. I do not accept the submission made by Mr Greer that the  judge  failed
    to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.  2  of  2010:  Child,
    Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant ("the guidance note") and also
    the Practice Direction, First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable
    Adult and Sensitive Witnesses. It is plain that the judge had regard to
    the medico legal report at paragraph 32 which set out the reference  in
    that report to the appellant's difficulty in giving an account, the use
    of language was limited and that she was better able  to  respond  when
    asked  direct  questions.  At  paragraph  36,  the  FtTJ  set  out  the
    conclusion reached by the expert that the appellant met the  diagnostic
    criteria for depression and for  PTSD.  Against  that  background,  the
    judge properly treated the appellant as a  vulnerable  witness  and  at
    paragraph 54 expressly said so and set out  the  special  measures  and
    steps taken to ensure that she was able to give her evidence.

25. The grounds set out in extract from AZ (trafficked women)  Thailand  CG
    [2010] UKUT 118 which considered the position of women suffering trauma
    from sexual abuse/violence in the context of trafficking. That said, it
    seems to me the guidance set out is equally applicable to  any  setting
    in which sexual violence has been said to have occurred. I  would  also
    agree that it is a  well-established  principle  that  those  who  have
    suffered sexual violence may be reluctant to discuss their experiences,
    particularly before males. This is recognised  in  other  jurisdictions
    and is  expressly  recognised  in  the  API  guidance  to  caseworkers.
    Furthermore, a failure to  disclose  information  should  not  be  held
    against someone when there may be many reasons,  including  feeling  of
    guilt and shame.

26. Whilst the grounds refer to paragraph 66, in my judgment this paragraph
    needs to be read in  conjunction  with  the  other  paragraphs  in  the
    determination. At paragraphs 17 - 18, the FtTJ makes reference  to  her
    earlier disclosure of sexual violence in the interview and at paragraph
    20 the judge recorded that at the previous hearing there  had  been  no
    assertion that her account was inaccurate or incomplete.  At  paragraph
    38, the FtTJ sets out the appellant's account to the Dr as to  why  she
    had not disclosed the full details and paragraph 42, the judge set  out
    the appellant's account of her inability to explain this  by  reference
    to the evidence in a witness statement.

27. It is against that evidential background of the FtTJ makes his findings
    at paragraph 65 - 67 and not just paragraph 66 as relied  upon  in  the
    grounds. At paragraph 65, the FtTJ sets out the  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence overall which included at subparagraph  (e)   the  discrepancy
    relating to the ill-treatment and paragraph  66  which  considered  the
    explanation for that specific discrepancy  in  light  of  the  evidence
    earlier recorded at paragraphs 17, 18, 20 and 38 and 42.

28. Whilst Ms Petterson submits that the findings  do  not  relate  to  the
    timing of the disclosure and therefore delay in that  sense,  the  FtTJ
    does attach weight to the delay in giving a full account  of  the  ill-
    treatment suffered in the context of her ability to discuss  the  issue
    in her interview. I consider that whilst it was open to  the  judge  to
    take into account what had been said in the earlier interview  and  the
    context in which it was said,  it  was  also  necessary  to  take  into
    account whether there were any reasons as to why she  would  have  been
    unable to give full disclosure at time. These are the reasons  referred
    to in the submissions made by Mr Greer. Whilst the  FtTJ  purported  to
    consider this at paragraph 67 (not paragraph  66)  reliance  was  still
    placed upon her replies in interview by taking into  account  that  she
    had  given  clear  and  unequivocal  answers  in  her  previous  asylum
    interview that if she had been unable to answer questions correctly the
    judge considered that he would have expected it to be stated  what  she
    thinks happened or to state that she could not recall, which she failed
    to do (see paragraph 67). This does not take into account whether there
    were any reasons do not provide a fuller account and the finding relies
    solely upon the evidence at the time of the interview rather  than  the
    evidence available there after as out in the medico legal report.

29. This leads to ground 3  which  is  based  on  the  assessment  of  that
    evidence. To that end, in my judgment grounds  2  and  3  run  together
    because if the FtTJ considered that the  medical  evidence  in  context
    there may be no error as asserted in ground 2.

30. Mr Greer submits that the judge's assessment of the medical evidence is
    unreasonable and fails to take into account all that  is  set  out  the
    report and that there were  passages  of  the  report  that  have  been
    misunderstood. He set  out  the  specific  references  in  the  written
    grounds which he relied upon in his oral submissions. By way  of  reply
    Ms Petterson submits that the  FtTJ  property  considered  the  medical
    evidence and that reference in the decision was made to  HE  (paragraph
    17) rather than the medical report. However she did  appear  to  accept
    that there was a difficulty  in  the  consideration  of  the  issue  of
    scarring.

31. I preface my consideration of  the  issue  by  stating  that  the  FtTJ
    plainly  took  into  account   the   appellant's   vulnerability   when
    considering the evidence overall (see paragraph 72)  and  that  he  did
    give weight to her evidence in certain respects (see paragraphs 59,  61
    and 71). However, I am satisfied the ground 3 is made out in respect of
    the assessment of the evidence of Dr Webster and the issue of  scarring
    which  is  relevant  to  her  account  of  events   in   Ethiopia   and
    circumstances of her detention.

32. Mr Greer submits the judge misunderstood the conclusions of the medical
    evidence and that there was no concession in the report as detailed  by
    the Dr and as set out at paragraph 68.

33. The issue of scarring is considered in the report at  paragraphs  44  -
    48. The FtTJ records that the Dr conceded that it was not  possible  to
    state the age of the scars (see page 9 of the report). Having read  the
    report, the doctor details the difficulties with dating scars and  that
    once mature, nothing useful in terms of age can be  inferred  from  the
    physical appearance alone. The doctor also make reference to  pigmented
    lesions. However, whilst the FtTJ recorded what was set out at page  9,
    this does not take into account that the Dr went on to  say  that  "the
    appearance of  all  the  lesions  in  this  case  is  in  keeping  with
    timescales related to unless stated  otherwise"  and  therefore  was  a
    modification of what had been said at page 9 but  had  not  been  taken
    into account by the FtTJ in reaching his conclusions.

34. Furthermore, I can see no concession made by the doctor as recorded  by
    the FtTJ at paragraph 68 where there were "many possible causes" of the
    scars documented in the report. I have considered  whether  this  is  a
    reference to the FtTJ's own view but the fact that he had recorded this
    in inverted commas   tends to  suggest  that  the  FtTJ  was  recording
    something set out in the  report.  As  such,  this  misunderstands  the
    report and the approach to the  medical  evidence  is  therefore  on  a
    flawed basis.

35. Furthermore, I accept this submission made by Mr Greer  that  causation
    was considered by  the  Dr  including  the  appellant's  childhood  and
    potential for fabrication (see paragraphs 70, 60 and 66).

36. Ms Petterson appeared to accept that  there  was  difficulty  with  the
    finding at paragraph 68 where the judge made reference to the  lack  of
    reference to scarring in 2009. Mr Greer submits that  in  essence  this
    was a finding that the scars had been  self-inflicted  since  the  last
    appeal and therefore it is contrary to the approach set  out  in  KV  v
    SSHD [2019] UKSC 10.  When reading the paragraph, I am  unclear  as  to
    what the FtTJ intended by his reference to this. Did he,  as  Mr  Greer
    submits, make the finding that the scars had been self-inflicted  since
    the last appeal or was the FtTJ stating that the appellant did not make
    any reference to having scars attributable  to  ill-treatment.  In  the
    absence of any reasoning in this respect I cannot assess which  is  the
    more likely. I would add that in general terms it would not be right to
    attribute weight to the failure to provide  medical  evidence  in  2009
    when this was not something that apparently was pursued at the  hearing
    as a point. There may have been a number of explanations as to why this
    had not occurred and to reach a finding on  this  would  have  required
    more elaboration. I would also agree with the grounds at paragraph 16 -
    18 that the doctor did not arguably accept her account  at  face  value
    when the doctor had highlighted in the report  the  inconsistencies  in
    the appellant's account.

37. As to ground 4, paragraph 65 records the inconsistencies in the account
    set out above, they were not only identified by the FtTJ  but  also  by
    the expert. At paragraph 66 the FtTJ took into account the  appellant's
    explanation of the discrepancies. However, as Mr Greer  submits  whilst
    it was open to the judge  to  consider  the  generality  of  that,  the
    appellant  did  give  specific  evidence  in  her   witness   statement
    concerning her evidence as to the factual events in Ethiopia  which  do
    not have been engaged with when reciting  those  inconsistencies  other
    than in general terms.


38. In light of the identified errors, I am satisfied that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a  point  of
    law and that the decision should be set aside. Due to the nature of the
    errors of law identified, both Mr Greer and Ms Petterson submitted that
    it will be necessary for a fresh hearing and for findings  of  fact  be
    made. I agree with that submission.  I have therefore  determined  that
    the appeal should be reheard by the First-tier Tribunal  in  accordance
    with the practice statement. Any necessary measures  in  light  of  the
    guidance should be made plain to the First-tier Tribunal in any written
    documentation prior to the hearing is that out in the  decision  of  AM
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1123


Notice of Decision

39. The decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on a  point
    of law; the decision is set aside, and the appeal shall be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing with no  findings  of  fact
    being preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 17/9/2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
