
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01634/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 January 2019              |On 06 February 2019             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    O. N.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Brar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant was granted leave to enter the  United  Kingdom,  and
         did so on 24 June 2009 as a visitor; on expiry  of  the  six  month
         period of leave, she became an overstayer.

      2. On 15 November 2016 the Appellant made  a  protection  claim  based
         upon the risk of harm she would face  in  seeking  to  protect  her
         daughter from the risk of FGM. This claim was refused on 18 January
         2018. The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of her  protection
         claim was heard and allowed by First Tier Tribunal Judge Bircher in
         a decision promulgated on 12 April 2018.

      3. The Respondent's application for permission to appeal  was  refused
         by the First tier Tribunal, but a renewed application to the  Upper
         Tribunal was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  on  14
         September 2018.

      4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to  Rule
         15(2A) for permission to  rely  upon  further  evidence.  Thus  the
         matter came before me.

    The challenge

      5. The Respondent had conceded before the Judge that the Appellant had
         been subject to FGM as a child, and, that her family would wish  to
         subject her daughter to  FGM.  Thus  the  Judge's  focus  was  upon
         whether there  was  a  real  risk  posed  by  the  members  of  the
         Appellant's extended family to her and to her  daughter.  If  there
         was, then the secondary focus was upon whether the  state  afforded
         sufficient protection to its citizens against  such  a  risk,  and,
         whether the Appellant could reasonably be expected  to  avoid  that
         risk by relocation within Senegal.

      6. The grounds are not well drafted. Mr Diwnycz  declined  to  advance
         the first ground, which was that the Judge had erred in failing  to
         deal with the Appellant's delay in making her claim to  protection.
         That delay was noted by the Judge,  and  it  was  open  to  her  to
         conclude that in the light of the Respondent's concessions  of  the
         key planks to the Appellant's account, that it  was  not  an  issue
         that carried any weight in the issues she had to determine.

      7. Mr Diwnycz also accepted that, as drafted, the  grounds  failed  to
         challenge either the assessment of the  sufficiency  of  protection
         afforded by the Senegalese authorities to  its  citizens,  or,  the
         ability of the Appellant  to  relocate.  In  the  circumstances  he
         accepted that the grounds demonstrate no material error of  law  in
         the decision.

      8. Accordingly the grounds fail to disclose any material error of  law
         in the approach taken by the Judge to the appeal that requires  her
         decision to be set aside and remade.







    DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    12 April 2018 contained no material error of law  in  the  decision  to
    allow the Appellant's appeal which requires that  decision  to  be  set
    aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify her. This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with  this  direction
could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 25 January 2018
