
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01134/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 16 November 2020                        |On 1 December 2020              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     MH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms C Bayati, counsel, instructed by Birchtree Law
Chambers
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Abebrese ("the judge") promulgated on 29 May 2020 in which
         he dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
         respondent dated 27 January 2020 refusing his protection and  human
         rights claim.

      2. The appellant is a national of Iran  who  was  born  in  1992.  The
         appellant claims that he is a Christian convert  and  would,  as  a
         consequence, face persecution if removed to Iran. He claims that he
         had been involved in attending House Churches in Iran  for  several
         months before he left the country in  November  2016.  The  Iranian
         authorities raided a House Church in July or August 2016  when  the
         appellant was not in attendance but found a register containing the
         details of attendees. The authorities believed that  the  appellant
         converted to Christianity and, following  a  search  of  his  home,
         found Christian documents and confiscated his laptop. The appellant
         was sent two court summons, one in September 2016 and one after  he
         left the country in November 2016. The appellant arrived in the  UK
         on 12 December 2016.

      3. The respondent did not accept that the appellant  was  a  Christian
         convert and rejected his claim as being incredible.  The  appellant
         appealed the  respondent's  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         pursuant to s.82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      4. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant  and  his  mother,
         who had entered the UK in 2017. The judge summarised  the  evidence
         and set out his findings at [24] to [34]. The  judge  rejected  the
         appellant's account of events that caused him  to  leave  Iran  and
         found that the appellant was not a genuine  Christian  convert.  At
         [25] the judge rejected the appellant's account of  his  friendship
         with a man called Morteza, a Christian, whom he met at a  gym.  The
         judge stated,

             "The fact that Christianity is illegal in  Iran  leads  me  to
             doubt that Morteza would have been wearing  a  cross  necklace
             even if it was not been [sic] worn in the open."

      5. The judge indicated in the same paragraph that he  had  taken  into
         consideration the evidence of the appellant's mother,  but  because
         he had already rejected the appellant's evidence  relating  to  the
         church register the  judge  did  not  find  it  credible  that  the
         appellant would leave personal details on a computer at the  family
         home. The judge stated that the appellant had not mentioned leaving
         personal details  on  a  computer  during  his  substantive  asylum
         interview. The judge dismissed  the  protection  and  human  rights
         appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

      6.  The  grounds  of  appeal  take  issue  with  the  judge's  adverse
         credibility findings. The grounds  assert,  inter  alia,  that  the
         judge was wrong when he stated that  Christianity  was  illegal  in
         Iran, and that the judge made a factual error as the appellant  had
         mentioned  the  confiscation  of  his  laptop  during  his   asylum
         interview and that it contained incriminating evidence. The grounds
         further contend that the judge failed to  adequately  consider  the
         evidence from the appellant's mother.

Discussion

      7. At the start of the 'error of law' hearing Mr Clarke very  properly
         accepted that the judge's adverse credibility findings were unsafe.
         The appellant had mentioned during his substantive asylum interview
         that the Iranian authorities had confiscated his  laptop  (question
         196) and that, as a result of evidence  uncovered  by  the  Iranian
         authorities, including his laptop, his fate was "sealed"  (question
         266). In drawing  an  adverse  inference  on  the  basis  that  the
         appellant made no mention of information contained on his  computer
         during his asylum interview, the judge failed to take into  account
         a relevant consideration and placed weight on an irrelevant matter.

      8. Mr Clarke accepted as accurate my observation at the outset of  the
         'error of law hearing' that the judge  failed  to  make  any  clear
         findings of fact in respect of the credibility of  the  appellant's
         mother. There was no assessment by the judge of the  evidence  from
         the appellant's mother relating to his claimed conversion  and  his
         attendance at a church  in  Chiswick.  The  judge  failed  to  make
         necessary findings in respect of material evidence. Mr Clarke  also
         accepted my observation that the judge failed to deal at  all  with
         the copies of the  two  court  summons  upon  which  the  appellant
         relied. In so doing the judge failed to take into account  relevant
         considerations and failed  to  make  any  findings  in  respect  of
         material evidence.

      9. I am additionally satisfied that  the  judge  wrongly  stated  that
         Christianity was illegal in Iran when relying on this as one of the
         reasons for doubting the appellant's account  of  his  relationship
         with Morteza. It was not however apparent from  the  decision  that
         Morteza was himself a Muslim who  had  converted  to  Christianity.
         Christians who have converted from Islam are  considered  apostates
         in Iran and this is a criminal offence. It is quite  possible  that
         this is  what  the  judge  meant.  His  decision  was  not  however
         sufficiently clear and gives rise to the impression  that  he  took
         into account an inaccurate factual  assertion  when  assessing  the
         appellant's credibility.

     10. For the reasons given above, which were accepted by the respondent,
         I find that the judge has made mistakes of law in his assessment of
         the appellant's credibility and that his decision must be set aside
         in its entirety.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     11. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

     12. I have determined that the judge's decision is  unsafe  because  of
         errors affecting his credibility assessment and his failure to take
         into account relevant evidence. In these circumstances  I  consider
         it appropriate for the case to be remitted back to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for a fresh  hearing,  a  view  with  which  both  parties
         agreed.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
(de novo) by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum   20 November 2020

Signed        Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
