
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01131/2019
                                                               PA/01139/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 August 2020                           |On 18 March 2021               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between
                                     AJ
                                     AA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr T Mahmood instructed by Primus Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office resenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. By a decision dated 15 August 2019 a Judge of  the  Upper  Tribunal
        found the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in a manner material
        to its decision to dismiss the appeal and gave directions  for  the
        further hearing of the appeal. It  is  recorded  at  [11]  of  that
        decision that the appellants' claims as to what  happened  in  Iraq
        are accepted and are  preserved  findings  and  that  it  was  only
        necessary to make findings on the  appellants'  ability  to  obtain
        CSIDs and to internally relocate.
     2. The matter came before the Upper Tribunal next on  14  August  2020
        for a Resumed hearing. Following consideration of the  written  and
        oral evidence a decision was  remotely  promulgated  on  18  August
        2020,  electronically.  On   4   February   2021   the   appellants
        representatives   contacted   the   Upper   Tribunal   asking   for
        developments as they had heard nothing further and had not received
        the decision.  An  investigation  within  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
        resulted  in  a  statement  that  there  was  no  record   of   the
        determination sent on 18 August 2020 on the system.   As a  result,
        the decision has had to be re-promulgated for  which  the  Tribunal
        offers its apologies to the  parties.  The  cause  of  the  failure
        within the IT system is not known.



Background


     3. The appellants are a father and son both  nationals  of  Iraq.  The
        first appellant was born on 1 January 1977.   Dependants  upon  the
        first appellants application are his wife and three daughters.  The
        second appellant was born on 4 December 1999.
     4. Both appellants are of Kurdish ethnicity and nationals of Iraq. The
        judge's findings in relation to the merits of the  appeal  are  set
        out at [66] of the decision of the second appellant (PA/01139/2019)
        in the following terms:


        66.  I note the Respondent accepts that the Appellant is both Iraqi
             and a Kurd. Other than that they don't accept the  claim  that
             relationship with [H] and are critical of issues, such as  the
             interview content and lack of photographs, etc. I have to  say
             that I was particularly struck with the evidence of the child.
             [S] and found her  to  be  entirely  credible  in  remembering
             aspects as well as finding, against the  lower  standard,  the
             rest of the family who gave  evidence  credible  and  although
             there were discrepancies in their various accounts these  were
             just minor discrepancies and not ones that, against the  lower
             standard, led me to doubt their position with  regard  to  the
             basis of the Appellant's appeal regarding being a member of  a
             victim of honour crime. Indeed he  claimed  asylum  almost  as
             soon as he arrived in the  United  Kingdom  albeit  that  (and
             Section 8 must be taken into account here and I do weigh it in
             the balance) he had made a claim in Italy but  of  course  had
             family who had been living in the United Kingdom and I  accept
             his explanation that he wanted  to  move  on  from  Italy  and
             indeed from France to get to the United  Kingdom.  There  were
             striking factors such  as  the  issue  of  various  witnesses,
             remembering the presence of a Kalashnikov rifle and  I  accept
             that errors in an interview are very likely to have been  down
             to the connection problems that are  shown  on  the  paperwork
             with reference to the  interpreter.  His  asylum  claim,  with
             regard to  membership  of  the  particular  social  group,  is
             accepted by me in regard of that aspect.


     5. The family home is in Kirkuk in Iraq.  The basis of the  First-tier
        findings is the second appellant's relationship with his girlfriend
        in Iraq who became pregnant,  resulting  in  problems  between  the
        families, during which the second appellant's  girlfriend's  family
        threatened to harm him and refused to allow him to  marry  her.  It
        was claimed the girlfriend's family had attended at his family home
        and threatened his life and that he feared the  family  would  harm
        him upon return to Iraq.

Discussion

     6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was aware that it  was  necessary  to
        consider  whether   the   parties   could   secure   the   relevant
        documentation. At [67 - 69] of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
        relating to the second appellant it is written:

        67.  I must therefore turn to considering whether he can return  to
             Iraq and in his evidence indeed he accepted that he  could  go
             to the Embassy in the UK and obtain a CSID  card.  He  doesn't
             have one at the moment but he has family  to  assist  him  and
             stated in his own evidence that he could go to London and  get
             such a card, which would be important  for  him  returning  to
             Iraq. Since the 2012 British Embassy confirms that  assistance
             can be provided and since 2014 three documentation centres are
             available,


        68.  I must however therefore turn  to  looking  at  the  issue  of
             internal relocation and future fear. I take into account  that
             he doesn't speak Arabic and  would  have  some  difficulty  in
             Baghdad and has no family in the KRI and  is  of  course  from
             Kirkuk, an area that, until the case of Qaraman  (referred  to
             above) met the Article 15C guidance.


        69.  I turned to look at whether he internally relocate. Whilst  he
             has accepted that he can get a CSID card to ease return but  I
             note that he's a kurd. There  was  no  evidence  of  political
             influence or widespread conduct of those looking  for  him  or
             the of the disgruntled family involved  in  the  honour  crime
             being able to trace him should he return. Indeed, no  credible
             evidence was before me that they are now really attempting  to
             do so, though there was credible evidence that they had sought
             to harm him in Iraq. The father had lost his CSID en route  to
             the UK. The father  did  not  know  whether  they  were  still
             looking for his son.


     7. The judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  records  at  [40]  that  the
        appellant in his oral evidence was not sure about when he had  last
        been in touch with family in Iraq, but that he  had  not  contacted
        his family since he had been in the United Kingdom.
     8. In his asylum interview dated 13 June 2018 the first appellant  was
        asked whether he had any family in Iraq to which he replied  "yes".
        When asked when he was last in contact, he confirmed that he  spoke
        to his father once a month or once in two months.
     9. In his witness statement dated 15 February 2019 the first appellant
        claimed he did not have any family in Baghdad or know anyone living
        there. At [29] it is written:

        29.  I do have contact with my family in Kirkuk. It is mainly on my
             father's side. I ring them around once every month or  two.  I
             also have some contact with my sisters.  However,  it  is  not
             regular. Any contact depends on the Internet. The Internet  is
             not regular in Iraq.

    10. The second appellant in his witness statement of 15  February  2019
        at [29] writes:

        29.  I do not have any contact with anybody in Iraq.  I  understand
             my dad has contact  with  my  paternal  side  of  the  family,
             including my grandparents in Kirkuk.  I  have  not  spoken  to
             them. I have never worked. At the moment I am studying ESOL in
             college in the UK.

    11. Considering the first question of whether the  appellants  will  be
        able to redocument themselves, it is accepted  that  following  the
        introduction of the new Iraqi identity card and the  withdrawal  of
        the CSID that it was not established the appellants will be able to
        obtain a replacement CSID in the UK.
    12. Annex I to the respondents June 2020 CPIN dealing with such  issues
        reads:  Information  obtained  from  the  Home   Office's   Returns
        Logistics Department -  April  2020  Failed  Asylum  Seekers  (FAS)
        Laissez Passers (LPs)

...

Civil Status Identity Cards (CSIDs)

        1) Please can you describe the process of obtaining a Civil  Status
           Identity Card for a failed asylum seeker from the Iraqi  Embassy
           in London in as much detail as possible (please include  details
           of what documents or information are required, timescales etc).


           CSID cards are being phased  out  and  replaced  by  INID  (Iraq
           National Identification) cards. It is not currently possible  to
           apply for an INID card outside of Iraq. As a result,  the  Iraqi
           embassy in London are advising their  nationals  in  the  UK  to
           apply instead for a 'Registration Document  (1957)'  which  they
           can use to apply for other documents such  as  passports  or  an
           INID card once they have returned to Iraq.


           The registration document (1957) must  be  applied  for  on  the
           applicant's behalf by a nominated  representative  in  Iraq.  In
           order  to  start  the  application,  the  individual   requiring
           documentation would normally provide at  least  one  copy  of  a
           national identity document (see above list Q1, FAS) and complete
           a power of attorney (to nominate a representative  in  Iraq)  at
           the Iraqi embassy along  with  the  embassy  issued  application
           forms. If they have no copies of identity  documents  they  also
           would need to complete a British power of attorney validated  by
           the FCO and provide parents names, place and date  of  birth  to
           their nominated representative in Iraq.


           Once  issued  the  nominated  representative   will   send   the
           registration document (1957) to the applicant  in  the  UK.  The
           process takes 1-2 months.


           The HO cannot apply for documentation other than Laissez Passers
           on someone's behalf but the embassy is willing to check  to  see
           if the individual already holds documents and provide copies  if
           necessary.

    13. The existence of family in Iraq, including  the  first  appellant's
        father, shows the existence of a male relative of the same  family.
        It was not made out that the appellants will not be able to find  a
        nominated representative in Iraq. It was not made out the necessary
        power of attorney validated by the FCO could not  be  secured.  The
        point recorded by the  First-tier  Tribunal  regarding  the  second
        appellant's willingness to be obtain a CSID from the Embassy in the
        United Kingdom means that he must  be  aware  of  the  family  book
        details as, indeed, will his father. It is also clear  that  family
        in Iraq will have valid documents with them which will  enable  any
        'forgotten' details to be obtained.
    14. Insufficient evidence was provided at the hearing and  insufficient
        submissions made to establish that the appellants will not be  able
        to obtain a Registration Document (1957),  which  will  enable  the
        respondent to return them to Iraq.
    15. I do not accept the submission the appellants are undocumented  and
        cannot obtain replacement documents to be made out on the evidence.
        This will include, with the assistance of family  members  and  the
        Registration Document (1957), passports.
    16. The appellants are from Kirkuk, which is not within  the  IKR.  The
        appellants will therefore be returned to Baghdad in accordance with
        the Secretary of State's policy of returning  those  who  will  not
        return voluntarily to Baghdad airport.
    17. The appellants have no family members  in  Baghdad,  do  not  speak
        Arabic, and there is no evidence that they have viable contacts  or
        community ties within that area. The scope of the hearing noted  by
        Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in the error  of  law  finding  of  12
        August 2019, is limited to the  appellant's  ability  to  obtain  a
        CSID, which I have dealt with above, and internal relocation.  This
        illustrates clear acceptance that the appellants cannot  return  to
        Kirkuk in light of the preserved findings relating to real risk  on
        return.
    18. In SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019]
        UKUT 400 (IAC) it was said:


           i) Where internal relocation is raised in the Iraqi context,  it
              is  necessary  to  consider   not   only   the   safety   and
              reasonableness  of  relocation but  also  the feasibility  of
              that  course,  in  light   of   sponsorship   and   residency
              requirements in operation in various parts  of  the  country.
              Individuals who seek to relocate within the country  may  not
              be admitted to a potential safe haven or may not be permitted
              to remain there;
          ii) Relocation  within  the Formerly  Contested  Areas. With  the
               exception  of the small area identified in section  A  (i.e.
              North of  Biaji  in  Salah-El-Din),  the  general  conditions
              within   the  Formerly   Contested   Areas  do   not   engage
              Article15 QD(b) or (c)  or  Article  3  ECHR  and  relocation
              within the Formerly Contested  Areas may obviate a risk which
              exists in  an  individual's  home  area.  Where    relocation
              within    the  Formerly    Contested     Areas   is     under
              contemplation,  however,    the    ethnic    and    political
              composition   of   the   home  area   and   the   place    of
              relocation  will  be  particularly  relevant. In  particular,
              an  individual  who  lived  in  a  former   ISIL   stronghold
              for  some  time  may  fall under  suspicion  in  a  place  of
              relocation. Tribal and ethnic differences may preclude   such
              relocation,  given  the  significant  presence  and   control
              of largely Shia militia in these areas. Even where it is safe
              for an individual to relocate within  the Formerly  Contested
               Areas,  however,  it  is  unlikely  to  be either   feasible
              or  reasonable  without  a  prior  connection   to,   and   a
              support structure within, the area in question;
         iii) Relocation to Baghdad. Baghdad is generally safe for ordinary
              civilians but  whether  it   is   safe   for   a   particular
              returnee  is   a  question   of   fact   in   the  individual
              case. There   are no   on-entry    sponsorship   requirements
              for Baghdad   but there    are    sponsorship    requirements
              for   residency. A documented  individual  of   working   age
              is  likely  to  be  able   to  satisfy   those  requirements.
              Relocation  to  Baghdad  is  likely  to  be  reasonable   for
              Arab  Shia   and   Sunni   single,   able-bodied   men    and
              married  couples  of  working  age   without   children   and
              without  specific  vulnerabilities.  Other   individuals  are
              likely to require external support, ie a support  network  of
              members of his or  her  family,  extended  family or   tribe,
              who are  willing  and  able  to   provide  genuine   support.
              Whether  such  a  support  network  is  available  is  to  be
              considered  with  reference  to   the   collectivist   nature
              of  Iraqi  society,  as considered in AAH (Iraq).


    19. The respondent's June 2020  CPIN at  4.1.1  records:  "The  British
        Embassy in Baghdad (BEB) observed in 2012 that to return to Iraq, a
        person needs a valid passport, expired passport  or  laissez-passer
        (an emergency travel document issued  by  an  Iraqi  Embassy).  The
        Iraqi authorities introduced these procedures in October  2011.  EU
        letters are currently not accepted for any returns to Baghdad."
    20. I find it was not made out any member of this family would  not  be
        able to obtain a laissez passer,  which  will  enable  them  to  be
        returned to Baghdad.
    21. It was not made out to the appellants  would  not  have  sufficient
        resources to enable them to  accommodate  themselves  initially  on
        return to Baghdad, bearing in mind funds that can be made available
        as per the country guidance and access to family support.
    22. The appellants state their religion is Sunni Islam, but  the  first
        appellant is not single and  is  part  of  a  married  couple  with
        children. Whilst the second appellant is a single  adult  he  forms
        part of the family unit. It was not made out  there  is  a  support
        network from family, extended family or tribe  willing  to  provide
        genuine support for this family unit in Baghdad, meaning it has not
        been made out it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the  family  unit  to
        internally relocate to Baghdad.
    23. In relation to internal relocation to the IKR all  the  members  of
        the family are Kurdish.
    24. In SMO it was found:


           i) For  an  Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish   origin
              in  possession  of  a valid CSID or Iraqi  National  Identity
              Card (INID), the journey from Baghdad to  the  IKR   by  land
              is  affordable  and  practical  and can  be  made  without  a
              real  risk of  P  suffering  persecution,  serious  harm,  or
               Article  3  ill  treatment nor would any difficulties on the
              journey make relocation unduly harsh;
          ii) P  is   unable   to   board   a   domestic   flight   between
              Baghdad  and  the  IKR without  either  a   CSID,   an   INID
              or  a  valid passport. If  P  has  one  of  those  documents,
              the journey from Baghdad to the IKR by land is affordable and
              practical  and  can  be  made  without  a  real  risk  of   P
              suffering  persecution, serious harm,  or   Article   3   ill
              treatment  nor would  any  difficulties  on  the journey make
              relocation unduly harsh;
         iii) P  will  face   considerable   difficulty   in   making   the
              journey  between Baghdad  and  the  IKR  by  land  without  a
               CSID  or  an  INID.   There   are  numerous  checkpoints  en
              route, including two checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of
              the airport. If P has neither a CSID nor an INID there  is  a
              real risk of P being detained at a checkpoint until such time
              as the security personnel are  able to verify  P's  identity.
              It  is  not  reasonable  to  require  P  to   travel  between
              Baghdad  and  IKR  by  land  absent  the ability  of   P   to
              verify  his  identity   at   a   checkpoint.  This   normally
              requires  the  attendance  of   a   male  family  member  and
              production of P's identity  documents   but   may   also   be
              achieved by calling upon "connections" higher up in the chain
              of command;
          iv) Once at the IKR border (land or  air)  P  would  normally  be
              granted  entry  to  the  territory.   Subject   to   security
              screening, and registering presence with the local mukhtar, P
              would be permitted to enter and reside in  the  IKR  with  no
              further  legal  impediments  or   requirements.   There   are
              no  sponsorship requirements for entry or residence in any of
              the three IKR Governorates for Kurds;
           v) Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment during
              the security screening  process  must  be   assessed   on   a
              case-by-case  basis.  Additional factors  that  may  increase
              risk  include:  (i)  coming  from  a  family  with  a   known
              association with ISIL, (ii) coming from  an  area  associated
              with ISIL and (iii) being a single male of fighting age. P is
              likely to be able to evidence the fact of recent arrival from
              the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of  having  arrived
              directly from ISIL territory;
          vi) If  P  has  family  members  living in   the   IKR   cultural
              norms  would require that  family  to   accommodate   P.   In
              such  circumstances  P  would,  in  general, have  sufficient
              assistance from the family so as to lead a 'relatively normal
              life',   which   would   not   be   unduly   harsh.   It   is
              nevertheless  important  for decision-makers   to   determine
              the  extent  of  any  assistance  likely  to  be provided  by
              P's family on a case by case basis;
         vii) For Kurds without the assistance of family  in  the  IKR  the
              accommodation options are limited:


                 i) Absent special circumstances it is not reasonably likely
                    that P will be able to gain access to one of the refugee
                    camps  in  the  IKR;   these   camps     are     already
                    extremely    overcrowded    and    are     closed     to
                    newcomers. 64%  of  IDPs  are  accommodated  in  private
                    settings with  the  vast  majority  living  with  family
                    members;
                ii)  If   P   cannot   live   with    a    family    member,
                    apartments   in    a    modern   block    in    a    new
                    neighbourhood  are  available  for  rent  at a  cost  of
                    between $300 and $400 per month;
               iii)  P    could    resort    to    a    'critical    shelter
                    arrangement',  living  in  an unfinished  or   abandoned
                    structure,  makeshift  shelter,  tent,   mosque,  church
                    or  squatting  in  a  government   building.  It   would
                    be  unduly harsh  to  require  P  to  relocate  to   the
                    IKR  if  P  will  live  in  a  critical housing  shelter
                     without access  to  basic  necessities  such  as  food,
                    clean water and clothing;
                iv) In considering whether    P    would     be  able     to
                    access    basic necessities,  account  must   be   taken
                    of  the  fact  that  failed  asylum seekers are entitled
                    to apply for a grant under the Voluntary Returns Scheme,
                    which could give P access to �1500. Consideration should
                    also  be  given to  whether  P  can   obtain   financial
                    support  from  other sources  such  as  (a)  employment,
                    (b)  remittances   from   relatives  abroad,   (c)   the
                    availability  of  ad  hoc  charity  or  by  being   able
                    to access PDS rations;
                 v) Whether P is able to secure employment must be  assessed
                    on a case-by-case basis  taking  the  following  matters
                    into  account:(i)Gender.    Lone    women    are    very
                    unlikely   to    be    able    to    secure   legitimate
                    employment;(ii)The  unemployment  rate  for  Iraqi  IDPs
                    living in the IKR is 70%; (iii)P cannot work  without  a
                    CSID or INID; (iv)Patronage    and    nepotism  continue
                    to   be   important   factors   in securing  employment.
                     A  returnee  with  family  connections to   the  region
                    will have a  significant  advantage  in  that  he  would
                    ordinarily be able to call upon those contacts  to  make
                    introductions to prospective employers and to vouch  for
                    him; (v)Skills,  education  and  experience.   Unskilled
                    workers  are  at  the greatest  disadvantage, with   the
                    decline  in  the  construction   industry  reducing  the
                    number of labouring jobs available; (vi)If  P  is   from
                    an  area  with  a marked  association  with  ISIL,  that
                     may deter prospective employer.


    25. As found above  the  appellants  will  have  the  necessary  travel
        documents to enable them to fly or travel by land to  the  IKR.  It
        was not made out that they will be refused entry. It was  not  made
        out they will not be able to benefit from the funds available to  a
        returnee and, as noted above, there is evidence of  family  members
        in Iraq. Insufficient evidence was provided, or submissions made to
        establish that the appellants would not be able  to  contact  their
        family members to arrange suitable assistance for them  in  gaining
        access to accommodation and/or to readjusting to life within Iraq.
    26. The first appellant was employed in Iraq as a taxi  driver  and  in
        his evidence refers to Sulamaniyah where he would  take  passengers
        to and from. It was not made out  the  first  appellant  could  not
        resume working  as  a  taxi  driver  for  which  he  has  not  only
        experienced but language skills  and  the  necessary  documents  to
        enable him to do so, or could  not  support  his  family  from  the
        income earned. The second appellant is a young  healthy  individual
        who failed to show he could not secure some form of  employment  in
        Iraq to contribute to the family finances, even  in  light  of  the
        findings in SMO regarding the unemployment rates in the IKR.
    27. The main thrust of the submissions on the appellant's behalf at the
        resumed hearing focused upon a  claim  they  could  not  redocument
        themselves and so could not return to Iraq rather that  the  impact
        of return.
    28. There is nothing in the evidence to support a claim that those  who
        may be seeking the second appellant  for  revenge  have  sufficient
        political influence or contacts to  enable  them  to  discover  the
        second appellant has returned to Iraq and settled in  the  IKR.  As
        noted by the First-tier Tribunal, nothing was given in the evidence
        on that occasion to show that those the second appellant fears were
        attempting to trace him or sought to harm him in Iraq.
    29. There is no evidence that there is a real risk pursuant to  Article
        15(c) of the Qualification Directive in the IKR or anything in  the
        individual profile of any  member  of  this  family  indicating  an
        enhanced or increased risk of harm within the IKR.
    30. I do not find it made out the  appellants  would  not  be  able  to
        support themselves, establish themselves, or  remain  in  the  IKR.
        There is clearly availability of family support which the appellant
        did not establish is not a  credible  finding.  It  was  not  shown
        sufficient support will not be available from  any  of  the  family
        members identified.
    31. Whilst there is a real risk in Kirkuk,  I  find  it  has  not  been
        established it is unreasonable or will be unduly harsh in  all  the
        circumstances for this family to internally relocate to the IKR.
    32. Paragraph 339O    of    the    Immigration    Rules,    which    is
        intended   to   incorporate the Directive, states:(i) The Secretary
        of State will not make: (a) a grant of asylum if  in  part  of  the
        country of origin a person would not have  a  well   founded   fear
        of  being   persecuted,   and   the   person   can   reasonably  be
        expected to stay in that part of the country; or (b)  a  grant   of
        humanitarian  protection   if   in   part   of   the   country   of
        return  a  person would not face a real risk of  suffering  serious
        harm, and the person can reasonably be expected  to  stay  in  that
        part of the country. (ii)  In  examining  whether  a  part  of  the
        country of origin or country of return meets  the  requirements  in
         (i)  the  Secretary  of  State,  when  making   his   decision  on
        whether to grant  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection,  will  have
        regard  to  the  general  circumstances  prevailing  in  that  part
         of  the  country  and to the personal circumstances of the person.
        (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return  to
        the country of origin or country of return.
    33. In light of  the  above  provisions  and  the  findings  made,  the
        protection appeal must be refused.
    34. In relation to the human rights aspect; the articles 2 and 3 claims
        fall with the protection claim. No credible Article 15(c)  QD  risk
        is made out. The family will be returned as a unit means there will
        be no breach of article 8 ECHR family life,  leaving  only  private
        life in the UK as a protected right.
    35. Considering the provisions of  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the  question  of  whether  any
        interference  in  that  private  life  is  proportionate   to   the
        legitimate  aim  relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State,   the
        appellants do not set out in detail, if  at  all,  details  of  the
        protected right the interference with which will result in a breach
        of article 8. The Secretary  of  State  has  established  that  any
        interference with the private life of any  member  of  this  family
        unit will be proportionate to the legitimate aim  relied  upon.  On
        that basis, the appeal  fails  pursuant  to  article  8  ECHR  too.
        Article 8 does not allow a person to  choose  where  they  wish  to
        live.


Decision

    36. I dismiss the appeal.

   Anonymity.


         The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated: 18 August 2020  Redated: 16 March 2021
