
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/01726/2015
                                                               PA/01733/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd June 2016                              |On 21st July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                            SA - FIRST appellant
                            KA - SECOND appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   Their  appeals  against
    refusal  of  their  protection  claims  were  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A Baldwin  ("the  judge")  in  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 15th February 2016.  The appellants  claimed  to  be  at
    risk on return to Pakistan as homosexuals, in a relationship  together.
    The judge found that their core claims, regarding their  sexuality  and
    their relationship, were not made out and concluded that they would not
    face any risk of persecution  or  ill-treatment  on  return.   He  also
    dismissed the appellants' human rights grounds of appeal, finding  that
    neither could succeed under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

2.   Permission to appeal against the decisions was refused by a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge on 11th March 2016 but granted by a Judge of  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 6th April that year.  The Upper Tribunal Judge  found  that
    it was arguable that the judge applied too high a standard of proof  in
    the light  of  the  quantity  of  evidence  apparently  supporting  the
    appellants' cases.  In directions made by the Principal Resident  Judge
    at Field House, the parties were advised that they should  prepare  for
    the forthcoming Upper Tribunal hearing on the basis that  it  would  be
    confined to considering whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    should be set aside for legal error.

3.   In a Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State made  on  26th  April
    2016, the appeals  were  opposed  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  directed  himself  appropriately  and  made   adequate
    findings  of  fact  which  resolved  the  asylum  claims  against   the
    appellants.  An appropriate standard of proof was applied.

Submissions on Error of Law

4.    Mr  Ahmed  said  that  the  judge's  findings  were  inconsistent  and
    undermined the overall conclusions reached.  At  paragraph  34  of  the
    decision, he made a clear finding  that  the  appellants'  interest  in
    joining and attending LBGT events and gatherings seemed to  have  begun
    after they decided to claim asylum.  The asylum  claims  were  made  in
    April 2015.  The appellants' bundle, which was before the judge, showed
    clearly at page 167 that SA had relied on services  from  NAZ  ("Sexual
    Health for Everyone") since 7th January 2014.  A letter from NAZ  dated
    1st February 2016 showed that he had attended DOST, a support group for
    South-Asian gay and bi-sexual men, long before the  asylum  claim,  and
    his relationship with KA was  expressly  mentioned.   The  respondent's
    bundle contained a similar letter regarding SA, at page  E7,  from  the
    same organisation, dated 3rd July 2015 and recording that SA first used
    services at NAZ in January 2014.  In the same bundle,  at  E11,  was  a
    letter from Ana Macelaru written at about the time of  the  substantive
    asylum interview in August 2015.  Ms Macelaru stated that she had known
    SA for about a year and met him in "Club Heaven".  There was a  similar
    supporting letter from Mr S U Ahmad at page  E11  in  the  respondent's
    bundle, dated 17th August 2015.

5.   Mr Ahmed said that this evidence showed how  the  appellants  conducted
    themselves in the United Kingdom long before they made their claims for
    asylum and contradicted the judge's adverse finding at paragraph 34  of
    the decision.  The appellants' use of services for  gay  men  pre-dated
    the asylum claims by about a year but  the  judge  did  not  take  this
    evidence into account.  It followed that the overall assessment of  the
    evidence was flawed.

6.   A second salient feature of the decision was the  judge's  analysis  of
    the timing of the asylum  claims  by  SA  and  KA.   The  judge  found,
    broadly, that the asylum claims could have been made far  sooner.    SA
    gave an explanation in answer to question 76 in the substantive  asylum
    interview.  The asylum claims were triggered  by  an  incident  on  2nd
    March 2015 in which the appellants were threatened.  In SA's case,  his
    leave expired only in September 2015.  No curtailment of his leave  had
    taken place.  There was no substance to a point made under section 8 of
    the 2004 Act and the judge's adverse finding in this  context  was  not
    soundly based.  So far  as  KA  was  concerned,  his  visa  expired  in
    September 2014.  He said in evidence  before  the  judge  that  he  had
    applied for further leave to remain.  The Secretary of State's decision
    letter noted an application made in November 2014, whereas KA  said  it
    was made in September that  year.   Either  way,  the  application  was
    refused in June 2015, after the asylum claims were made in  April  2015
    and after the appellants discussed matters with NAZ.

7.   Mr Ahmed moved to ground (iv), the focus being on paragraph 30  of  the
    decision.  This part of the decision concerned evidence given by  those
    who lived in the same accommodation as the appellants.  The judge found
    that this evidence could not be given real weight in view  of  apparent
    inconsistencies.  One of the witnesses, Mr Raza, was key.  Mr Raza told
    the judge that the signature at the end of his statement  was  not  his
    and the number of his particular accommodation  was  incorrect.   Those
    were largely the reasons why the judge attached little  weight  to  his
    evidence.  The judge recorded Mr Raza as saying that he had  known  the
    appellants since June 2015 and had occasionally met them.  However,  Mr
    Raza's evidence went further  than  that.   He  described  meeting  the
    appellants at a NAZ event, a dinner, and as seeing  the  appellants  at
    NAZ events monthly.  He gave evidence regarding the attachment  between
    SA and KA.  He  also  saw  others  in  the  appellants'  accommodation,
    including Ms Nur and the Lithuanian gentleman.  None of  that  evidence
    appeared to have been taken  into  account,  the  judge  giving  little
    weight to the evidence because  of  Mr  Raza's  volunteering  that  the
    signature on his statement was not his.  There was no  attempt  by  the
    judge to clarify why it was that someone else had signed the  statement
    in Mr Raza's name.

8.   At paragraph 32 of the decision, the judge selected a  photograph,  one
    of a very large number provided, showing one of the appellants  asleep.
    No questions were put to the witnesses about this particular photograph
    whereas fairness required such a step before  an  adverse  finding  was
    made.  At paragraph 32 of the decision, the judge concluded that little
    weight could be given to a police report at page 162 in the appellants'
    bundle, as only one page of the document appeared, out of  a  total  of
    nineteen pages.  Questions about the single page were not put to any of
    the  witnesses.   The  document  was  taken  from  a  police  officer's
    notebook. The appellants had been given a carbon copy of  the  page  in
    which their names and details of the incident in March were taken.  The
    judge found it odd that words were  added  to  the  final  box  in  the
    document, for the police contact number for the incident, but failed to
    take into account the letter from the Community Safety Unit at page 161
    of the appellants' bundle and the Victim Care Card at page 163.

9.   At paragraph 33 of the decision, the judge drew  an  adverse  inference
    from KA's answers in interview regarding where he  lived  in  Pakistan.
    He had mentioned in the asylum interview a relationship in  Karachi  in
    2010, after having stated that he had always lived in Jhang,  where  he
    was born.  However, his answer to question 52 in the  interview  showed
    that his Jhang address was  his  permanent  home  and  his  address  in
    Karachi  was  temporary.   He  was  transferred  to  Karachi  for  work
    purposes.  The judge's finding that  the  flight  between  Karachi  and
    Faisalabad took only 45 minutes was speculative.  At the  end  of  that
    paragraph of  the  decision  (33)  the  judge  noted  an  inconsistency
    regarding how frequently the appellants met each other, based on  their
    answers in interview.  There was no engagement with the evidence  given
    at the hearing, which was entirely consistent.  The judge was  required
    to at least take that evidence into account, even if he  were  then  to
    conclude that  greater  weight  should  be  given  to  the  answers  in
    interview.

10.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller said that the evidence  given  by  the  appellants
    was properly engaged with by the judge, as was the NAZ evidence.   This
    was clear, for  example,  from  paragraph  18  of  the  decision  which
    expressly recorded the letter from NAZ as confirming that KA had been a
    user of services in January 2014, that letter accompanying  KA's  claim
    for asylum.  The judge was alert to the  letters  in  the  respondent's
    bundle and elsewhere but there was no oral evidence from their authors.
     The judge did have oral evidence from three  witnesses  and  he  found
    inconsistencies in their testimony, set out  in  paragraph  23  of  the
    decision.  Two of those claimed to have lived in the same accommodation
    as the appellants did not know about each other, which was peculiar and
    one of the appellants could not recall his precise address.  The  judge
    was entitled to find,  at  paragraph  30  of  the  decision,  that  the
    evidence was  entirely  unsatisfactory.   The  confusion  regarding  Mr
    Raza's signature was a red herring as the judge  said  that  Mr  Raza's
    evidence had to be viewed in the light of the  evidence  given  by  the
    other two witnesses, Ms Nur and Mr Smatovas.  Mr Raza had  only  known
    the appellants for a relatively short period of time.

11.  So far as the police report was concerned the  copy  of  the  page  was
    very poor.  The judge was entitled to find it odd that it appeared that
    someone had complained about an incident which was not  recorded  as  a
    crime.  The letter at page 161 of the appellants' bundle  made  mention
    of domestic violence and women's refuges, which were  not  relevant  to
    the appellants' case.

12.  So far as the timing of the asylum  claims  was  concerned,  the  judge
    accepted that SA's student leave had not expired but, even so,  SA  was
    not studying at the time and so his presence was not in accordance with
    the leave granted to him.  The judge was also entitled to find that the
    appellants' claim that they had no knowledge of how to claim asylum was
    implausible.  This dealt with question 76 in the asylum interview.  The
    judge  had  a  plethora  of  documents  before  him,   including   many
    photographs.  The NAZ letters fell to be weighed with the  inconsistent
    evidence from the three supporting witnesses and the judge's  rejection
    of events in Pakistan.  So far as KA's move from Jhang to  Karachi  was
    concerned, there was no evidence of the employment said to explain this
    move although this might have been provided.

13.  In a brief response, Mr Ahmed said that paragraphs 18  and  34  of  the
    decision appeared to contradict each other.  In the former,  the  judge
    did indeed clearly record documentary evidence  regarding  the  use  of
    sexual health services and services for gay men long before the  asylum
    claim.  This could not be reconciled with his adverse findings  in  the
    latter paragraph.  The supporting letters described the appellants as a
    gay couple and this evidence required engagement.  The NAZ letters were
    not determinative but they amounted to relevant evidence  and  directly
    supported the claim that the appellants were  in  a  relationship  with
    each other.  That evidence was simply not assessed at all.

14.  In a brief discussion regarding the appropriate venue, should an  error
    of law be found, the representatives agreed that the appeals should  be
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal, in view of the judge's  conclusion
    on the credibility of the particular claims.

Conclusion on Error of Law

15.  The decision has been prepared by a  very  experienced  judge  and  his
    findings of credibility and fact are clearly set out, at paragraphs  28
    to 34 of the decision.  Much of the analysis is thorough  and  cogently
    reasoned, including the judge's adverse findings  regarding  the  three
    witnesses, Mr Smatovas, Ms Nur and Mr  Raza,  and  the  inconsistencies
    which emerged.  His assessment of  the  single  page  from  the  police
    report is also clear and shows a full engagement with that  documentary
    item.

16.  Nonetheless, it is clear from paragraphs 30, 33 and 34 of the  decision
    that the judge's overall conclusion that the  appellants'  core  claims
    were not to be believed largely flowed from  his  assessment  that  the
    asylum claims were made late and were, to an extent, opportunistic  and
    his finding that the evidence showing the appellants' use  of  services
    largely intended for the gay community and  their  attendance  at  LBGT
    events and gatherings occurred only after  the  appellants  decided  to
    claim asylum.  It is in relation  to  these  particular  parts  of  the
    analysis that I conclude that Mr Ahmed's submissions are well made.

17.  So far  as  the  use  of  NAZ  services  and  attendance  at  DOST,  an
    organisation catering  for  the  needs  of  South-Asian  gay  men,  are
    concerned,  each  of  the  appellants  produced  documentary   evidence
    supporting their cases.  So far as KA is concerned, the judge expressly
    referred to a letter from NAZ describing KA's use of  the  services  in
    January 2014 and to a relationship with SA.  The appellants' bundle  at
    page 162 contained a similar document regarding SA.   The  respondent's
    bundle also contained similar items,  all  tending  to  show  that  the
    appellants identified themselves as a homosexual couple at least a year
    before the asylum claims were made.  That evidence, although some of it
    was expressly noted by the judge, appears not to have been carried into
    the overall assessment and does not sit well with the judge's  findings
    in paragraph 34 regarding attendance at  LBGT  events  only  after  the
    appellants decided to claim asylum.

18.  So far as the timing of the asylum claims is concerned, Mr  Ahmed  drew
    attention to the expiry of SA's leave in September 2015,  months  after
    the claims were made and to the application for leave  made  by  KA  in
    September or November 2014 as having been decided by the  Secretary  of
    State only in June the following year, again after the  asylum  claims.
    Although the judge was clearly aware that SA's leave was still valid in
    the Spring of 2015, the weight given to the apparent failure  to  claim
    asylum "a good  deal  sooner"  overlooks  that  each  appellant  had  a
    rational basis at the time for thinking that there was no  prospect  of
    imminent removal from the United Kingdom, albeit  that  their  presence
    was technically precarious.  Moreover, the assessment does  not  appear
    to take into account the "trigger" of the incident referred to by SA in
    his asylum interview in answer to question 76.

19.   Finally,  although,  as  noted  above,  the  judge  made  a   thorough
    assessment of the single page from  the  police  report,  I  accept  Mr
    Ahmed's submission that the overall credibility of the claim  regarding
    contact with  the  police,  following  threatening  behaviour  directed
    against the appellants, required the documents at pages 161 and 163  of
    the appellants' bundle to  be  taken  into  account  and  weighed.   Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller mentioned that  the  Community  Support  Unit  letter
    included domestic violence and similar community groups, but  the  same
    letter also provides details of victim support and the community safety
    unit itself, of obvious direct use to the appellants.

20.  Overall, I conclude that the decision does contain errors  of  law,  in
    the assessment of the evidence  regarding  the  appellants'  engagement
    with services directed at the LBGT community and  in  relation  to  the
    timing of the asylum claims.  In order  to  reach  sustainable  adverse
    findings on these matters, the decision required an express  engagement
    with evidence which supported the appellants' case.

21.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  will  be  re-
    made.  In the light of the agreement of the parties,  and  taking  into
    account the Practice  Statement  made  by  the  Senior  President,  the
    appropriate venue is the First-tier Tribunal, at Hatton Cross, before a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge A Baldwin.


DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It  will  be  re-made
in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross, before a judge other than First-
tier Tribunal Judge A Baldwin.  No findings of fact are  preserved  and  the
appeal will be re-heard de novo.

ANONYMITY

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made  an  anonymity  direction  and  it  shall
continue in force, until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise.


Signed                                  Date 21st July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
