
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01168/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2018                         |On 7th March 2018             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                   Mr S.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made.  As a protection claim, it is appropriate
to do so.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The Appellant a citizen of Afghanistan (born [  ]  1990)  appeals  with
    permission  against  the  decision  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Plumptre) dismissing his appeal against  the  Respondent's  refusal  to
    grant him protection.

 2. The Appellant's claim to protection is based on fear of the Taliban  in
    Afghanistan on account of his work as a cashier at the  Azizi  Bank  in
    Jalalabad City.  He claims that he received  threatening  letters  from
    the Taliban informing him that his employment  was  Haram  because  the
    bank at which he worked was responsible  for  paying  the  salaries  of
    state officials and soldiers.  In addition the bank charged interest.

 3. The Appellant's claim is that at first he  did  not  take  the  threats
    seriously.  However on receipt of a third letter, which stated  that  a
    Taliban Sharia court had issued  an  order  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    executed, he became concerned.

 4. He took that threat seriously and reported it to his local elder.   His
    local elder told him that he should contact his own mother who lived in
    the UK to help him leave.  The Appellant's claim is  that  he  reported
    the matter to the police who said that they could not  protect  him  as
    many are threatened by the Taliban and they cannot  provide  protection
    for all.

 5. Accordingly the Appellant claims he resigned his position at  the  bank
    in February 2016 and  made  arrangements  through  an  uncle  to  leave
    Afghanistan.  He travelled via several EU countries including  Germany,
    Belgium and France, making no claim to asylum en route.  He arrived  in
    the UK on 1st August 2016 and promptly made his claim to asylum here.

 6. The Appellant, as evidence of his claim, brought  with  him  the  three
    threatening letters which he said he received from the Taliban.

 7. The Respondent did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  experienced
    problems with the Taliban as a consequence  of  his  employment.   With
    regard to the  threatening  letters  produced  by  the  Appellant,  the
    Respondent  considered  that  when  those  were   set   alongside   the
    Appellant's own evidence, they added little value to the claim.

 8. The Respondent added that even taking  the  Appellant's  claim  at  its
    highest, he had not demonstrated that he would be at risk on return  to
    Kabul and  accordingly  his  claim  to  protection  was  refused.   The
    Appellant appealed the refusal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. By the  time  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Appellant had obtained further evidence.  This was in  the  form  of  a
    witness statement from his mother,  who  corroborated  the  Appellant's
    receipt of the second  threatening  letter.   She  was  in  Afghanistan
    visiting the country at the time that the Appellant received the second
    threatening letter.  In addition the Appellant obtained expert evidence
    verifying the authenticity of  the  letters  and  confirming  that  the
    Appellant was on a Taliban blacklist.

10. The FtTJ when coming to her decision to dismiss the  appeal  found  the
    central core of the Appellant's claim not credible.  In particular  for
    the purposes of this hearing, the judge found that she could not  place
    weight on  the  expert  evidence  regarding  the  authenticity  of  the
    threatening letters.  She found therefore that the Appellant would  not
    be at risk on return and dismissed the appeal.

11. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds seeking permission are lengthy, but the focus of
    the ground centres on the fundamental  issue  of  the  authenticity  or
    otherwise of the threatening letters.  Permission to appeal was granted
    by UTJ Rintoul in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that, given the centrality of the letters from  the
         Taliban to this appeal, that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Plumptre
         erred in her approach thereto, for the reasons set out in Grounds 3
         and 4.

         All the grounds are arguable."

    Thus the matter  comes  before  me  to  decide  initially  whether  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material error  such  that
    the decision must be set aside and be remade.

Error of Law Hearing

12. I heard submissions in  the  first  instance  from  Mr  Nicholson.   Mr
    Nicholson's submission started with Ground 1  of  the  grounds  seeking
    permission following  which,  after  a  response  from  Ms  Everett,  I
    indicated that I was satisfied that the decision of the FtTJ  contained
    material error requiring the decision to be set aside. I  now  give  my
    reasons for this decision.

13. Ground 1 is entitled "failure to take credible  corroborative  evidence
    into account in reaching findings  as  to  whether  Appellant  received
    Taliban letters."  At the hearing before the FtT, the Appellant brought
    a witness - his mother - who prior to the hearing had signed and  dated
    a witness statement.  In that witness statement the Appellant's  mother
    confirmed she was present in Afghanistan  (visiting)  when  the  second
    letter arrived from the  Taliban.   Her  statement  outlines  that  the
    Appellant told her that he had received the first letter and  that  now
    he was being threatened with the second letter.   This  is  essentially
    corroborative evidence but it is  also  relevant  evidence  and  it  is
    evidence which must be assessed when looking at the claim as a whole.

14. When dealing with the Appellant's mother's evidence the judge says this
    at [22]:

         "The appellant currently lives with his mother who  attended  court
         but was not required to give oral evidence  and  two  younger  twin
         brothers."

15. It would seem that there was no challenge to the  Appellant's  mother's
    evidence, from the Respondent.  However in the judge's findings of fact
    and credibility, I can find no reference within the  decision  to  show
    that the judge has taken that evidence into account when  reaching  her
    conclusion that the Appellant had not received any threatening  letters
    from the Taliban.  That evidence seems to have been simply sidestepped.



16. I find that the omission to analyse that evidence is a material  error.
    It has always been the case that  the  central  issue  in  this  appeal
    revolves around  the  receipt  or  otherwise  of  those  letters.   The
    evidence  of  the  Appellant's  mother  requires  proper  analysis   to
    determine whether or not  it  is  capable  of  lending  weight  to  the
    Appellant's claim.

17. Following on from that, the  omission  was  capable  of  infecting  the
    judge's  reasoning  concerning  her   approach   to   the   Appellant's
    credibility as a whole.  This is especially pertinent  in  this  appeal
    because the Appellant claims  that  he  cannot  relocate  elsewhere  in
    Afghanistan because he is on a Taliban blacklist, and the Taliban would
    be capable of finding him wherever he went in the country.

18. Ms Everett on behalf of the Respondent had filed a  Rule  24  response.
    However whilst not formally conceding the matter, she  did  acknowledge
    that the Rule 24 response did not cover the point set out in  Ground  1
    concerning the Appellant's mother's statement.

19. At the end of submissions I indicated to the parties that I  considered
    the omission of any consideration of the Appellant's mother's evidence,
    to be sufficient to make the FtT's decision unsustainable.  Accordingly
    with the agreement of the parties, I indicated that the whole  decision
    should be set aside for material error and accordingly remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
of 22nd August 2017 is allowed insofar as the FtT's decision  is  set  aside
for material error.  The matter will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
for that Tribunal to make a fresh decision.  No findings are preserved  from
the original decision.  The hearing should be  before  a  judge  other  than
Judge Plumptre.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                         Date         05 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
