
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01136/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at North Shields                            Decision and Reasons
Promulgated
On 23rd April 2018                                     On 30th April 2018




                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms L Mair of Duncan Lewis and Co, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Iraq born in May 1978. She is a mother
      of [E] born in October 2014 and [A], born in April 2016. They were
      originally linked to of her claim for protection but subsequently it
      has been accepted they are British nationals with a right to reside
      and so no longer are party to the proceedings.


   2. She made a claim for protection on the basis she is a member of a
      particular social group. This is as a possible victim of a so-called
      honour attack from her own family because of her marriage to Mr IJ. He
      is originally from Iraq, came to the United Kingdom in 2000, and
      claimed protection. That claim was unsuccessful but in 2007 he was
      naturalised.

   3. He travelled backwards and forwards between the United Kingdom and
      Iraq and in January 2011 met the appellant, with their marriage taking
      place in February 2012. Thereafter, he continued travelling between
      the two countries.

   4. The appellant claims that her own family did not want her to come to
      the United Kingdom to be with her husband and because she disobeyed
      them they, particularly her elder brother, will harm her.

   5. Her claim was rejected by the respondent. The respondent was not
      satisfied with the documentation provided and did not accept that the
      appellant was married as claimed. Similar considerations applied in
      respect of her children and their nationality. Her fear of her brother
      was not accepted. In any event, there was sufficiency of protection
      for the appellant in Iraq and she could avoid difficulties from her
      brother by relocating.

The First tier Tribunal

   6. Her appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Tobin at Manchester on 14
      July 2017. In a decision promulgated on 8 August 2017 her claims were
      rejected. At hearing it was clarified that the particular social group
      related to women in Iraq. The judge was advised that the appeals in
      respect of the children were no longer live and copies of their
      British passports were submitted.


   7. At paragraph 23 the judge pointed out that the appellant's husband had
      not attended the hearing. The judge found this to be significant;
      pointing out that he could have provided evidence about the claimed
      threat from his brother-in-law. Because of this the judge said no
      weight was being placed upon his statement. Regarding the appellant's
      difficulties in Iraq, the judge found her to be evasive and lacking in
      credibility. The judge found the threat from her brother was not
      credible.

   8.  At paragraph 38 the judge noted that both children are British
      citizens and referred to the respondents instructions to caseworkers.
      However, at paragraph 47 the judge concluded she and her children
      could return to Iraq as a family unit and that no breach of article 8
      would occur. The judge recorded the position of the children's father
      was uncertain as he had not attended the hearing and no explanation
      was proffered.


The Upper Tribunal

   9.  Permission to appeal was granted on grounds which included a
      submission that the judge failed to appreciate issues agreed between
      the parties in relation to the appellant's husband and article 8.


  10. The respondent's rule 24 response states that the presenting officer
      at the hearing did not have a note about what was agreed.

  11. At hearing, Ms L Mair was able to provide me with a statement from
      Counsel who originally appeared for the appellant. It indicates that
      there was a discussion at the outset before the judge about the
      article 8 claims and the fact it was now established the children held
      British nationality. The statement records that the presenting officer
      confirmed that the claimant should succeed on article 8 grounds. The
      statement records the judge, in light of this, asked the
      representatives whether the claim for protection was being pursued.

  12. When this was still pursued time was allowed following concerns
      expressed by the judge as to whether a Convention reason was engaged.
      The statement records that the appellant's husband was in attendance.
      Given the outstanding issue related to the protection claim it was
      decided that he would not be called as a witness. The statement
      records that this was discussed with the presenting officer. The
      appeal proceeded with the appellant only giving evidence in relation
      to the protection claim.

  13. The presenting officer, Mr Diwnycz, acknowledged there was no note on
      file from the presenting officer as to what had taken place but he did
      not dispute the note provided by Counsel. Ideally, First-tier Judge
      Tobin should have been invited to comment on Counsel's statement.
      However, both parties today are in agreement that there has been an
      understanding, at least between the representatives ,that the claim
      would most likely succeed on article 8 and the focus at hearing was
      upon the protection claim.

Error of law

  14. I find a material error of law has been established on procedural
      grounds as to how article 8 was dealt with. The judge is not required
      to accept an agreement between the parties as to the disposal of an
      appeal but should make the parties aware of this. In this instance it
      is accepted by the parties that what was thought to be agreed and
      accepted by the judge was not reflected in the decision. It may be
      that with the break-in proceedings the earlier understandings were
      overlooked when the matter resumed. This could explain the judge's
      comments about the appellant's husband not giving evidence and the
      adverse inference drawn.


  15. Mr Diwnycz accepts the relationship between the appellant and her
      husband is as claimed. The children have British passports. The
      appellant is now expecting her third child. Mr Diwnycz indicated he
      would not be seeking to resist the article 8 claim.

  16.  I asked Ms L Mair if the protection claim was being pursued in light
      of the presenting officer's view. I allowed her time to consult with
      her client. She then indicated that the only issue being pursued was
      in relation to article 8.

Remaking the decision.


  17. SF and others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120
      (IAC) has been cited. It refers to the Immigration Directorate
      Instruction - Family Migration - Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) "Family
      Life as a Partner or Parent and Private Life, 10 year Routes". It
      contains guidance at 11.2.3: `Would it be unreasonable to expect a
      British Citizen Child to leave the UK?' It provides:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be
         to force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age
         of that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice
         Judgment in Zambrano.

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with
         the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to
         considerations of such weight as to justify separation, if the
         child could otherwise stay with another parent or alternative
         primary carer in the UK or in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

         . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph
         398 of the Immigration Rules;

         . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
         repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

         In considering whether refusal may be appropriate the decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation. If
         the decision maker is minded to refuse, in circumstances where
         separation would be the result, this decision should normally be
         discussed with a senior caseworker and, where appropriate, advice
         may be sought from the Office of the Children's Champion on the
         implications for the welfare of the child, in order to inform the
         decision."

  18. New Instructions were issued on 22nd February 2018.It has not been
      argued they make any difference to the present appeal. The appellant
      is the mother of two young British children. She is currently pregnant
      with her third child. It is likely if she had to leave the country
      then she would take the children with her. There is no challenge to
      her being in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her children.
      There is no challenge to her relationship with her husband. The
      conditions in her home country were raised and the difficulty a lone
      female would face. All of these factors lead to the conclusion that
      removal would be a disproportionate interference with the appellant's
      article 8 rights.

Decision


A material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Judge Tobin. I remake the decision allowing the appeal on article 8 grounds
only.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

Dated 26 April 2018

