

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      PA/01897/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 8th August 2017                   |On: 22nd August2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     TAA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Smith, Counsel instructed by public access
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male national of Iraq born in 1988.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for international protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant  is  accepted  to  be  a  national  of  Iraq  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity. He is a Sunni Muslim.   When he claimed asylum in  September
    2016 he gave an account of being forced into working for Daesh  against
    his will. He claimed that his work was publicly praised  by  Daesh  and
    that as a result people in his locality turned against him.  He  feared
    that Daesh would punish him for escaping.


 4. In her letter dated 4th February 2017 the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department accepted that the Appellant is,  as  he  claimed,  from
    Daquq in Kirkuk  governate.    This  had  formerly  been  recognised  a
    'contested area' where the indiscriminate violence taking place was  of
    a sufficiently high level to consider that any  civilian  would  be  at
    risk if returned there. The Respondent did not however accept  that  to
    be the case any longer. The refusal letter cited three  short  passages
    from an August 2016  'Country  Information  and  Guidance'  (CIG)  note
    (Security Situation in the Contested Areas) to submit that  Kirkuk  was
    no longer considered  to  be  'contested'.  Reference  is  made  to  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  00544  (IAC)  and  then  (somewhat
    mysteriously) at paragraph 39  the  letter  concludes  that  "the  most
    recent Country Guidance case on Iraq states that return to Kirkuk would
    no longer amount to a breach of Article 15(c)".   Leave  was  therefore
    refused on 'humanitarian protection' grounds. In respect of the  asylum
    claim the Respondent found there to be a number of discrepancies in the
    Appellant's account of being forced to work for Daesh and  so  rejected
    it.    In the alternative, the  Respondent  found  that  the  Appellant
    would be able to relocate without difficulty within Iraq, in particular
    to the IKR.


 5. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal is  conducted  what
    can only be described  as  a  careful  and  detailed  analysis  of  the
    evidence. It concluded, having directed  itself  appropriately  to  the
    correct burden and standard of proof, that the Appellant's claims about
    forced labour for Daesh could not be believed.   No challenge  is  made
    to those findings. Turning to the matter of humanitarian protection the
    Tribunal noted the terms of the country guidance in AA, to  the  effect
    that Kirkuk is a contested area where the conflict has reached  Article
    15(c) intensity. It directed itself  to  the  appropriate  test  to  be
    applied when consideration is given to departing from country guidance.
    Placing reliance on the materials referred to in  the  refusal  letter,
    namely the August 2016 CIG, the Tribunal then finds that the  situation
    in Kirkuk has improved to the  extent  that  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection is not justified. The appeal was thereby dismissed.

 6. The Appellant submits that in its determination the First-tier Tribunal
    materially erred as follows:

              i) In failing to  follow  the  country  guidance  case  in  BA
                 (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 in which the
                 Respondent expressly recognised that  the  guidance  in  AA
                 should stand, notwithstanding the developments in Iraq  and
                 the advance against Daesh;


             ii) In departing from the country guidance in AA the First-tier
                 Tribunal failed to give adequate  reasons  or  to  identify
                 "very strong grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence"  for
                 doing so.


    Error of Law

 7. In May 2015 when the appeal in AA was heard (and in  October  when  the
    decision was promulgated) the Respondent accepted that the conflict  in
    Kirkuk engaged Article 15(c). That position was consistently maintained
    until August 2016 when the CIG referred to above  was  published.  That
    indicated that the Respondent had  changed  her  guidance  to  decision
    makers. The pertinent policy summary read as follows:

         3.1.3 However, the situation has changed since then. Diyala, Kirkuk
         (with the
         exception of Hawija and the surrounding area) and Salah al-Din no
         longer
         meet the threshold of Article 15(c).


         3.1.4 However, decision makers should consider whether there are
         particular
         factors relevant to the person's individual circumstances which
         might
         nevertheless place them at enhanced risk.


         3.1.5 In general, a person can relocate to the areas which do not
         meet the
         threshold of Article 15(c).

 8. These are the passages from the CIG set out in the  determination,   at
    paragraph 54.   The determination  proceeds  from  there,  with  little
    detour, to a conclusion that this  material  constitutes  "very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence", this being the test set down  by
    Stanley Burnton LJ in SG (Iraq) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940.  Before me Mr  Harrison,  who  stressed
    the otherwise high quality of this decision, conceded that the Tribunal
    had here appeared to "step over the obvious need for reasoning".


 9. I must agree that this was a concession properly  made.   Firstly,  the
    passages cited, and reproduced above, do  not  constitute  evidence  at
    all. They are a statement of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department's policy.   Secondly, there is no reasoning to  explain  why
    the CIG, even taken as a whole, might constitute the "cogent  evidence"
    required to depart from the country guidance.   For  the  Appellant  Ms
    Smith contended that for those reasons alone this  decision  should  be
    set aside; in her very well made submissions she was  further  able  to
    explain why, on a proper analysis, the August 2016 could not be  relied
    upon in the  manner  contended  in  the  refusal  letter,  and  adopted
    (without  reasons)  by  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    The   'evidence'
    underpinning the policy statements is set out at section 2:

         2.3.7 Iraq is still the scene of internal  armed  conflict  between
         Government forces (Iraqi Security Forces and/or Kurdish  Peshmerga)
         and associated forces (Shia militia) on  the  one  side  and  Daesh
         (Islamic State) on the other (see Actors of violence).


         2.3.8  There  are  reports  that  civilians  are  affected  by  the
         indiscriminate  nature  of  the  current  violence,  which   mainly
         includes shootings and Improvised  Explosive  Devices  (IEDs),  and
         also  suicide  bombings,  car  bombs,  rockets  and  mortars   (see
         Fatalities, Injuries and Nature of violence).


         2.3.9 Within the last year Daesh has suffered significant losses in
         Anbar, Ninewah and Salah al-Din,  with  Government  and  associated
         forces now controlling most of Diyala, Kirkuk  (except  Hawija  and
         its surrounding areas) and Salah al-Din (see Control of territory).


         2.3.10 There has been a steady decline in security incidents in all
         'contested' governorates, especially in Salah al-Din,  since  Daesh
         (Islamic State) captured Mosul, Iraq's third-biggest city, in  June
         2014. Since mid-2015, when the UT in AA  considered  evidence,  the
         number of security incidents has declined in Anbar  and  Salah  al-
         Din. The number  of  security  incidents  has  remained  steady  in
         Ninewah, Diyala and Kirkuk, with the latter two governorates  still
         showing much lower  levels  overall  when  compared  to  the  other
         'contested' areas (see Security incidents).


         2.3.11 Since  mid-2015,  the  number  of  civilian  fatalities  and
         injuries either decreased or remained steady in Diyala, Kirkuk  and
         Salah al-Din, and within relatively low levels. Anbar  and  Ninewah
         has seen far more civilian deaths  overall.  Their  statistics  are
         fairly erratic, which reflects the more 'contested' nature  of  the
         governorates and how Daesh's control gives them more opportunity to
         subject the civilian populations in these areas  to  killings  (see
         Fatalities).


         2.3.12  Based  on  current  available  evidence,  most   Internally
         Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Iraq come from Anbar (43%) and  Ninewah
         (34%). The number of  IDPs who come from  Diyala  (4%)  and  Kirkuk
         (4%) is relatively small. IDPs are  returning  to  all  'contested'
         governorates,  although   particularly   to   Salah   al-Din.   The
         International Organisation of Migration (IOM) reported that 38%  of
         all returnees went to Salah al-Din, with  20%  returned  to  Tikrit
         alone. Very few people have returned to Ninewah since August  2014.
         Returns to Anbar, the largest governorate in Iraq,  are  happening,
         but are concentrated in the  areas  of  the  governorate  near  the
         border with Baghdad. IDPs are returning to Ramadi in  Anbar  (which
         accounts for 13% of all  returnees),  following  recent  Government
         military successes there (see Displacement).


         2.3.13 Although Daesh has suffered losses in  all  the  'contested'
         governorates, the group  still  holds  large  parts  of  Anbar  and
         Ninewah, with life in these areas characterised by  systematic  and
         widespread acts of violence and gross violations  of  international
         humanitarian law and  abuses  of  human  rights.  There  remains  a
         significant threat to the lives and psychological well-being of the
         inhabitants there (see Human rights violations against  civilians).
         These  two  governorates  also  remain  the  most  violent  of  the
         'contested' areas, with people still not generally returning  there
         (except to the areas of Anbar near Baghdad).




10. Looking at those passages it is difficult to  see  what  supported  the
    Respondent's policy shift  beyond  the  statement  at  2.3.9  that  the
    government now controls "most  of  Kirkuk".  Regard  to  the  remaining
    evidence  indicates  that  this  fact  is  not  in  itself  capable  of
    demonstrating that Article 15(c) conditions have ceased.  At 2.3.7  the
    Respondent recognises that Iraq remains the  scene  of  internal  armed
    conflict. At 2.3.8 the CIG  acknowledges  that  there  continue  to  be
    reports of civilians being  affected  by  indiscriminate  violence.  At
    2.3.10  the  document  states  that  the  number  of  security  related
    incidents in Kirkuk has "remained steady". This analysis  is  supported
    by the graphs that appear in the CIG at section 6.  At  6.1.1  a  graph
    shows the level of violence in the top six  'contested  areas'.  It  is
    clear from this that the levels of violence  in  Kirkuk  were  in  fact
    marginally higher on the last date illustrated - June 16 - than that in
    May 2015 when AA was heard, and when the Respondent agreed that Article
    15(c) was engaged.


11. This leads to Ms Smith's other ground of appeal. In finding as it  did,
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard to  the  findings  in  BA
    (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC). In that  reported
    Country Guidance decision the Respondent had submitted the August  2016
    CIG only to concede that the evidence did not  justify  departure  from
    AA:


         "56. This decision  focuses  on  the  situation  in  Baghdad  city.
         Although the evidence shows that there have been  some  changes  in
         the security situation in other areas of Iraq  since  the  Tribunal
         heard AA (Iraq) it is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  case  to  give
         guidance on the situation outside Baghdad. The evidence shows  that
         the security situation in other  areas  of  Iraq  continues  to  be
         extremely fluid. The parties were in agreement that the  Tribunal's
         findings in AA (Iraq) regarding generalised  violence  continue  to
         apply"


         (emphasis added)

    This equivocation about the evidence on  the  part  of  the  Respondent
    perhaps explains why the August CIG has now been removed from the  Home
    Office website and no longer appears on its list of country information
    and guidance.

12. For the reasons set out above I find that the decision, insofar  as  it
    relates to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive,  must  be  set
    aside. The decision was not supported by reasoning or 'cogent evidence'
    capable of justifying departure from established country guidance.




    The Re-Made Decision


13. The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  made  no  further
    submissions on whether the situation in  Kirkuk  has  improved  to  the
    extent required. It follows from what I have said above that I  do  not
    regard the evidence in the August 2016 CIG as  sufficiently  cogent  to
    warrant  departure  from  the  country  guidance  on  this   issue.   I
    accordingly find that the Appellant would be at a real risk of harm  by
    way of indiscriminate violence if he returned to Kirkuk.


14. The question remains whether he might reasonably be expected  to  avail
    himself of an internal flight alternative and go and seek safety in the
    IKR.  The findings on this matter by the Tribunal  in  AA  were  fairly
    limited.  The Tribunal found the area to be "virtually  violence  free"
    and there to be no Article 15(c) risk pertaining there. Ms Smith  takes
    no issue  with  those  findings.   In  respect  of  reasonableness  the
    evidence before the Tribunal in AA indicated as follows:

         19.      A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain
         entry for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission
         for a further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can remain for
         longer, although K will need to register with the authorities and
         provide details of the employer. There is no evidence that the IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the IKR whose permits
         have come to an end.


         20.      Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be
         expected to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city by
         travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is likely to
         involve an assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from
         Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of
         K's securing employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of
         assistance from family and friends in the IKR.


    No findings are made about the  wider  humanitarian  or  socio-economic
    conditions in the IKR.


15. From that starting point Ms Smith made the following key submissions:


              i) the Appellant's personal  circumstances  indicate  that  he
                 will be without support and that in those circumstances  he
                 is unlikely to be able to support himself; and
             ii) that situation in the IKR  has  markedly  deteriorated  for
                 IDPs since 2015.


16. In respect of the  Appellant's  personal  circumstances  the  pertinent
    facts are these. He has:

               . No family connection to the IKR
               . No friends in the IKR
               . Never visited the IKR
               . Sorani
               . Little education but some skills as a mechanic

17. Reliance was placed on section 8 of (a different) August 2016 CIG Iraq:
    Return/Internal Relocation, which deals with the  IKR[1].  The  primary
    source cited in this section is the Joint Report by the Danish  Refugee
    Council and the Danish Immigration  Service  The  Kurdistan  region  of
    Iraq: Access, Possibility  of  Protection,  Security  and  Humanitarian
    Situation published in April 2016 ('the Danish report').   That  report
    relied in turn on information supplied by the IOM, UNHCR, Human  Rights
    Watch, Qandil (a  Swedish  humanitarian  organisation),  Kurdish  NGOs,
    lawyers, journalists, and IKR security personnel. The CIG  also  refers
    to information supplied by the British embassy in Baghdad during  2014.
      Ms Smith draws my attention  to  the  distinction  in  this  evidence
    between whether the Appellant is reasonably likely to  be  admitted  to
    the IKR,   whether he would be reasonably likely  to  be  permitted  to
    remain there.  Even  if  the  Appellant  were  able  to  secure  lawful
    residence  in  the  IKR,  Ms  Smith  submits  that  his  socio-economic
    situation would be so dire that it would be unduly harsh to expect  him
    to relocate there.


18. The sources cited in the  Danish  report  appear  fairly  unanimous  in
    stating that an IDP arriving by air from Baghdad would be  admitted  to
    the IKR: see for instance 8.1.4 of the CIG. Two journalists and an  NGO
    indicated  that  those  arriving  by  land  may  face   an   additional
    requirement to show that they  have  a  sponsor  in  the  IKR  [8.1.3].
    Although some evidence suggests that admission may be at the discretion
    of the Asayish [8.1.1], that identity documents  are  required  [8.1.3]
    and that the land border is periodically closed, the  general  view  is
    expressed that, as found in AA, by-air entry is  permitted  on  arrival
    for an initial period of ten days.

19. What happens thereafter is that IDPs are required to  regularise  their
    position by applying for a long-term residence permit. The requirements
    thereof are set out at s 8.2.1:


         'PAO/KHRW said that if a person wishes to  stay  longer  [than  two
         weeks] in KRI, he must have a sponsor, and after finding a  sponsor
         who must be publicly employed, the IDP must find a  place  to  live
         and get a support letter from the  local  mukhtar.  PAO/KHRW  added
         that the  sponsor  should  also  get  a  support  letter  from  the
         government agency where he is employed to confirm that he is  still
         employed. Further, PAO/KHRW said  that  the  IDP  and  the  sponsor
         should then approach the local  Asayish  office  with  the  support
         letter from the mukhtar, the  support  letter  from  the  sponsor's
         employer and all relevant ID, including the national  ID  card  and
         the Public Distribution System card.  PAO/KHRW  said  that  if  the
         request is denied, there is nowhere to lodge a complaint about  the
         decision.


         'IOM said that if a person wants to stay in KRI for more  than  one
         week, the person must register at the local  mukhtar's  office  and
         the closest Asayish centre in the area where he  stays  within  the
         first week of the stay. IOM added that if the  person  stays  in  a
         hotel for more than a week, without intention of  settling  in  the
         neighbourhood, it is only  necessary  to  have  approval  from  the
         Asayish,  and  there  is  no  need  for  approaching  the  mukhtar.
         According to IOM, here, the individual or the head  of  the  family
         must present a Kurdish sponsor in person, a place of  residence  in
         KRI, registration  details  of  the  car  and  full  name.  To  the
         knowledge of IOM, the family is given a paper with all names of the
         family members as well as the car registration number, and the  one
         week residence permit will be extended for shorter periods of  time
         until the security clearance by the Asayish is issued.


         'Three sources stated, however, that practice is inconsistent. Two
         of these sources explained that it is unclear which criteria must
         be fulfilled to obtain a residence permit. In line with this, Human
         Rights Watch said that there are different ways to obtain a permit,
         also depending on the governorate within KRI. IRC said that, for
         someone who is not connected, the registration for a residence
         permit in KRI can take a couple of years...


         'IOM stated that, with regard to processing of applications for
         residence permits and the duration of renewed residence permits,
         the procedure is arbitrarily implemented. According to IOM,
         sometimes, the temporary residence permit is extended for one week
         or a month or two months or sometimes even three months during the
         approval process for a permanent residence. To the knowledge of
         IOM, the decision may depend on the applicant's background and
         place of origin.


         According to PAO/KHRW, there is no fixed practice ensuring that an
         IDP can have a permanent residence permit after five years; it
         varies from place to place. Long-term residents, including IDPs who
         have lived in KRI for many years, are treated more favourably than
         new IDPs. However, PAO/KHRW said that they still need to renew
         their residence permit every three or six months or once a year,
         depending on the governorate they live in, and Kurdish IDPs do not
         have to renew their residence permits; only Arab IDPs do.


         'According to the international NGO, a permanent  residence  permit
         is a permit of one  year,  and  it  is  renewable.  IOM  defined  a
         residence permit as a renewable permit with an initial duration  of
         six months.'

20. The CIG goes on  to  explain  how  the  'sponsorship  requirement'  was
    formally abolished in 2012 due to concerns about corruption,  but  that
    numerous sources confirmed that it continues to  be  enforced  [8.2.3].
    UNHCR told the Danish researchers that "access to the KRI may  be  very
    difficult for IDPs, unless they have some  form  of  sponsorship  or  a
    certain ethnic or religious profile and  some  sort  of  connection  to
    government officials or people employed with the security forces in the
    area".


21. It is evident from the extracts reproduced and  summarised  above  that
    there would appear to be a divergence between the position in  law  (no
    sponsorship required) and in practice (where it is apparently  enforced
    on a selective basis).   Kurdish NGOs PAO and KHRW report that  an  IDP
    who wishes to  remain  in  the  IKR  must  have  a  sponsor  (a  public
    employee), accommodation, and support from  local  officials  including
    the security services.  The evidence from the IOM and  HRW  is  broadly
    consistent with that.  They agree that the requirements, and procedure,
    may differ according to the governate that the application is made  in.
    Both UNHCR and the IRC suggest that an individual without "connections"
    may need to wait at least a "couple  of  years"  for  a  permit  to  be
    issued.  All of that indicates it to be reasonably likely that  an  IDP
    who wishes to remain in the IKR beyond ten days would  be  required  to
    find a sponsor, accommodation  and  the  support  of  the  Mukhtar  and
    Asayish. I accept Ms Smith's submission that since the Appellant has no
    connection with the IKR it is not reasonably likely  that  he  will  be
    able to find a sponsor.  If he cannot find a sponsor then he  will  not
    be able to remain lawfully in the IKR.


22. In respect of the socio-economic conditions the sources noted that  job
    opportunities are "very limited" in the IKR [8.2.4], even for the  host
    community. The financial crisis means that wages are not being paid  in
    the public sector and that the private sector is  not  adding  new  job
    opportunities. If IDPs do manage to secure employment it  is  generally
    in casual work on construction sites.

23. The question then arises whether in those  circumstances  it  would  be
    'unduly harsh' to expect the Appellant to remain there. I return to the
    guidance in AA. The Tribunal there applied the settled  principle  that
    in internal flight assessments, decision-makers are required  to  weigh
    all relevant factors in the balance and assess whether  the  individual
    concerned would be able to lead a semblance of a normal life in the new
    area.   The Appellant speaks Kurdish and as such  would  not  face  the
    immediate obstacle faced by an Arab  compatriot.  The  difficulties  he
    would face would however be significant. He does not know anyone in the
    IKR and as such would not be able to find a sponsor. The likelihood  of
    him being able to secure lawful residence, beyond the initial period of
    ten days entry, would in those circumstances be low.  The  consequences
    of that are not altogether clear.  I  can  see  no  evidence  that  the
    authorities in the IKR would seek to remove the Appellant, but  on  the
    other hand the  lack  of  security  would  obviously  be  a  matter  of
    significant concern for him.  The economic situation in the IKR appears
    to be bleak. I accept Ms Smith's submissions that  without  a  sponsor,
    and without a formal residence permit, the appellant is going  to  find
    it extremely difficult to find regular employment or accommodation.  It
    appears to me that in those circumstances the risk of destitution is  a
    real one.   I do not understand it to be  the  Respondent's  case  that
    destitution   would   constitute   a   'reasonable'   internal   flight
    alternative.  For that reason the appeal must be allowed.





      Decisions


24. For the reasons I have given I am satisfied that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  involved  material  errors  in  approach  to  the
    question of Article 15(c). The decision is set  aside  to  the  limited
    extend identified above.  The findings on asylum are preserved.


25. The decision is remade as follows:


    "The  appeal   is   allowed   on   protection   grounds   (humanitarian
    protection)".

26. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            22nd August 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] This was the CIG available at the date of the First-tier Tribunal
determination; I note that a later version has now been published but the
relevant section remains the same.


