
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01545/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 November 2017                     |       On 24 November 2017           |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     AHM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AHM,  is  a  male  citizen  of  Libya.   By  a  decision
    promulgated on 24 March 2017, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Myers)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of  asylum.   That
    decision had been made by the Secretary of State on  31  January  2017.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision should be set aside.  The  Upper  Tribunal  in
    ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017]  UKUT  263  (IAC)  found  that  any
    citizen of Libya is at risk there at the present time (Article  15(c)).
    I am aware that Judge Myers  promulgated  her  decision  prior  to  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in  ZMM.   I  am  aware  also  that  the
    evidence put before the Upper Tribunal in ZMM  was  more  comprehensive
    than that provided to  Judge  Myers.   However,  it  is  clear,  having
    considered the material that was before Judge Myers, that there  was  a
    strong case for  concluding  that  humanitarian  protection  should  be
    awarded to the  appellant  at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  In my opinion, Judge Myers did  not  consider  this  evidence
    adequately in reaching her decision.  I therefore set aside the judge's
    decision.  I have remade the decision.  In the  light  of  the  country
    guidance of ZMM, this appeal  is  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  24
    March 2017 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 31  January
    2017 is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


