
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01160/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 April 2018                             |  On 10 May 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Ms
                       (anonymity direction CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Spurling, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Secretary of State alleges that the decision and  reasons
    statement of FtT Judge Seifert that was  issued  on  22  December  2018
    contains legal error because he failed to  make  findings  on  material
    matters and because he failed to give adequate reasons.  Permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 22  February  2018  by  FtT
    Judge Boyes on all grounds.

 2. At the start of the hearing, the representatives clarified  that  there
    were two  issues  in  the  grounds.   First,  whether  the  credibility
    findings could be upheld.  There were a number of challenges.   Second,
    whether Judge Seifert had properly applied the country guideline  case,
    GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319.

 3. I deal first with the credibility challenges.

 4. Mr Bramble did not seek to amplify the grounds of appeal.

 5. Mr Spurling began his submissions by examining paragraphs 49 and 58  of
    the decision and reasons statement,  which  contained  Judge  Seifert's
    findings of  credibility.   At  paragraph  49  the  judge  recorded  he
    assessed credibility based on all the evidence and  having  heard  from
    the respondent.  At paragraph 58 Judge Seifert was satisfied  that  the
    evidence supported Ms Harris's submissions; Ms Harris  represented  the
    respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.   Mr  Spurling  reminded  me  of
    first principles.  It was for Judge Seifert to assess credibility.   It
    was open to  him  to  find  that  none  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    allegations undermine the core account.

 6. Mr Spurling took me to the second issue, which is whether Judge Seifert
    resolved the conflict over the respondent's chronology.  The respondent
    alleged that the respondent's account to have been detained in 2004 was
    not possible because of his entry clearance application  made  at  that
    time.  Mr Spurling took me to question 11.1 of the screening interview,
    where the respondent said he was detained for a week  in  August  2004.
    Next, we went to question  34  and  35  of  the  substantive  interview
    record.  The respondent stated that he was arrested one night (i.e.  in
    the evening) at the end of August 2004.  The evidence was consistent in
    that the respondent was detained for one week.  Mr Spurling took me  to
    paragraph 12 of the witness statement, wherein the respondent  said  he
    applied for a visa on 31 August 2004.  Mr Spurling submitted that there
    was no glaring inconsistency and the issue  is  whether  the  imprecise
    reference to the end of August 2004 in question 35 could not include 24
    August 2004, that is, a week before the end of August.

 7. Mr Spurling also submitted that focusing on the detention in  2004  was
    misplaced because the core factors relied on later detentions, that is,
    those after 2008.

 8. Mr Spurling submitted that the Secretary of State  was  wrong  to  draw
    adverse conclusions from different transliterations of names  into  the
    Latin alphabet. There was no standard transliteration system  and  such
    differences were attributable to different interpreters being used.

 9. Mr Bramble reminded me that the Secretary of State took issue with  the
    incident in 2004 and believed it undermined  the  respondent's  general
    credibility.  The failure of Judge Seifert to engage with the issue  or
    to make findings on it meant it was left unresolved.  Mr  Bramble  took
    me to paragraph 44 of Judge Seifert's decision and  asked  me  to  note
    that the presenting officer had made specific reference to the  reasons
    for refusal.  This was not a case  where  the  judge  could  infer  the
    Secretary of State no longer pursued the issue.

10. As to the issue of names, as indicated at paragraph 53,  Judge  Seifert
    recognised the concern went further  than  mere  transliteration.   The
    problem involved the assessment of official documents in Sri Lanka.  Ms
    Harris made various assertions which the judge took to be evidence.

11. I have found this a straightforward case to decide.  It is obvious that
    Judge Seifert did not engage with  the  issues  relating  to  the  2004
    detention.  This is obvious because Mr Spurling had to take me  to  the
    interview records and not to what was  recorded  in  the  decision  and
    reasons statement.  Judge Seifert failed to make  a  finding  that  the
    incident was not part of the core account.   Judge  Seifert  failed  to
    make  a  finding  that  any  discrepancy  was  immaterial  to   general
    credibility.  Judge Seifert failed to make a finding that there was  no
    inherent inconsistency in the chronologies given in the  interviews  as
    to whether the detention was at the end of August 2004, which was  when
    the respondent applied for entry clearance.  Although  the  failure  to
    make relevant findings explains why no reasons are given,  the  failure
    to engage with the issues raised means a full assessment of credibility
    has not been carried out.  This is a legal error.

12. The same problem derives from Judge Seifert's failure to  consider  the
    respondent's names in the documents and  whether  that  undermined  the
    reliability of those documents.  Merely to accept counsel's explanation
    is insufficient;  a  finding  had  to  be  made  as  the  evidence  was
    contested.  It is trite law that counsel cannot give evidence.

13. The legal errors are  such  that  I  must  set  aside  Judge  Seifert's
    decision and reasons  statement.   This  is  because  without  a  sound
    assessment of the respondent's credibility, it is impossible to  assess
    the risks he faces on return to Sri Lanka.  This also means there is no
    need for me to make a detailed assessment of  the  second  ground;  the
    fact the credibility findings are unsound means that the application of
    GJ (Sri Lanka) could not be properly considered.

14. I have considered whether the appeal  can  be  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal but the extent of the failures it is appropriate to remit  the
    appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  decision.   To  do
    otherwise would deny the respondent further appeal rights.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Judge  Seifert's  decision  and  reasons  statement  contains  legal   error
requiring it to be set aside.

The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing
before any judge other than Judge Seifert.

Anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the respondent.  The respondent can  be  referred  to  as
"MS".



Signed                              Date         3 May 2018

             Judge McCarthy
             Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
