

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/01394/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 11 May 2017                         |      on 16 May 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON

                                   Between

                                   Z A M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr Howard of Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent:         Mr C Bates - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Asjad ('the Judge') who in a decision promulgated on  15  September
        2006 dismissed the appellant's protection claim and claim for leave
        to remain based on his human rights.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Iraq born in 1997 who entered the UK
        in August 2015, and who  claimed  asylum  shortly  thereafter.  The
        appellant claimed to be of Kurdish ethnicity and to have been  born
        in Suleiman Beg (also referred to as  Sulayman  Beg)  in  Iraq.  He
        claims his father was a member of the Ba'ath party who was involved
        with killing Peshmerga, although his father later joined this group
        following the fall of Saddam Hussein.  The  appellant  claims  that
        when ISIS entered his village in March or April 2015 he was  forced
        to flee to a refugee camp in Kirkuk with his family. The  appellant
        claims he cannot return to Iraq because of his fear  of  ISIS,  his
        ethnicity, and his father's involvement with the two named groups.
     3. The Judge having considered the evidence with the  required  degree
        of anxious scrutiny sets out the findings of fact from [14] to [21]
        of the decision under challenge. Those findings may  be  summarised
        as follows:


    . Although it is accepted the appellant is a Kurdish Iraqi  it  was  not
      accepted that he had ever lived in Suleiman Beg (Sulayman Beg) for the
      reasons set out in [14].
    . The appellant's account has been inconsistent and  it  was  found  the
      appellant had changed his account having established that  it  was  at
      complete odds with historical events. The fact the appellant  did  not
      know when ISIS entered Suleiman Beg (Sulayman  Beg),  taken  with  his
      lack of knowledge of the borders and  what  river  flows  through  his
      alleged home area, supported the conclusion that the appellant was not
      from that area at all. [14]
    .  The  appellant's  account  regarding  his  father's  activities   was
      haphazard and inconsistent. Cross examination revealed  holes  in  his
      evidence that he found difficult to explain. The appellant's answer as
      to how his father managed to survive having changed  sides  after  the
      war was "indicative of the appellant making  up  answers  as  he  went
      along". The Judge found "the appellant's evidence - was all  over  the
      place - and simply had no credibility to it  whatsoever.  It  is  also
      clear from the evidence that from 2003 to 2015, the appellant was able
      to live in Iraq without any difficulty at all". [15]
    . It was not found the appellant's father was a member of either of  the
      claimed groups which was found to be a fabricated  account  which  the
      appellant was unable to uphold because when tested it simply "made  no
      sense". [16]
    . The appellant accepts that he has some family in the KRG and  although
      he claims to have no contact with them the only  evidence  to  support
      that assertion comes from the appellant himself. No weight was  placed
      upon the appellant's testimony in light  of  the  adverse  credibility
      findings made. The Judge found other family members have  remained  in
      Iraq. [16]
    . The appellant is likely to be from the KRG. [17]
    . It was the appellant's own evidence that he had worked as a baker  and
      was unable to give any examples of discrimination that he had  himself
      faced. [17]
    . Although accepting the appellant cannot return to Baghdad  as  he  had
      not the requisite papers, it was found that relocation to the KRG  was
      viable in this case. [19]
    . The appellant could seek assistance from family  in  Iraq  during  the
      period of relocation. He  is  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  speaks  Kurdish
      Sorani and has members of his family in Iraq. Relocation to the KRG is
      reasonable in all the circumstances. [20]
    .  The  appellant's  assertion  that  relocation  would  lead  to   very
      significant obstacles was rejected. It was found such a high threshold
      had not been met. There is nothing compelling or exceptional about the
      case that merited consideration of article 8 outside the Rules. [21]




Grounds



     4. The appellant's original  grounds  asserted  the  Judge  failed  to
        adequately apply the country guidance case and in  contending  that
        his relocation to the KRG was  viable,  the  Judge  had  failed  to
        adequately assess the practicality  of  relocation  and  failed  to
        adequately  assess  whether  the  appellant  would  likely   secure
        employment in the KRG (referred to in the grounds as the  IKR).  It
        was also asserted that the Judge gave inadequate  reasons  for  not
        accepting that there will be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
        appellant's return to Iraq.
     5. The renewed grounds of challenge rely on the same  pleadings  which
        were further relied upon by Mr Howard in his  oral  submissions  to
        the Upper Tribunal. The initial  grounds  also  contain  a  reasons
        challenge, asserting the Judge had not given adequate  reasons  for
        not accepting the appellant's claim regarding where he  came  from,
        and inadequate reasons for not accepting  that  his  father  was  a
        member of the Ba'ath party.



Error of law


     6. We indicated at the start of the hearing that,  following  detailed
        consideration of  the  merits  of  the  case  on  the  papers,  our
        preliminary view was that the dismissal of the appeal by the  Judge
        was a finding reasonably open to the First-tier Tribunal  based  on
        the available evidence.
     7. The Judge gave adequate reasons for finding the appellant  had  not
        proved that he came from Suleiman Beg  (Sulayman  Beg).  The  Judge
        refers in [14] to the inability of  the  appellant  to  answer  two
        questions relevant to the area  which  would  have  been  known  by
        someone who claimed to have lived there,  the  fact  the  appellant
        wrongly identified the nearest border to that town, and  claimed  a
        river runs through Kirkuk when the Judge notes  that  there  is  no
        river  running  through  that  city.  The  Judge  noted  that   the
        appellant's claim that ISIS came to that area  in  March  or  April
        2015 was "so off the mark that he could not have been living in the
        area at all". As noted in the reasons for refusal letter,  Suleiman
        Beg (Sulayman Beg) was liberated from ISIS by the Iraqi and Kurdish
        forces and Shia armed volunteers in September  2014.  There  is  no
        evidence of this area being subsequently reoccupied by ISIS.
     8. The Judge gives adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
        account regarding his father's activities  which,  having  had  the
        benefit of considering both the  oral  and  written  evidence,  was
        described as "haphazard and inconsistent". The Judge found that the
        claim  regarding  the  appellant's  father's   activities   was   a
        fabricated account which did not  withstand  testing.  The  grounds
        amount to a mere disagreement with such a conclusion.
     9. The grounds challenge the  failure  of  the  Judge  to  assess  the
        reasonableness of relocating to the Kurdish zone but, as the  Judge
        found at [17], it is likely that the appellant  is  from  the  KRG.
        This is not an issue of relocation to an area of which  he  has  no
        previous knowledge or experience but a  return  to  his  home  area
        where he has worked, has family, speaks the language, and  has  the
        requisite Kurdish ethnicity. The Judge gives adequate  reasons  for
        finding that the appellant will be able to re-establish himself  in
        his home area where there is family support available.  It has  not
        been made out on the evidence before the Judge, or in  any  of  the
        documents we  have  had  the  opportunity  to  consider,  that  the
        appellant will face any real risk on return or that it would not be
        reasonable in all the circumstances for him to return to  his  home
        area.
    10. The country guidance case referred to by the Judge  at  [19]  deals
        with the lack of risk on return  to  the  Kurdish  zone  for  those
        eligible to enter.  As the appellant originates from that  area  he
        will be pre-cleared by the Kurdish authorities, meaning he will fly
        straight into the international  airport  at  Sulaymaniyah  without
        having to transit via Baghdad.
    11. The Judge has given adequate  reasons  for  why  the  appellant  is
        unable to succeed under paragraph 276ADE (iv), in light of the fact
        he can return to his home area safely, without risk.  The appellant
        has not made out that he can satisfy the requisite test or to  show
        that the decision was not proportionate. Whilst  the  reasoning  in
        relation to this latter element may be  brief,  a  reading  of  the
        decision shows that relevant aspects were considered by  the  Judge
        who has given adequate reasons in support of the findings made.
    12. As we indicated at the conclusion of the hearing,  our  preliminary
        view was  not  changed  by  the  additional  submissions  made  and
        accordingly this appeal is dismissed.


Decision

    13. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
    15. We make such an order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 11th of May 2017






