
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01114/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd June 2019                     |On 24th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                   mR m.k.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Solomon of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made. As a protection claim, it is appropriate to
do so.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka (born 25th March  1973),  appeals
    with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Geraint Jones QC) promulgated on 15th March 2019 dismissing his  appeal
    against the Respondent's refusal of his protection claim and refusal of
    his Article 8 ECHR claim.

 2. In summary the Appellant is a Sri Lankan of Tamil ethnicity.   From  to
    2004 until 2007 the Appellant worked for the Danish demining  group  in
    Jaffna but was forced to leave his job when it became clear that he was
    wanted by the authorities.  He had two older  brothers  and  a  younger
    brother, all of whom were LTTE combatants.   His  older  brothers  were
    killed in action in 2008 and the whereabouts of his younger brother  is
    unknown.  His mother and sisters are presumed to have died  during  the
    war.

 3.  The  Appellant  claims  to  have  been  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities for two years between May 2009 and March 2011.   His  claim
    is that he was tortured during that time and as a  result  of  this  he
    confessed to being a member of the LTTE. An uncle arranged his  release
    from detention with the help of a politician and on payment of a bribe.
     After his release he left Vavuniya with the politician  who  acted  as
    his agent and accompanied him to the UK.

Immigration History

 4. The Appellant entered the UK in March 2011 and claimed asylum  on  12th
    April 2011.  His claim to asylum was refused by the  Respondent  and  a
    subsequent appeal (the first appeal) came before  Judge  Geraint  Jones
    QC.  The appeal was dismissed but nevertheless the  FtTJ  made  several
    findings including one that the Appellant had  been  taken  to  a  camp
    based upon suspicion that he was an LTTE sympathiser and also  that  he
    may have been tortured there to procure a confession that he had been a
    member of the LTTE.

 5. By  the  28th  September  2011  the  Appellant  became  appeals  rights
    exhausted. He did not leave the UK  because  further  submissions  were
    made on his behalf to the Respondent.  These were initially refused but
    subsequently the Respondent agreed to issue a further decision  in  the
    Appellant's case.  This resulted in the Respondent's decision  of  22nd
    January 2019 refusing once again to grant the Appellant asylum or Human
    Rights protection (second appeal).

 6. The appeal against the decision of 22nd January 2019 came  before  FtTJ
    Geraint Jones QC, who had been the judge who heard the first appeal.

 7. The basis of the second appeal relied upon several grounds:

     . there was new evidence to show that the authorities in Sri Lanka had
       taken an interest in the Appellant's whereabouts after he  had  left
       the country

     . since arriving in the UK, he had engaged in diaspora activity

     . the Appellant suffered from and  continues  to  suffer  from  mental
       health problems with a report dated 2012 from  Dr  Dhumad  assessing
       the Appellant as a high suicide risk if removed

     . the Appellant had now formed a relationship with a Miss J., a  woman
       with refugee status.  She and the Appellant met at a TGTE  event  at
       the end of 2016 and in January 2017 they undertook a cultural  Hindu
       marriage ceremony

 8. The Appellant did not give oral evidence at the second  appeal  hearing
    but Miss J. did.  There was a  large  amount  of  documentary  evidence
    placed before the FtTJ.  This included the Appellant's written  witness
    statement; an updated report of Dr Smith, a country expert attesting to
    whether records were kept of those who had  escaped  by  payment  of  a
    bribe; an affidavit from the Appellant's uncle who remains in Sri Lanka
    and which refers to procuring the Appellant's release from detention by
    bribery; and supporting testimony that the Appellant's uncle  had  been
    harassed by the authorities. There  was  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    attendance at TGTE events.  Additionally there  was  a  large  body  of
    medical evidence supporting the Appellant's claim that he  is  at  high
    risk of suicide if removed.

 9. The FtTJ made several findings concluding that he did  not  accept  the
    evidence of the Appellant's uncle, did not accept that the evidence  of
    sur place activity was of a sufficient level to place the Appellant  at
    risk, and that in any event it did not  arise  from  genuine  political
    motivation.  So far as the Article 3  claim  is  concerned,  the  Judge
    concluded that it had no real prospect of success.

10. So far as the evidence of the Appellant's  partner  is  concerned,  the
    judge came to the  conclusion  that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant and Miss J. were cohabiting in terms that would  be  akin  to
    recognising them as a married couple.  He dismissed the appeal  on  all
    grounds.

Onward Appeal

11. The grounds seeking permission are lengthy and make several  criticisms
    of the judge's findings and decision.  The grant  succinctly  sets  out
    the issues before me  and  therefore  the  relevant  parts  of  it  are
    reproduced below:

         "2.  The grounds assert that the Judge erred in failing to  make  a
             finding on whether the Appellant was a vulnerable witness;  in
             rejecting the evidence which showed that the Appellant was  of
             interest to the authorities; in making erroneous  findings  in
             relation to the Appellant's diaspora activities; in failing to
             address suicide risk and in relation to Article 8  failing  to
             have  regard  to  material  evidence   and   erring   in   his
             consideration of whether Article 8 was engaged.

         3.   It is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
             failing to make a finding as to whether the  Appellant  was  a
             vulnerable  witness   particularly   given   that   this   was
             highlighted in the skeleton argument.   It  is  also  arguable
             that he erred in the approach to the evidence of the Appellant
             in the manner set out in paragraphs 3 to 6 and paragraphs 7 to
             13 of the grounds. Whilst the grounds in relation to  Articles
             3 and 8 are less arguable I do not refuse permission in  light
             of Safi and others (permission  to  appeal  decisions)  [2018]
             UKUT 0388 (IAC)."

    The Respondent did not serve a Rule 24 notice.

12. Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal discloses  such  material  error  of  law  that  it
    requires it to be set aside and be remade.

Error of Law hearing

13. Before me Mr Solomon appeared for the Appellant and Mr Tarlow  for  the
    Respondent.  Mr Solomon's submissions kept to the lines of the  grounds
    seeking permission.  He emphasised  in  particular  that  the  greatest
    criticism of the decision centred  on  the  fundamental  error  of  the
    FtTJ's complete failure to address the central issue, namely what  will
    happen to the Appellant at  the  airport  if  returned  to  Sri  Lanka?
    Developing this theme Mr Solomon said that the Judge had sidelined  the
    evidence from the Appellant's uncle which was cogent evidence that  the
    authorities had an interest in the Appellant.  The judge had failed  to
    deal  with  the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant's  release  from
    detention would be recorded as escape (by virtue of having been secured
    by a bribe) and thus he would be of interest on return.  The  Appellant
    had engaged in diaspora activities; the fact that they were  of  a  low
    level would not be enough to allay the suspicions of the authorities on
    return.  The Appellant would be questioned at Colombo airport  and  his
    profile would become known.

14. The next criticism that Mr Solomon put forward centred on  the  judge's
    treatment  of  the  medical  evidence.   There  were  two  strands   of
    criticism. A large body of medical evidence spanning  from  2012  -2019
    had been placed before the judge. This showed  that  the  Appellant  is
    someone with significant mental health problems.  The Appellant did not
    give oral evidence; he relied upon his witness statement. The  skeleton
    argument put forward at the hearing said that the Appellant  should  be
    treated as a vulnerable witness. The judge appears to  have  completely
    ignored this aspect of the Appellant's claim.  Nowhere does  the  judge
    turn his mind to, and make a record of,  whether  the  Appellant  is  a
    vulnerable witness and its impact on  the  overall  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's evidence.

15. Turning to the medical evidence itself, the Appellant's claim  is  that
    he is at risk of suicide if returned to Sri Lanka.   There  was  cogent
    evidence available from Dr Dhumad who assessed the Appellant to  be  at
    high risk of suicide  if  removed.   The  judge  had  given  no  proper
    consideration to Dr Dhumad's report that the Appellant would not be fit
    for interviewing by the Sri Lankan authorities on  return,  and  if  so
    interviewed, it would create a state in him in which he would be unable
    to think sufficiently clearly to explain himself properly.  This aspect
    of the Appellant's claim was backed up by the further report  from  the
    country expert, Dr Smith.  He confirmed that all failed asylum  seekers
    are interviewed by the Sri Lankan authorities at Colombo  airport  and,
    if the Appellant is unable to respond to questions put to  him  by  the
    authorities, it will arouse suspicion such as to create a real risk  of
    a breach under Article 3.  The judge has simply ignored this aspect  of
    the claim.  Altogether these are serious errors and the decision should
    be set aside and a fresh hearing ordered.

16. Mr Tarlow on behalf of the Respondent made no spirited defence  of  the
    decision.   He confined his response to simply saying  that  the  judge
    had given adequate reasons for his decision.

17. At the end of submissions, I announced my decision that I was satisfied
    that the decision of the FtTJ contained material  error  requiring  the
    decision to be set aside and remade.  I now give my  reasons  for  this
    finding.

Consideration

18. I am satisfied that there is merit in all of the grounds argued  by  Mr
    Solomon.  I am satisfied that a reading of the decision shows that  the
    judge has simply not made any  reference  or  finding  on  whether  the
    Appellant was to be treated as a vulnerable witness.  This  is  despite
    this matter being specifically raised in the skeleton  argument  before
    the judge.  The absence of direct reference to this aspect of the claim
    may not in itself necessarily be fatal if it  can  be  shown  that  the
    judge has adhered to the principles set out in the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance for dealing with vulnerable witnesses.  I find  that  in  this
    appeal, the FtTJ has not done so.  Nowhere is there any mention in  the
    decision which would lead the reader to conclude that those  principles
    have been followed.

19. I am further satisfied that the FtTJ has failed  to  properly  consider
    the medical evidence before him.  There was medical  evidence  spanning
    the period from 2012-2019.  The FtTJ considers the Appellant's  Article
    3 claim at [50-54].  At [51] he states that it would be unrealistic  to
    try to summarise  the  medical  evidence.   At  [52]  he  states,  "The
    appellant has sought to lay the ground for an Article 3  claim  in  his
    witness statement (undated) at B271-279, where, in paragraph 16, he, as
    I find, self-servingly asserts that he is seriously thinking of  ending
    his own life" (my italics). So far as the Article 3 claim is concerned,
    the Judge concluded at [54] that it was "very much  a  make-weight  (my
    italics) given that when viewed objectively, it never had, and does not
    have, any real prospect of success."

20. In my judgment to approach the medical evidence in  this  manner  lends
    itself to the criticism that the judge has narrowed  his  view  of  the
    evidence without properly  considering  it  as  a  whole.  The  medical
    evidence supported the Appellant's claim that  he  was  suffering  from
    severe depression and PTSD and has  contemplated  suicide.   Indeed  in
    2012 Dr Dhumad had assessed the Appellant's suicide risk as "high"  and
    then "very high" if he were told for certain that he would be  returned
    to Sri Lanka. I find that such evidence cannot be dismissed  as  "self-
    serving".  Nowhere do I find that the FtTJ has properly  addressed  the
    medical  evidence  holistically.   This  I  am  satisfied  renders  the
    decision unsustainable.

21. I am reinforced in this finding in that the judge makes no reference in
    his analysis of the medical evidence to show that he has kept in mind a
    fundamental point of what was being argued before him which was whether
    or not there would be a risk  to  the  Appellant  if  returned  to  the
    airport at Colombo, on the basis that he is someone who displays mental
    health problems.  According to Dr Dhumad's opinion the Appellant  would
    be extremely frightened if questioned by the authorities in  Sri  Lanka
    and this would create a psychological state in him in which he would be
    unable to think sufficiently clearly to explain himself properly.  This
    evidence is central  to  the  Appellant's  claim  and  requires  proper
    consideration. This I find the FtTJ has failed to do.   These  findings
    are sufficient to allow me to  set  aside  the  decision  for  material
    error.

22. I record that I am satisfied on a reading of the decision that  I  find
    that the FtTJ has not fully engaged with the evidence  put  forward  on
    the  Appellant's  behalf  and  contained  in  his  uncle's   affidavit.
    Likewise I am satisfied on a reading of the decision that the FtTJ  has
    overlooked material evidence when assessing  the  significance  of  the
    Appellant's diaspora activity.

23. So far as the Article 8 claim is concerned I am persuaded that there is
    material evidence which has not been addressed by the  FtTJ.   This  is
    set out in paragraphs 18-20 of the grounds.  I find therefore that  the
    decision must be set aside in its entirety.  The matter will need to be
    heard afresh.  No findings are preserved.

24. I canvassed with the parties how the remaking of  the  decision  should
    proceed.  Both parties were firmly of the view that the  matter  should
    be to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr  Solomon's  view  was
    that fairness demanded it  in  view  of  the  substantial  fact-finding
    exercise which is necessary.  I agree with those views.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 15th  March  2019  is
hereby set aside for legal error.  The matter is remitted to  that  Tribunal
(not Judge Geraint Jones QC) for a fresh hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     19 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

