
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01979/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 3rd September 2019                |On 12th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  MISS H V
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Islam (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Anthony, promulgated  on  25th  March  2019,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on  15th  March  2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, born on 26th September 1987, and
    is a female.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    30th January 2018, refusing her claim for asylum and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she was a victim of modern
    slavery, although this was rejected by the  Competent  Authority  on  a
    balance of probabilities, and that  she  had  been  subject  to  forced
    prostitution.  If she was returned back to Vietnam she would be subject
    to ill-treatment again and that this would also entail the violation of
    her Article 2 and 3 rights.

The Judge's Decision

 4. The judge set out the expert report from the Helen  Bamber  Foundation,
    prepared by Dr S Unigwe, right at the outset of the  determination  (at
    paragraphs 11 to 16) together with other evidence that was  put  before
    the judge, before concluding that  the  Appellant's  claim  was  not  a
    credible one, and that she would not be at risk on return.   The  judge
    also  had  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  now  in  a
    relationship with a British  citizen,  and  was  pregnant.   The  judge
    observed that, "I accept that their preference is for the Appellant and
    their unborn baby to live in the UK.  However, I find  that  Article  8
    allows for the right to respect for one's family and private  life  but
    not where one conducts one's family life" (paragraph 52).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge's  conclusions  are
    perverse and irrational and  had  regard  to  immaterial  factors.   In
    particular, the judge had taken  the  wrong  approach  to  the  medical
    evidence of Dr Unigwe, prepared by the Helen Bamber Foundation.

 7. On 24th April 2019, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on
    the  basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge's  assessment  of
    credibility was flawed as the  judge  reaches  a  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant is not credible, before  taking  the  medical  evidence  into
    account.  Secondly, the assessment is not conducted in the round taking
    into account all the relevant evidence before reaching a conclusion.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Islam,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, relied upon the grounds of application.  He  submitted  that
    the Appellant, who was seated at the back of  the  courtroom  with  her
    British citizen husband, was now due to give birth to  their  child  in
    four weeks time.

 9. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that it was  not  the  case  that  the
    judge had formed a view on credibility prior to looking at  the  expert
    evidence as such.  The judge had made constant references to the expert
    report by Dr Unigwe at every part of the decision and  the  conclusions
    on those that were open to the judge.   Second,  it  was  open  to  the
    Appellant to now make an Article 8 application.  There had  never  been
    an Article 8 application.  She could do so on the basis  that  she  was
    married to a British citizen, and pregnant  with  his  child.   If  the
    British citizen could show that  he  was  gainfully  employed  and  the
    Appellant  could  then  meet  the  Rules,  the  application  would   be
    successful.

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set the decision aside  and  re-make  it.   My
    reasons are as follows.

11. First, it is not the case at all, as the grant of permission  suggests,
    that the judge has made a credibility  finding  first,  and  then  only
    thereafter taken the medical evidence into account,  this  is  not  so.
    The judge at the outset sets out the medical evidence.  However, it  is
    arguable that  the  analysis  of  that  medical  evidence  is  somewhat
    partial.  For example, the judge states, in  relation  to  Dr  Unigwe's
    report that, "I find that the cause of the PTSD symptoms will very much
    depend on whether I accept the Appellant's account regarding her forced
    prostitution" (paragraph 13).  It is arguable that the  judge  did  not
    necessarily have a free hand in so doing because regard had to  be  had
    to what the expert had to say about the cause  of  the  PTSD  symptoms.
    This is not least because the judge then did also  go  on  to  say  (at
    paragraph 14) that at least one of the scars  that  the  Appellant  had
    referred to could be attributed "to trauma caused by gangsters  as  the
    lesion on her left foot/ankle (identified as S11 on  the  report).   Dr
    Unigwe states that the S11 was highly consistent with its  attribution"
    (at paragraph 14).

12. Second, however, and much more importantly, the judge's conclusions  in
    relation to the PTSD are unclear and contradictory.  Whereas it is  the
    case that the judge  at  the  outset  refers  to  "the  PTSD  symptoms"
    (paragraph 13), she subsequently goes on  to  actually  disbelieve  the
    existence of the PTSD symptoms.  She goes on to say (at  paragraph  30)
    that,

         "I do not accept that the Appellant suffers from PTSD symptoms.   I
         find from Dr Unigwe's report that the diagnosis of PTSD is based on
         the Appellant's own self-reporting of symptoms  and  self-reporting
         of lifelong history of repeated abuse and severe trauma" (paragraph
         30).

13. In the same way, the judge then contradicts herself again by  going  on
    to say that, "whilst I accept Dr Unigwe's diagnosis that the  Appellant
    has symptoms of depression, I find that her mental health condition  is
    not caused by events she has asserted ..." (paragraph 40).  This is  at
    variance with Dr Unigwe's very clear conclusion that "Miss Vu has post-
    traumatic stress disorder, which is very likely a result of the traumas
    listed above.  She also  fulfils  the  criteria  for  depression"  (see
    paragraph 189 (at page 19 of his report, dated 11th March  2019)).   Dr
    Unigwe also goes on to say that the Appellant's "account of  trauma  is
    clinically plausible" on the basis of his own formal examination of her
    (paragraph 190).  He further concludes that "if a decision is made  for
    her to return  to  Vietnam  that  risk  [of  self-harm]  will  increase
    significantly to the point where a suicide  attempt  would  be  a  real
    possibility ..." (paragraph 192).  The fact that Dr Unigwe has come  to
    such a clear  and  conclusive  analysis  means  that  the  judge's  own
    conclusions with respect to the matters that he has referred to  needed
    to be a lot more unambiguously stated and properly reasoned.




14. It  is  well  established  that  an  expert  is  entitled  to  come  to
    conclusions  that  are  within  "the  spectrum  of  views  which  could
    reasonably be held" (see Mibanga [2005] EWHC 367).  Whilst  it  is  the
    case that experts do not decide cases but judges  do,  the  judge  must
    have a sound basis upon which to  reject  an  expert  report  (see  M-W
    [2010] EWCA Civ 12 per Wall LJ at paragraph 39).

15. For all these reasons, this appeal needs to be  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Anthony.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Anthony  pursuant  to  Practice  Statement  7.2(b)  of   the   Practice
    Directions.

17. An anonymity direction is made.

18. This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    10th September 2019
