
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01556/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2016                   |On 17 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     NO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Canter, instructed by Terence Ray, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 16 August 2016 dismissing  her  appeal  against
    the  respondent's  decision  made  on  25  January  2016  refusing  her
    application for asylum.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Saudi Arabia born on 23  May  1989.   She
    first came to the UK on a student visa in  July  2008  and  started  an
    English course which she completed in February 2009 when  she  returned
    to Saudi Arabia.  In March 2009 she returned to the UK as  an  aspiring
    student to attend a course offered by  an  English  school,  which  she
    completed in May 2010 and she intended to start a foundation course  at
    university. Whilst in the UK she met her husband, as she claims, also a
    citizen of Saudi Arabia and this developed into a love relationship.

3.   However, the  appellant's  father  wanted  her  to  marry  one  of  his
    friends.  She was very upset by this and said that she would not  marry
    an old man. Her father threatened her, saying that  he  had  given  his
    word to this other man and, as far as he  was  concerned,  nothing  was
    going to stop the marriage.  However, under a  pretext  facilitated  by
    one of her friends, the appellant was able to leave the family home and
    travel to the airport and then on to Bahrain.  It was her case that she
    met her husband there and subsequently on 14 May 2015  they  were  duly
    married in Egypt.  However, they could not register their marriage,  as
    they were unable to produce consent from the male guardian or the Saudi
    Arabian Embassy.

4.   In the light of these difficulties the appellant and her  husband  went
    through a different type of marriage, which did  not  require  parental
    consent.  The appellant and her husband, having  returned  to  Bahrain,
    left for Paris and then  Switzerland  before  entering  the  UK  on  27
    February 2015. They had planned  to  stay  only  for  a  week  but  the
    appellant received a telephone call  from  a  friend  in  Saudi  Arabia
    informing her that a family neighbour had seen the  appellant  and  her
    husband together in Bahrain, her father was now aware of the  situation
    and she was at risk of being killed by him to eradicate the  shame  she
    had brought on the family.

5.   The respondent did not accept that the appellant  had  married  without
    her family's knowledge or permission  or  that  she  had  received  any
    threats due to marrying without permission. She was not satisfied  that
    the appellant had a genuine  subjective  fear  of  returning  to  Saudi
    Arabia and her application was refused accordingly.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  heard
    on 22 July 2016.  The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and,
    having considered the documents submitted  in  support  of  the  appeal
    including an expert report from Dr Rebwar  Fatah  on  marriage  law  in
    Moslem countries, he found  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  credible
    witness. He said that he was driven to find that her accounts  were  no
    more and no less than a fabrication devised to extend her stay  in  the
    UK.  A marriage certificate had  been  produced  in  evidence  for  the
    marriage in Egypt but the judge found that this was a  fabrication.  He
    also found that the appellant's evidence about her claim that she could
    not renew her passport anywhere inside or outside Saudi Arabia  due  to
    her father's orders was contradictory and not true and that her account
    was deeply implausible and finally, he drew an adverse  inference  from
    the failure to claim asylum until 27 June 2015.  For these reasons  the
    appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

7.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued that  the  judge's  finding  that
    the appellant had not entered into an Urfi casual marriage was based on
    a misunderstanding of the evidence set out in Dr Fatah's  report  about
    whether there would be a written agreement  of  or  witnesses  at  such
    marriages.  It is further argued that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    assumed that  the  person  identified  in  the  seal  on  the  marriage
    certificate was necessarily a government official and,  in  any  event,
    these points were not put to the appellant at the hearing. The  grounds
    also argue that the judge failed to clarify a discrepancy  referred  to
    in [17] when dealing with the issue of the renewal of  the  appellant's
    passport, failed to give adequate reasons at [18] why  the  appellant's
    account was deeply implausible and erred in the weight he  attached  at
    [19] to the delay in claiming asylum.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  only  in
    respect of the  ground  relating  to  the  marriage  certificate.  When
    granting permission Judge Ford said:

         "2.  The Tribunal records that the expert  Dr  Fatah  concluded  at
             paragraph 62 that the appellant's marriage  was  Urfi  casual.
             The decision  also  records  that  Dr  Fatah  "outlined  those
             constituents of an Urfi casual marriage  and  the  appellant's
             marriage drawing explicitly on the contents  of  the  document
             translated  as  a  'legal  marriage  contract'  could  not  be
             reconciled   with   his   understanding   of   the    relevant
             constituents".   The  appellant  argues   that   this   is   a
             misunderstanding of what the expert said in his report.

         3.    Although  the  expert  outlines  his  understanding  of   the
             procedures involved in the Urfi casual marriage I  cannot  see
             that at any point he concludes that the  certificate  produced
             by the appellant is not compliant with such procedures.

         4.   It is arguable that  the  Tribunal  may  also  have  erred  in
             assuming without putting it to the appellant that  [WS]  whose
             seal appears on the marriage certificate was  an  official  of
             the state.  There were problems with this certificate in  that
             it does state on its face that it is a legal marriage contract
             which is inconsistent with the appellant's position  that  she
             could not enter into a legal marriage because  she  could  not
             produce evidence of parental consent. ..."

9.   At the hearing before me Mr Canter submitted that the judge  had  erred
    in his finding at [15] that the constituents set out  in  the  marriage
    certificate produced in evidence simply could not  be  reconciled  with
    the constituents for an Urfi casual marriage  which  Dr  Fatah  had  in
    mind.  Mr Canter pointed in particular to paras 62-70 of the report and
    to para 85 where Dr Fatah said, "If the couple did not get  permission,
    as [NO] has stated, then her marriage was not an official  one.   Thus,
    it is likely that [NO's] marriage in Egypt was based on the Urfi casual
    procedures".  He submitted that the judge had erred by saying  that  Dr
    Fatah tended to the view  that  such  marriages  would  be  verbal  not
    written and that, although he stated that it was not always written, he
    said in the same paragraph that the contact  was  variable.  The  judge
    said that witnesses were not required and that it was a salient feature
    of the legal marriage contract produced that there were  two  witnesses
    whose details were  set  out.  Mr  Canter  submitted  that  Dr  Fatah's
    evidence was that an Urfi casual marriage was not  always  written  and
    did not always take place in the presence of witnesses.  The judge  was
    wrong, so he argued, to make a finding on the basis that the fact  that
    there were witnesses and a written  certificate  was  determinative  of
    whether or not an Urfi casual marriage  had  taken  place.  He  further
    submitted that the judge had been wrong to attach weight  to  the  fact
    that the document relied on bore the words "Signed  and  sealed:  [WS]"
    and that it followed that it was necessarily a  ceremony  taking  place
    under the auspices of an official.

10.  Mr Walker pointed out that at para 90  of  his  report  Dr  Fatah  when
    talking about Urfi marriages said that the verbal or  written  contract
    was not registered with state authorities and

         "given that [NO] got married without the knowledge of  her  parents
         in a foreign country the possibility  of  a  casual  Urfi  is  more
         plausible than the possibility of a proper Urfi as the couple  kept
         their marriage a secret and did not get the consent of either their
         families or the Saudi Embassy".

11.  He accepted that the judge had not taken full  account  of  the  expert
    evidence  when  reaching  his  findings  on  the  marriage  certificate
    produced. Although permission  had  not  been   granted  on  the  other
    grounds, Mr Walker accepted  that  the  error  was  such  that  it  was
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

Consideration of Whether the Judge Erred in Law

12.  I accept the submissions of Mr Canter, which were not contested  by  Mr
    Walker. The fact that an Urfi casual marriage would often be verbal (or
    perhaps more  accurately  oral)  and  not  written  is  not  in  itself
    determinative and similarly, the fact that witnesses are  not  required
    does not in itself mean that a witnessed ceremony may not constitute an
    Urfi casual marriage.  I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  a  number  of
    relevant matters arising from the expert  evidence  were  left  out  of
    account when the judge found that the legal  marriage  contract  was  a
    fabrication and that there was no marriage between  the  appellant  and
    her claimed husband.  Both representatives submitted and I  agree  that
    in these circumstances the proper course  was  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.



Decision

13.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The  appeal  is  remitted  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for   further
    consideration by way of a rehearing by a different judge. The anonymity
    order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains in force.


Signed:                       H            J            E             Latter
    Dated: 7 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

