
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01472/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 September 2021                  |On 28 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    DRZI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel instructed by Susan Paul
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt.  Her date  of  birth  is  7  April
    1984.  It is  the  present  practice  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    anonymise Appellants in appeals raising asylum and other  international
    protection claims.  However,  it  is  not  clear  to  me  whether  this
    Appellant has been anonymised.  If so I direct this to continue and  if
    not I make an order to anonymise her.

 2. The Appellant  was  granted  permission  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal J K Swaney on 12 May 2021 against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R Hussain to dismiss her appeal  on  protection  grounds
    and under Article 8 ECHR.  Thus the matter came before me in  order  to
    determine whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

 3. The Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in 2015.  The  Appellant  made
    further submissions which gave rise to the decision of 27 January  2020
    against  which  she  appealed  and  which  is  the  subject  of   these
    proceedings.

The error of law

 4. Judge Hussain heard evidence from the Appellant and  her  partner,  BH.
    The judge did not set out their evidence but stated that he had  regard
    to it.  Part of the further submissions on which the  Appellant  relied
    giving rise to the decision which was the subject of the appeal  before
    Judge Hussain was a court judgment (AB/11/25) together  with  a  letter
    from a lawyer in Egypt (AB/7).  These documents  were  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The first ground of appeal relied on by Mr Gajjar
    concerned the Egyptian Court judgment and  the  reasons  given  by  the
    judge for finding that the document was not reliable.  The  judge  gave
    five reasons for concluding that the document was  not  reliable.   The
    first reason he gave, according to Mr Gajjar,  involves  a  mistake  of
    fact and a failure to have regard  to  material  evidence.   The  first
    reason the judge gave reads as follows:-

      i) The Appellant submitted a letter to her in an email  from  Mr  Ramy
         Jamal Sabry who said to be her lawyer.  This letter states that the
         lawsuit was lodged against the Appellant on 3 October  2014,  being
         one month before she left.  However, the  judgment  refers  to  the
         hearing date of 7 September 2016 and states that the  case  itself,
         having been filed in 2016.

 5. I accept that the judge's assessment of the evidence is incorrect.  The
    judgment of the Egyptian Court states that the case  was  lodged  on  3
    October 2014 and not 2016.  I find that the judge rejected the evidence
    on the basis of a misunderstanding.

 6. The  second  reason  given  by  the  judge  for  finding  the  document
    unreliable reads as follows:-

     ii) Her appeal before FTTJ Sangha was on 3 March  2016.   However,  she
         makes no mention of such  allegation  of  either  police  or  court
         proceedings at her asylum  claim  or  appeal  before  FTTJ  Sangha.
         Indeed, the main thrust of her fear and concern  was  the  risk  of
         FGM.  The only concerns she expressed  about  her  being  a  Coptic
         Christian was that of harassment and discrimination from the Muslim
         Brotherhood.  No specific detail was given as to  why  she  herself
         would be singled out".

 7. The grounds assert that the judge overlooked the  Appellant's  evidence
    in her witness statement which confirmed that  she  did  not  have  the
    judgment at the time of the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    having only recently  received  it  through  her  lawyer.   The  ground
    misrepresents the finding of the judge.  The judge refers to her having
    not mentioned allegations of either police or court  proceedings.   The
    judge does not question the  failure  to  present  the  Egyptian  Court
    judgment at the hearing.  Indeed, the decision of the  court  in  Egypt
    was made on 7 September 2016, post the date of the hearing before Judge
    Sangha.  I do not accept that the finding of the First-tier Tribunal at
    paragraph 18(ii) contains an error of law.  The judge was  entitled  to
    take into account the basis of the previous claim.  I asked  Mr  Gajjar
    at the hearing if there was any evidence from the Appellant  explaining
    when she became aware of the allegations,  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    proceedings in Egypt were filed in 2014.  He was not able to  point  me
    to any evidence in this regard.  He drew my attention to the judge  not
    having made a record of the Appellant's oral evidence. However there is
    no legal requirement for the judge to do so.  It is not raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal that the Appellant gave evidence at the hearing which
    was not taken into account.

 8. The third reason given by the judge for rejecting  the  reliability  of
    the court document reads as follows:-

    iii) The Appellant was alerted to the fact that the Respondent found the
         copy of judgment documents submitted to be of poor quality.  Whilst
         an Appellant fleeing persecution may not be expected to obtain such
         documents from the authorities they  are  fleeing  from.   In  this
         instance the  Appellant  claims  to  have  been  notified  of  this
         judgment by her lawyer representing her.  In such  circumstances  I
         would expect her to be able to  provide  an  original  or  suitable
         clear and certified copy of the original.

 9. The grounds challenge this finding on the basis that the judge did  not
    take into account the evidence from the lawyer which is as follows:

         "According to court rules, it is not possible  to  obtain  original
         case papers and no legal action can be taken in the  case,  due  to
         the absence of a formal power of attorney.  Notwithstanding that  I
         read the papers of the case and have also obtained a  copy  of  the
         ruling."

10. I accept that the finding of the judge  does  not  disclose  engagement
    with the evidence of the lawyer.  Furthermore Mr Tufan at  the  hearing
    before me conceded that the judgment from the Egyptian  Court  that  he
    has in his file was legible, which undermines the finding of the judge.

11. The fifth reason given by the judge is as follows:-

    v) The letter from the lawyer dated 1 July 2019 is itself more akin  to
       a letter advocating her asylum claim rather than  informing  her  of
       the progress or outcome of any proceedings.  The challenge  to  this
       finding is that it is irrational to use the contents of the lawyer's
       letter to undermine the reliability of the court's judgment in  this
       way and that the judge has placed  excessive  weight  on  immaterial
       factors.

12. It is not clear to me what prompted the letter to  the  Appellant  from
    the Egyptian lawyer. However, I find that the judge's finding discloses
    at least that the judge took into account immaterial matters.  There is
    in my view no connection between the content of the letter  insofar  as
    it is capable of supporting the Appellant's claim on protection grounds
    and the reliability of the court judgment.  I note that the  letter  is
    not a letter addressed personally to the Appellant  seeking  to  inform
    her of the progress of her case.  The letter does not indicate to  whom
    it was sent and for what purpose.

13. While I do not accept the ground relating to the reason  given  by  the
    judge at paragraph 18(ii) and there is no challenge to the reason given
    at  18 (iv) , I accept that three out of the five reasons given by  the
    judge for finding the document not to be reliable are  flawed  for  the
    reasons that I have given.  It is not possible for me to conclude  that
    had those errors not occurred the judge would  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion, notwithstanding the  application  of  Devaseelan  and  SSHD
    [2002] (UKAIT 00282).

14. Grounds 2 and 3 relate to Article 8. The judge did not accept that  the
    Appellant met the definition of a partner for the purposes of  Appendix
    FM because she was not able to establish that she had lived with BH for
    two years.  The reason for this  is  set  out  at  paragraph  23.   The
    reasons can be summarised.  Although the Appellant claims that she  was
    in a relationship with BH for about four years  the   judge  said  that
    there was no evidence they are legally married.  The  judge  said  that
    the Appellant claims to have lived with BH since 2015 at an address  in
    Nottingham.  However,  the  judge  did  not  accept  this  because  the
    Appellant had been accommodated and supported by the  Respondent  until
    at least 4 October 2016.  While the judge did not accept that they  had
    lived together since 2016, it is not clear why  he  was  not  satisfied
    that they had been living together for two years.

15. While I accept that  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  insurmountable
    obstacles and Article 8  generally,  having  rejected  the  Appellant's
    evidence that she and BH had been living together for a period  of  two
    years, it is not clear from the decision what the judge made about  the
    relationship and whether or not he accepted that the couple were living
    together  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  or  indeed  at   any   time.
    Furthermore, the failure to consider the best  interests  of  the  BH's
    minor child is a material error in the Article 8 assessment.

16. For the above reasons I set aside the decision  of  the  judge,  having
    found the Appellant's grounds of appeal made out.  There are  a  number
    of material errors.  None  of  the  findings  made  by  the  judge  are
    sustainable.  It is necessary for there to be a de novo hearing.

17. In the circumstances taking into account the Practice Statement of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier and Upper Tribunal on
    25 September 2012, specifically paragraph 7.  In light  of  the  nature
    and extent of the judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for
    the decision to be remade I consider it appropriate to remit  the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                   Date 13 September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



