
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01290/2020



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Manchester CJC on 11 November 2020 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|At a remote hearing via Skype               |On 17 November 2020            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER



                                   Between

                                      A

                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Elliot-Kelly, Counsel

For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

Introduction

      1. I have maintained the anonymity  direction  because  this  decision
         refers to the appellant's international protection claim.

      2. This is an appeal by the appellant ('A'), a  citizen  of  Pakistan,
         against a decision of First-tier Tribunal ('FIT') Judge M R Oliver,
         sent on 7 April 2020, dismissing his appeal  on  asylum  and  human
         rights grounds. This followed a  previous  decision  by  FTT  Judge
         Colvin, sent on 29 January 2019, dismissing A's appeal as  well  as
         the appeal of his then claimed partner  ('P').  For  convenience  I
         shall refer to these as the 2019 FTT and the  2020  FTT  decisions.
         In summary, the 2019 FIT rejected A and P's claim to be  in  a  gay
         relationship. The 2020 FTT considered those findings equally  valid
         to A's claim that he was gay and would be at  risk  in  persecution
         for reasons relating to this. The 2020 FTT considered  A's  further
         evidence to be unreliable, and rejected his claim to be gay as well
         as his claim that P had been killed when he returned to Pakistan.

      3. In a  decision  dated  6  May  2020  FTT  Judge  G  Wilson  granted
         permission to appeal observing all issues in the grounds of  appeal
         to be arguable. Judge Wilson regarded the grounds to assert,  inter
         alia, that the 2020 FTT  failed  to  consider  material  facts  and
         evidence. The matter then came before me to determine  whether  the
         FTT decision contains an error of law, and if so whether it  should
         be set aside.

Hearing

      4. At the beginning of the hearing before me, Mr McVeety accepted that
         although the grounds of  appeal  were  drafted  in  a  general  and
         generic fashion, Judge Wilson regarded them to at least include the
         assertion that the 2020 FTT failed to consider material  facts  and
         evidence. Mr McVeety agreed with me that even if that was an overly
         generous interpretation of the grounds of appeal, it was clear from
         the documents on file that the 2020 FIT failed  to  make  important
         findings on the fresh evidence before it and not  before  the  2019
         FIT, and this constituted a 'Robinson obvious' error of law  -  see
         Durueke (PTA: AZ applied, proper approach) [2019] UKUT 197 (IAC) at
         [34] to [37].

      5. Both representatives accepted that the  2020  FIT  failed  to  make
         findings of fact on key evidence such that the FTT decision  should
         be set aside. Mr McVeety was entirely correct to concede the appeal
         for the reasons I summarise below.

      6. Both representatives agreed that the error of law is such that  the
         decision needs to be remade completely.  This  will  require  fresh
         findings of fact in relation to detailed and extensive evidence.  I
         had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant Senior President's  Practice
         Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual  findings
         required in remaking the decision, and I decided  that  the  matter
         should be remitted to the FIT.

Error of law discussion

      7. The 2019 FTT provided comprehensive reasons for rejecting A and P's
         respective claims to be gay and their joint claim to be  in  a  gay
         relationship. The 2020 FTT had before it extensive  fresh  evidence
         post-dating the 2019 FTT decision.  This  included:  written  fresh
         claim submissions dated 30 September 2019, a witness statement from
         A dated 6 March 2020, witness statements from two friends who  gave
         oral evidence at the 2020 FTT hearing, emails,  facebook  messages,
         medical evidence and supporting letters. These entirely recast  A's
         case because of events said to post-date 29 January 2019, the  date
         of the 2019 FTT decision. The chronology and the relevant  evidence
         relied upon is summarised below.

          i) In February 2019 P explained to A that his family  wished  for
             him to return to Pakistan and he was considering doing  so.  A
             and P argued about this and P left the  home  he  was  sharing
             with A in the  UK  in  April  2019,  in  order  to  return  to
             Pakistan. P has not been in contact with A since this time.

         ii) A called P's friend in Pakistan, Hamza, in  order  to  clarify
             P's whereabouts. Hamza called A two days later to say that P's
             family refused to answer  and  warned  him  against  enquiring
             further regarding.

        iii) In June 2019 A received a phone call in which P's brother  and
             his own father threatened and abused him.

         iv) On 26 June 2019 A received an email from  Hamza  in  which  he
             said that P had been killed by his own brother and A's  family
             had been threatened by P's family. Hamza also  explained  that
             he had been beaten and threatened. A  responded  in  an  email
             dated 1 July 2019 asking Hamza to facilitate contact with  his
             family. Copies of these emails were available to the 2020 FTT.

          v) This evidence is contained not only in A's  witness  statement
             but also referred to in the witness statement of Ikram UI Haq,
             who gave oral evidence before the  2020  FIT.  This  statement
             states that P went back to Pakistan and has not been heard  of
             since. In addition, A was informed that P was  killed  because
             of his sexuality.

         vi) On 13 July 2019 A received a facebook message from his  friend
             in Pakistan, Orangzaib, in which he said that a fatwa had been
             issued against A and newspaper reports had been  published  in
             which A's father stated that he  had  disinherited  A.  In  an
             email that day A asked his friend to  provide  copies  of  the
             fatwa and newspaper reports. The friend then sent  a  copy  of
             the fatwa against A and newspaper reports published on 10  and
             11 July 2019. This correspondence and attachments were  before
             the 2020 FTT.

        vii) A was very upset and depressed during this period  and  sought
             medical attention and counselling. In particular,  A  attended
             his GP at Tooting South Medical Centre on  9  August  2019.  A
             letter from the GP dated 21  February  2020  confirms  that  A
             registered at  this  practice  in  August  2019  when  he  was
             diagnosed as having moderate depression, given antidepressants
             and referred for counselling. The GP notes for 9  August  2019
             also contain A's explanation that he felt low  because  P  had
             been killed and he was afraid for his own life. The  2020  FIT
             also had a letter from 'NHS Talk Wandsworth' dated  28  August
             2019 which recorded A's claim  that  P  had  been  killed  and
             described his  self-report  as  indicating  that  measures  of
             depression and anxiety scores were in the severe range. A also
             sought help from his friend Ghulam who put  him  on  to  'Mind
             Out',  a  LGBTQ  mental  health  service,  which  offered  him
             assistance in July 2019. In a letter dated 13  August  2019  a
             Senior Mental Health Advocate outlined  a  history  consistent
             with the one provided by A.

      8. The  FTT  considered  the  reliability  of  the  fresh  documentary
         evidence to be "key" [43] and stated that this had been  considered
         in the context of all the evidence and the reasoning  of  the  2019
         FIT [44].  The 2020 FTT judge concluded at [45] that  each  of  the
         reasons  provided  for  disbelieving  A  remained  "equally   valid
         following the service of documentation which I find  has  not  been
         shown, even to the lower standard to  be  reliable".  Although  the
         evidence was referred to in a general sense, Mr McVeety was correct
         to concede that the 2020 FTT failed to address  and  make  findings
         upon the fresh evidence post-dating the 2019 FTT.   In  particular,
         the 2020 FTT:

               1) Failed to make any findings of fact as to the  credibility
                  of A's detailed account (which cross-referenced to  emails
                  and facebook messages) that he believed that  P  had  been
                  killed by his  family  in  Pakistan  because  of  his  gay
                  relationship with A. Although the 2020 FTT considered A to
                  have provided a "striking" lie before the 2019 FIT at [44]
                  and was obliged to treat  those  findings  as  a  starting
                  point, the judge was nonetheless obliged to make  findings
                  in relation to A's evidence as to  what  had  taken  place
                  since the 2019  FTT  decision.  The  2020  FIT  failed  to
                  consider the utility of a 'Lucas' self-direction about A's
                  honesty - see Uddin v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 338  (12  March
                  2020).

               2) Made no findings of fact regarding A's two witnesses,  who
                  attended the hearing and  were  cross-examined.  They  are
                  referred to at [40] without names, and no further  mention
                  is made of them in the decision.

               3) Entirely failed to refer  to  or  address  the  supporting
                  evidence  from  the  GP  which  corroborated  A's  claimed
                  chronology of events.

               4) Rejected the reliability of the fatwa  and  the  newspaper
                  reports without considering  the  context  in  which  this
                  evidence was provided. A did not  have  supportive  family
                  members in Pakistan - these materials were  sent  attached
                  to emails and messages from a friend.

               5) Failed to address all the  fresh  evidence  in  the  round
                  before concluding that the  2020  FTT  reasoning  remained
                  "equally valid".



Conclusion

      9. The 2020 FIT's errors of approach in relation to the credibility of
         A's account post-dating the 2019 FIT decision  constitute  material
         errors of law. These errors have infected the credibility  findings
         made, such that the decision needs to be set aside  and  remade  de
         novo on both asylum and human rights grounds.

     10. The FIT decision contains errors of law. Its decision cannot  stand
         and is set aside. The matter is remitted to the FIT, where it  will
         be remade de novo by a judge other than Judge  Abrebrese  or  Judge
         Oliver.


Signed: Ms. M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 13 November 2020
