
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01594/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th November 2018                         |On 08th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           Serge Martin Boukoulou
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Thomas (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Birrell, promulgated on 15th August 2018, following a hearing  at
    Manchester Piccadilly on 10th August 2018.  In the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Congo,  and  was  born  on  6th
    October 1975.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    14th  January  2018,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC  395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that  he  used  to  work  as  a
    police officer, and fell in  disfavour  with  the  ruling  regime,  and
    believes  his  uncle  (his  father's  cousin)  was  poisoned   by   the
    government, and that they are also now attempting to  poison  him.   He
    claims that he is at risk were he to return back to Congo.

The Judge's Finding

 4. The judge summarised the Appellant's situation and considered, how  the
    Appellant had entered the UK on a visitor's visa, when he  had  claimed
    to have been an actor and a comedian, which he  said  he  undertook  as
    activities on a part-time basis, in addition to being a police officer.
     The judge went  on  to  consider  the  Appellant's  account,  and  the
    documentation that had been furnished in his favour (from paragraph  22
    onwards).

 5. It was the Appellant's case that he received the  documents  about  the
    predicament he was being put into from his wife  and  from  his  former
    boss in  the  secret  service  with  whom  he  has  remained  friendly.
    However, (at  paragraph  24)  the  judge  did  not  consider  that  the
    Appellant's former boss would assist in this way, given the Appellant's
    claim that the ruthlessness of the  regime  was  such,  that  they  had
    poisoned his uncle, and attempted to poison him.

 6. In relation to how the Appellant procured the documents, there  was  an
    investigation of this issue before the Tribunal.

         "The Appellant initially said that he had received  them  from  the
         colonel  who  had  remained  friendly  with  him  in  the  security
         services, but he had  deleted  the  documents  because  all  secret
         service phones were under surveillance.  When  questioned  further,
         he said that it was the colonel who would delete the message  which
         then automatically deleted it from his phone.  I am a regular  user
         of WhatsApp and pointed out to the Appellant that I know that  this
         is not the case and I note that  there  is  certainly  no  evidence
         before me to suggest that this is the case.  I  am  satisfied  that
         the Appellant was simply being untruthful about the problems of all
         the documentation and therefore  I  attach  little  weight  to  it"
         (paragraph 25).

 7. The judge also then went on to consider the claim that the  Appellant's
    uncle had been poisoned, and that he  himself  was  at  risk  of  being
    poisoned in the same way.  The judge rejected this completely.  He  did
    so on the basis that the ailments that the Appellant himself exhibited,
    were medically shown to have been the cause of other related conditions
    (see paragraphs 26 to 28).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application essentially state that, in  suggesting  that
    the judge herself was a regular user of WhatsApp, she could not  accept
    that the messages on the Appellant's phone  could  be  deleted  by  the
    sender once they were sent to him (see paragraph 6 of  the  grounds).as
    the Appellant had contended. Second, it was said  that  the  judge  was
    wrong to have failed to consider the Appellant's own explanation as  to
    how his former  boss  would  assist  him  in  providing  the  necessary
    documents (paragraph 11).

 9. On 20th September  2018,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Tribunal on the basis that, in view of the contention  that  the  judge
    arrived at findings which were based on "her own knowledge and her  own
    perception as to material matters", it was arguably the case that judge
    took into account immaterial considerations, namely, her

         "... own understanding as to whether a message might  automatically
         be deleted from the Appellant's phone.  The  judge's  understanding
         of the matters was arguably an  immaterial  consideration  and  the
         judge arguably descended  into  the  arena.   The  application  for
         permission is granted".

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me, Miss Thomas, narrowed down the focus  of  her
    submissions to precisely this question,  namely,  that  the  judge  had
    effectively allocated to herself the status of an expert, giving a view
    as to how the  WhatsApp  messages  are  deleted,  and  whether  such  a
    deletion at one end necessarily also deletes the message at  the  other
    end, and this was not something that was  open  to  the  judge  to  do.
    Secondly, she submitted that whereas the judge had gone on to find  the
    Appellant to have been wanting of credibility in  other  respects,  the
    plain fact remained that the  judge's  view  in  relation  to  how  the
    WhatsApp message system operated, had infected her findings in relation
    to all the other findings as  well.   The  decision,  accordingly,  was
    unsafe, and it should be set aside.

11. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that it  was  entirely  fair  for  the
    judge to say in open court, and in the presence of  well-known  Counsel
    in this jurisdiction (as the Appellant was represented  by  Miss  Geeta
    Patel) that the Appellant's account was not credible where he suggested
    that the deleting of a message by the  sender  would  also  delete  the
    message at the Appellant's end as well.  The fact  remained,  submitted
    Mr Bates, that the Appellant had begun this entire  account  by  giving
    entirely  conflicting  explanations   about   how   he   received   the
    documentation.  Indeed, the judge was herself  clear  in  stating  that
    "even Miss Patel described in her final submission 'a confused account'
    of why he could not show them messages  and  documents  on  his  phone"
    (paragraph 25).  Given that this was the case, there was  no  error  of
    law of any materiality.  Indeed, submitted Mr Bates, it would have been
    altogether different if the judge had raised these matters only in  the
    determination, without giving the parties the  opportunity  to  explain
    them during the course of the hearing.

12. In reply, Miss Thomas submitted that be that as it may, the judge's use
    of language in terms that, "I am a regular user of WhatsApp and pointed
    out to the Appellant that I note  that  this  was  not  the  case  ..."
    (paragraph 25) showed that she had stepped into the arena, in precisely
    the way in which the grant of permission  had  suggested,  and  made  a
    finding against  the  Appellant,  which  ultimately  infected  findings
    across the board in relation to this Appellant.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, that this is a case where
    the Appellant had himself begun by giving a convoluted  account  as  to
    how he  had  received  the  documents  and  why  they  were  no  longer
    available.  He himself had said that he  had  deleted  them  at  first.
    When challenged further, he said that it was the sender,  the  Colonel,
    who deleted them. When he was expressly told that this could not be the
    case, and that "there is certainly no evidence  before  me  to  suggest
    that this is the case" (paragraph 25), the Appellant did not deal  with
    this.  It is not clear what his evidence was  thereafter.   It  is  not
    clear what his explanation was thereafter.  One can only  assume,  that
    he gave none.  This is why the judge concluded that the  Appellant  had
    given an untruthful account and that for this reason she would  "attach
    little weight to it".  This was not to say that  the  judge  completely
    disregarded it.  It was simply to say  that  she  would  attach  little
    weight to it.  In effect, therefore, the judge had given the  Appellant
    some credence for the account that he had given.

14. Second, the Appellant's case was also that his uncle had been  poisoned
    and that he himself also was at risk  of  being  poisoned.   The  judge
    comprehensively rejected this on the basis of the medical evidence that
    was before her.  First, there was the evidence from the Dalton Hospital
    dated 25th October 2017 which confirmed that the Appellant's  recurrent
    abdominal pain was on account  of  "a  failed  drainage  of  an  intra-
    abdominal collection" and the CT scans revealed  "distal  ileitis  with
    inflammatory changes suggestive of TB  ileitis  with  failed  drainage"
    (paragraph 26).  The  judge  even  went  on  to  consider  more  recent
    evidence from the  Birmingham  Hospital  dated  2nd  April  2018  which
    confirmed all of  this,  and  added  that  the  Appellant  was  "having
    adhesions as a result of an appendectomy.  There is  no  suggestion  of
    poison" (paragraph 27).  Third, the judge then went on to consider  the
    claim that  the  Appellant's  uncle,  Thomas  Mayinda,  had  also  been
    poisoned to death.  However, this  person  had  attended  hospitals  in
    France for regular treatment.  The  evidence  from  there  showed  that
    "Mayinda died following a vascular stroke".  The Appellant states  that
    there were Articles showing that it could have been a  vascular  stroke
    or it could have been poisoning.  However,  the  judge  explained  that
    there was no evidential basis for this (paragraph  27).   Finally,  the
    Appellant gave an inconsistent and conflicting account  about  his  own
    occupation.  He claimed to have been a police  officer.   But  then  he
    also ended up procuring a visa to the UK  where  he  described  himself
    only as an actor  and  a  comedian.   By  the  time  that  the  hearing
    occurred, he had also said that he was a journalist and a  novelist  in
    his spare time (paragraph 29).  He claimed that his  Bank  Account  had
    been frozen after he arrived in the UK.  However, as the  judge  found,
    "I find it incredible that someone who had been arrested, detained  and
    tortured on three to  four  occasions  by  the  current  regime  as  an
    opponent of the regime would continue to be employed  in  the  security
    services" (paragraph 30), which was the Appellant's claim, if  he  said
    that he worked as a police officer, a matter that he did  not  disclose
    to the visa authorities in the UK.  All in all, therefore, the findings
    made by the judge, were entirely open to her.  The  decision  that  she
    arrived  at  was  comprehensive,  clear,  and  entirely  fair  to   the
    Appellant.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction is made.

17. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th February 2019






