
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01213/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th December 2018                    |On 2nd January 2019                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs L Barton, Counsel instructed by ADL Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals  against  a  decision  of  Judge  Andrew
    Davies (the judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated  on
    19th September 2018.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the claimant.

 3. The claimant was born on 20th August 1999 and is a Vietnamese  citizen.
    She claims to have arrived clandestinely in the UK on 28th August  2014
    and thereafter claimed asylum.  She claimed that she could  not  return
    to Vietnam because she would be at risk as a former  victim  of  modern
    slavery, having been trafficked from Vietnam  to  Europe  for  the  sex
    trade.  She also claimed international protection on the basis that she
    is a Catholic.

 4. On 3rd March 2017 the Competent Authority decided that the claimant was
    not a victim of human trafficking from Vietnam for the purposes of  any
    kind of exploitation.  It was not accepted that she  was  a  victim  of
    slavery, servitude or forced/compulsory labour.

 5. On 10th January 2018 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claimant's
    application for international protection and her human rights claim.

 6. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 4th September 2018.  The judge found
    that the claimant had not proved that she would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution in Vietnam on grounds of  religious  belief  and  dismissed
    that aspect of her claim.

 7. The judge found that victims of trafficking do not  form  a  particular
    social group in Vietnam within the meaning of the  Refugee  Convention,
    as they do not have a distinct identity within Vietnamese society.  The
    judge noted the decision of the  Competent  Authority  which  concluded
    that the claimant had not been a victim of  modern  slavery,  including
    human trafficking.

 8. The judge found that the Appellant could not be considered  part  of  a
    particular social group, but concluded to the lower standard  that  the
    claimant had been a victim of trafficking, notwithstanding the decision
    of the Competent Authority to the contrary.

 9. The judge found that the claimant faced a real risk of serious harm  on
    return  to  Vietnam  as  she  may  be  destitute,  and  vulnerable   to
    trafficking or re-trafficking and she had no family support  available.
    She had left Vietnam as a child and would return as a young adult  with
    a baby.  The judge therefore concluded that the claimant  was  entitled
    to a grant  of  humanitarian  protection  and  allowed  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary, it was contended  that  the  judge  had  made  a
    material misdirection of law on the basis that it was not open  to  the
    judge to depart from the conclusions of the  Competent  Authority  when
    deciding whether the claimant was a  victim  of  trafficking.   It  was
    submitted that it was only in cases where the decision had  been  found
    to be perverse or in breach of the Secretary of  State's  policy,  that
    the judge would be empowered to depart from those conclusions.  It  was
    contended that the judge had  failed  to  identify  any  perversity  or
    breach of policy and therefore had erred in law.  Reliance  was  placed
    upon MS (Trafficking - Tribunal's Powers - Art. 4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016]
    UKUT 00226 (IAC).

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge O'Garro who  relied  upon  MS
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594 in concluding that there was an arguable
    error of law.

12. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. Mr Bates very fairly drew my attention  to  case  law  which  had  been
    published  after  MS  (Pakistan).   There  were  two   Upper   Tribunal
    decisions, the first in time being AUJ  (Trafficking  -  no  conclusive
    grounds decision) Bangladesh [2018]  UKUT  00200  (IAC)  and  the  most
    recent decision, that being ES (s82 NIA  2002;  negative  NRM)  Albania
    [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC).

14. Mr Bates submitted that  AUJ  appeared  to  support  the  Secretary  of
    State's submission, but accepted that ES did not.   Mr  Bates  accepted
    that if I thought it appropriate to follow the guidance  in  ES,  there
    was no material error of law in the FtT decision.

15. Mrs Barton submitted that ES should be  followed,  as  being  the  most
    recent  decision,  and  in  that  decision  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    considered AUJ and MS (Pakistan) which in turn  considered  an  earlier
    decision AS (Afghanistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 1469.



My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I find no material error of law in the FtT decision.  In  my  view  the
    approach taken by the judge is in line with the  most  recent  guidance
    given by the Upper Tribunal in ES which was heard on 28th June 2018 and
    promulgated on 6th September 2018.

17. It  is  clear  that  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch,  in  ES,  carefully
    considered the previous authorities, those being AS  (Afghanistan),  MS
    (Pakistan) and AUJ Bangladesh.

18. In ES  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  both  AS
    (Afghanistan) and MS (Pakistan) was giving judgment on the  role  of  a
    previous decision made by the Competent Authority in an appeal  against
    removal under the previous appeal regime under section 82 of  the  2002
    Act which pertained prior to 20th October 2014.  The decision in ES, as
    in the case  before  me,  relates  to  the  "new  appeal  regime",  the
    important difference being that  the  appeal  in  ES  was  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse a protection claim, not a  decision  to
    remove from the United Kingdom.

19. Judge Finch in ES found that the Upper Tribunal Judge in AUJ  had  made
    comments which appeared to support the Secretary of  State's  position,
    but which did not form any part of the head note to the decision and as
    Judge Finch described at paragraph 17 of  her  decision  were  "clearly
    obiter".

20. I set out below the head note to ES;

         1.   Following the amendment to s82 of the Nationality, Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act), effective from 20  October
             2014, a previous decision  made  by  the  Competent  Authority
             within the National Referral Mechanism (made on the balance of
             probabilities)  is   not   of   primary   relevance   to   the
             determination of an asylum appeal, despite  the  decisions  of
             the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ
             1469 and SSHD v MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594.

         2.   The correct approach to determining whether a person  claiming
             to be a victim of trafficking is  entitled  to  asylum  is  to
             consider all the evidence in the  round  as  at  the  date  of
             hearing, applying the lower standard of proof.

         3.   Since 20 October 2014, there is also no right of appeal on the
             basis that a decision is not in accordance with  the  law  and
             the grounds of appeal are limited to  those  set  out  in  the
             amended s82 of the 2002 Act.

21. Judge Finch pointed out at paragraph 33 of ES that;

         "Furthermore, the fact that  the  Government  decided  to  adopt  a
         balance of probabilities as the appropriate standard of proof for a
         conclusive decision within  the  National  Referral  Mechanism,  as
         opposed to the far lower standard of proof  applicable  in  Refugee
         Convention decisions, indicates that it did recognise that the  two
         processes were to be distinguished from each other".

22. The judge in this  case,  which  was  heard  just  prior  to  ES  being
    promulgated, has followed the approach advocated  in  ES.   I  conclude
    that the current position is as outlined in ES, in that an FtT Judge is
    not bound by a negative decision made by  the  Competent  Authority  in
    relation to trafficking.  It is relevant that the  Competent  Authority
    makes a decision based on a balance of probabilities, which is not  the
    case in the FtT, where the standard of proof is a reasonable degree  of
    likelihood, which is a lower standard.

23. I therefore conclude that ES should be followed.  The judge  considered
    all the evidence in the round as at the date of  hearing,  and  applied
    the correct standard of proof and therefore reached a  conclusion  open
    to him on the evidence, and did not err in law.

24. The decision of the FtT stands.



Notice of Decision

The FtT decision does not disclose an error of law.  I do not set aside  the
decision.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.



Anonymity

I have decided that it is appropriate to  make  an  anonymity  direction  in
this case.  Unless a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of  her  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made pursuant to Rule  14  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date         10th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the FtT stands so does the decision not  to  make  a  fee
award.


Signed                              Date         10th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


















