
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01368/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 June 2017                               |On 22 June 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                               muhammad kashif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Wass, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Sunrise
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission against a decision of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Aziz who in a determination promulgated  on  27
    March 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to grant asylum.  The appeal  was  refused
    on both asylum and human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  15  January  1982  who
    entered Britain as a student on 2 April 2011 with a visa valid until 30
    September 2014.  In January 2014 his  leave  to  remain  was  curtailed
    because of non-compliance with his visa conditions.  He overstayed  and
    in December 2016 was encountered working illegally at a restaurant.  He
    was served with removal papers.  He claimed asylum on 10 December 2016.
     That application was refused on 31 January 2017 and it is  the  appeal
    against that decision which is now before me.

3.   The appellant claimed that his brother had set light to a  Quran  in  a
    mosque in Hyderabad in January 2011.  The appellant's brother had  then
    been arrested and taken into custody and pleading guilty.   In  January
    2011 the incident had been broadcast in the media and  threats  to  set
    their house alight had been made against the appellant's family.    The
    appellant's father had been attacked by clerics.

4.   The appellant had moved to Islamabad on 23 January  2011  for  his  own
    safety, remaining there until April 2011.  He stated that while he  was
    there media coverage of his brother's actions had resulted in people in
    Islamabad recognising him and he had been attacked and  beaten  on  one
    occasion by members of the public.  Although he had tried to report the
    matter to the police they had threatened to arrest him and his  family.
    He had then left Pakistan.  He feared various religious groups who were
    aware of his identity and would  be  able  to  track  him  down  if  he
    returned.

5.   The Secretary of State did not consider that the appellant's claim  was
    credible.  The court documents which it  was  claimed  related  to  his
    brother had been produced were produced, but it was noted that the name
    on the court documents, "Faisal Rajput", did not match the  appellant's
    brother's name which was "Faisal Majeed".

6.   The Secretary of State also considered that the appellant's  claim  was
    not plausible, stating that if people  were  attacking  his  home  with
    impunity as the police were refusing to help his family, the  appellant
    and his family would not have been able to remain in the house, without
    difficulty.   It  was  moreover  not  credible  that  having  moved  to
    Islamabad the appellant would be beaten by a group of people who  would
    recognise him from coverage of the charges against his brother.

7.   Although the appellant had claimed that his brother had been killed  in
    prison, the death registration certificate which the appellant provided
    said that his brother's death was "natural" and that the cause  of  his
    death was normal.  No weight was placed by the Secretary of State on an
    untranslated newspaper  article.  The  Secretary  of  State  relied  on
    Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004.

8.   The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  considered  the
    documents submitted.  He  set  in  detail  out  the  evidence  and  his
    submissions in the determination. Having referred to  relevant  law  in
    paragraph 71 of the  determination  onwards,  the  judge  set  out  his
    findings of fact and conclusions.

9.   He did not find that the appellant  was  credible.  He  placed  weight,
    inter alia, on the delay in claiming asylum and said he considered that
    the appellant's claim was generally implausible stating  that  for  the
    appellant's brother to burn the Quran openly would have been  "reckless
    in the extreme" and that if the local people  had  turned  against  the
    appellant's family it would be unlikely that they would have been  able
    to escape as they had.

10.  In paragraph 78 he emphasised that what he found most  implausible  was
    the appellant's explanation as to why internal  relocation  was  not  a
    viable option, given the many years that had passed since his brother's
    alleged actions.

11.  In paragraph 79 he stated:-

         "79. The appellant stated that internal relocation was not a viable
             option as of the date of hearing because;


             (a)  an agent or agents of persecution which he kept referring
                  to  as  'religious   organisations'   kept   details   and
                  photographs of every child who was born in Pakistan,


             (b)  the religious organisations were still offended  by  what
                  his brother did and  even  though  his  brother  had  been
                  killed in prison  in  2014,  the  religious  organisations
                  continued to be so incensed by the actions of his  brother
                  that they wanted to  kill  the  appellant  as  well  (even
                  though he played no part in the  Quran  burning  incident)
                  and


             (c)  as these religious organisations kept a database of every
                  child born in Pakistan, they would be able  to  distribute
                  information and details  about  him  throughout  Pakistan,
                  thus ruling out internal relocation as a viable option."

12.   He  emphasised  that  the  appellant  kept  referring  to   "religious
    organisations" without being able to provide any sort of name until  he
    was asked several times in re-examination. The  judge  said  that  this
    concerned him, and moreover he did not find it credible that agents  of
    persecution would be interested in the appellant, given that he had not
    been involved in the  Quran  burning  incident  and  that  the  alleged
    perpetrator, his brother, had been murdered in prison.

13.  He also found as lacking in credibility the assertion  that  "religious
    organisations" held records (separate from the state)  of  every  child
    born in Pakistan and they could use their records to be able to  locate
    him throughout Pakistan. He pointed out that,  when cross-examined  the
    appellant had been asked how  those  organisations  would  be  able  to
    recognise the appellant from a photograph of  him  as  a  baby  he  had
    claimed that religious organisations would  be  taking  photographs  of
    every child as they grew up, thus updating their  records.   He  stated
    that that was nothing less than pure fiction.

14.   He  noted  that  it  was  only  after  repeated  questioning  by   his
    representative that the appellant had mentioned two organisations which
    operated from within his own village.  He stated  that  the  difficulty
    the appellant had in  naming  the  organisations  was  because  he  had
    difficulty in trying to make up an  untruth  to  cover-up  for  earlier
    untruths which he had told the Tribunal.

15.  Moreover, in paragraphs 84, 85 and 86 he wrote:-

         "84. Lack of digital footprint: If the appellant's account and that
             of his friend is to be accepted,  then  there  was  nationwide
             media coverage of the Quran burning incident in  2011  by  24-
             hour TV news channels and the printed  press.   The  appellant
             himself states at paragraph 10 of his statement that  news  of
             his brother's actions 'spread like wildfire' and the  incident
             was given high coverage due to its extreme  and  controversial
             nature.  He added in his oral testimony that the  very  reason
             why internal relocation from their village to Islamabad failed
             was because people recognised him  and  his  family  from  the
             intense media coverage that followed  his  brother's  actions.
             The appellant's friend, Mr Zaib, stated that the country's two
             main 24-hour news channels covered the  incident  for  several
             days  and  that  he  even  recalls  seeing   the   appellant's
             photograph in the press.


         85.  During closing submissions, I  indicated  to  the  appellant's
             counsel, Mr Lemer, that if I were to  accept  the  appellant's
             account and the intense  media  coverage  that  his  brother's
             actions generated, then this was the type of case  that  ought
             to be relatively easy to objectively verify due to the digital
             footprint that it would leave behind.


         86.  Mr Lemer  acknowledged  the  point  that  I  was  making.   He
             indicated that the absence of such evidence  was  not  through
             lack of effort by those instructing him.  They  had  tried  to
             obtain  media  reports  of  the  appellant's  brother's  Quran
             burning incident from 2011  but  had  been  unable  to  locate
             anything.  He also suggested that given that the incident took
             place in 2011, the passage of time may be an  explanation  for
             the absence of a digital footprint in 2017 ...".

16.  The judge stated that he did  not  accept  that  last  observation  and
    stated that he found there was a very good explanation for the lack  of
    a digital footprint and the fact that  the  appellant's  representative
    had not been able to find any media/press reports of the incident which
    was that the appellant had manufactured the entire account.

17.  He referred to the death  certificate  produced  but  stated  that  the
    death certificate referred to the  appellant's  brother's  death  being
    from natural causes which undermine the  assertion  that  he  had  been
    murdered in prison.   He  did  not  accept  the  explanation  that  the
    authorities would not want it to be known that  his  brother  had  been
    murdered in prison and that  was  why  the  death  certificate  falsely
    stated that his brother had died from natural causes.  He  stated  that
    "Considered in isolation,  this  is  not  an  implausible  explanation.
    However, this is not the only anomaly in the document".

18.  He stated that the appellant's father whom the appellant had said  that
    he had lost contact with since 2011 had  been  recorded  as  being  the
    individual who registered the death and provided information  regarding
    the last burial  rites.   The  appellant  could  not  explain  why  the
    document contains such information as  according  to  his  account  his
    father's whereabouts had been unknown since 2011.  He stated  he  found
    the appellant's attempts to distance himself from a document  which  he
    had adduced and sought to rely upon to be unconvincing.

19.  He did refer to other documents which  had  been  produced  and  stated
    that in light of the numerous adverse findings which he  had  made  and
    applying the principles in Tanveer Ahmed IAT [2002] UKIAT 00439  little
    weight should be attached to those documents.

20.  He stated that he  believed  that  the  appellant  had  fabricated  the
    entire asylum claim to frustrate his removal after he had  been  caught
    working illegally and therefore dismissed the appeal.

21.  The grounds of appeal largely misrepresent what  the  judge  had  said,
    for  example  suggesting  that  he  had   said   that   the   religious
    organisations who would pursue the appellant would  not  recognise  him
    from a picture taken when he was a baby, when in fact  what  the  judge
    had said was that he did not accept that they would have updated  their
    records.  It was argued that  that the judge had  been  speculative  in
    his  views  about  the  extremist   organisations   and   stated   that
    "clerics/religious organisations" would  have  a  very  strong  network
    throughout Pakistan.  They suggested that the judge was wrong to  place
    weight on the fact that the appellant lacked knowledge of the extremist
    groups he feared as he was not a country expert.  It  was  argued  that
    the judge had not given reasons for his conclusions.

22.  The grounds also  suggested that the  tone  of  the  determination  was
    "eccentric" and the judge had not made a finding as to whether  or  not
    the Quran burning incident had occurred, and nor had he made a  finding
    on whether or  not  religious  extremist  groups  had  networks  spread
    throughout Pakistan.  It was claimed that the judge  should  also  have
    considered that the religious organisations would have a photograph  of
    him acquired from the media and would therefore be  able  to  recognise
    him if he were to return.

23.  It was stated that the documents from Pakistan had been "legalised"  by
    the Foreign Office in Pakistan which  confirmed  the  documents  to  be
    genuine and authentic, but the judge had failed  to  make  findings  in
    that regard.

24.  It was stated that the judge had not disputed the  appellant's  brother
    had died in prison or that he was prosecuted for the offence of burning
    the Quran were clearly relevant factors.  It was stated the  judge  was
    not entitled to make the findings which he had.

25.  The grounds went on to state that the judge, by  stating  that  he  was
    concerned about the lack of evidence of digital media in paragraphs  84
    onwards, had not taken into account the evidence that  was  before  him
    and  that  moreover  the  judge  had  not  considered  the   particular
    circumstances of the appellant.

26.  It was suggested that the  judge's  findings  were  at  odds  with  the
    documentary evidence produced.

27.  In granting permission to  appeal  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Keane stated that:-

         "The very lengthy narrative style grounds on which the  application
         for permission  was  made  amounted  to  a  disagreement  with  the
         findings of the judge.  The judge set out reasons for  his  finding
         that the appellant had not given a credible  account  that  he  had
         come  to  the  adverse   attention   of   clerics   and   religious
         organisations  in  Pakistan.   However,  at  paragraph  85  of  his
         decision the judge appeared to request corroborative evidence of an
         incident which involved the burning of  the  Quran  in  2011.   The
         judge arguably had regard to an irrelevant consideration."

     Judge Keane considered that that was an arguable error of law.

28.  At the hearing before me Miss Wass referred  to  what  was  written  at
    paragraph 85 of the determination  which  I  have  quoted  above.   She
    stated that the judge  was  clearly  requiring  corroborative  evidence
    which was an error of law.      Moreover, she stated that the judge had
    failed to consider court documentation and to have considered objective
    evidence of what happened  to  those  who  committed  blasphemy  -  she
    referred to pages 15 to 17 of the bundle  which  showed  details  of  a
    fatwa issued against a son after blasphemy by his father.  That  showed
    that there was objective evidence of the treatment of family members.

29.  She argued that the judge had erred in failing to  make  a  finding  on
    the incident of the burning of the Quran, had failed  to  consider  the
    documentary evidence of the allegations  made,  and   erred  by  merely
    stating that he considered the documents in the context of the guidance
    in the determination in Tanveer Ahmed.  The  documentary  evidence  had
    been legalised by the Pakistani Foreign  Office  and  therefore  proper
    consideration should have been given to them.

30.  She argued that there was a lack of reference of consideration  of  the
    documentary evidence and the objective  evidence  which  had  been  put
    forward and the judge had  given  weight  to  irrelevant  matters,  for
    example the attack on the appellant's family's house.  She argued  that
    the judge was wrong to consider that internal relocation would be  open
    to the appellant and to place weight on the fact that  there was a lack
    of a digital footprint regarding what had happened in 2011.

31.  In reply Mr Whitwell stated that the grant of permission  was  somewhat
    Delphic, but it appeared that Judge Keane had  stated  that,  with  the
    exception  of  the  issue  regarding  paragraphs  84  and  85  of   the
    determination, the grounds of appeal were merely  a  disagreement  with
    conclusions which were fully open to the judge to make.

32.  He referred to the fact that the  appellant  had  only  claimed  asylum
    when he had been picked up after being  found  to  work  illegally  and
    pointed out the fact that Mr  Lemer,  in  paragraph  86,  accepted  the
    judge's point about the lack of supporting evidence.   He  referred  to
    the documentary evidence and the incident in the bundle  which  related
    to a high profile human rights activist whose son had been  fearful  of
    what might happen  to  him  in  Pakistan.   He  stated  that  was  very
    different from this appellant.  He asked me to find that the judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant had not  made  out  his  claim  and
    reached conclusions which were fully open to him.

Discussion

33.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the Immigration  Judge.   The  judge  properly  considered  all  the
    evidence before him and his conclusions were, I consider, fully open to
    him.  He was entitled to find that not only was the  appellant's  claim
    implausible, but that it was simply not credible.  He was not saying in
    paragraphs 84 and 85 that he  required  corroboration,  he  was  merely
    making the clearly obvious point that if there had been  such  a  media
    storm caused by such a clear act of sacrilege  as  burning  the  Quran,
    there should  surely  be  some  evidence  of  that.   This  indeed  was
    acknowledged by the appellant's representatives who had endeavoured  to
    find evidence  in  support  of  the  appellant's  claim  but  had  been
    unsuccessful.

34.  The judge moreover was entitled to  find  that  the  appellant's  claim
    that he would be  recognised  throughout  Pakistan  was  not  credible.
    There was simply no evidence whatsoever to back-up his  assertion  that
    unnamed religious organisations would be able to trace  him  throughout
    Pakistan.  It of  course  must  be  remembered  that  it  was  not  the
    appellant  himself  who  claimed  that  he  had  committed  an  act  of
    blasphemy, but his brother, and he asserted that his brother  had  been
    killed.

35.  Moreover the judge did properly consider all the  documentary  evidence
    before him.  He was entitled to view  the  evidence  with  considerable
    scepticism notwithstanding that the Pakistani Embassy  had  "legalised"
    the documents.  Given that the judge considered those in context he was
    quite correct in his application of the  principles in  Tanveer  Ahmed.
    His  conclusions regarding  the  documents  were  fully  open  to  him,
    particularly given the fact that the death  certificate,  for  example,
    did not reflect the appellant's assertions of what had  happened  about
    the death of his  brother,  that  he  had  said  that  his  father  had
    disappeared in 2011 but that his father had registered the  death,  and
    that the fact that he received  the death certificate indicated that he
    had been in touch with his family, whereas the appellant had said  that
    he had not.  I  consider  that  the  judge  was  entitled  moreover  to
    consider that the background evidence  submitted  did  not  assist  the
    appellant: there  was  nothing  therein  to  indicate  that  "religious
    groups" would be able to trace people from photographic  records  which
    they had throughout Pakistan, or indeed be able to trace someone from a
    background such as the appellant who had a very low profile indeed.  He
    was entitled to find that the appellant was not credible and  to  place
    weight on the delay in claiming asylum.

36.  The judge was, I consider, fully entitled to find that the  appellant's
    claim was not credible, he gave clear reasons for  that  and  therefore
    was fully entitled to dismiss the appeal and made no material error  of
    law in so doing.

Notice of Decision

37.  This appeal is dismissed.

38.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed [pic]


                                    Date:  22 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy











