
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
PA/01071/2015

                                              AA/06655/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 September 2016                     |On 19 October 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                          O H J A (first appellant)
                         K S A M (second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                        Appellant/Respondent

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Appellant/Respondent


Representation:

For OHJA and KSAM:          Ms Khan, instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration
For the Secretary of State for the Home Department:   Mr Diwyncz, Senior
                                            Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is a cross-appeal concerning a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Chambers) which was promulgated on 29  January  2016.   Granting
    permission, Judge Gleeson helpfully summarised the position as follows:

         The appellants are husband and wife, both are Iraqi  citizens,  who
         appealed against the respondent's decision to  make  a  deportation
         order in respect of the first appellant (the husband)  pursuant  to
         Sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007 and  to  certify  the
         decision pursuant to Section 72(9) of the Nationality,  Immigration
         and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended)  and  to  refuse  asylum  and
         humanitarian protection or leave to remain on human rights  grounds
         to the wife and their children.

         At the date of the decision, the wife and children  benefited  from
         discretionary leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules HC  395
         (as amended) which will not expire until the end of September 2017.
          Theirs was, in effect, an upgrade appeal.

         The First-tier Tribunal discharged the  Section  72(9)  certificate
         and then dismissed the first appellant's challenge to the  decision
         under Section 32 and upheld the respondent's decision to remove him
         to Iraq.  As regards the wife and children, he also  dismissed  the
         humanitarian protection and human rights claims within  the  Rules,
         but having regard to Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009, and the best interests of the  children,  the
         judge allowed the appeals of the  wife  and  children  outside  the
         Rules on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. Before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Khan of Counsel, who  appeared  for  OHJA
    and KSAM, conceded that the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction  to
    allow the appeal  on  Article  8  grounds;  the  second  appellant  had
    appealed under Section 83 of the 2002 Act (as  amended)  and  therefore
    had a right to appeal on asylum grounds.  There was no jurisdiction  on
    such an "upgrade appeal" for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

 3. Further, Ms Khan submitted that the judge's findings in respect of  the
    asylum and humanitarian protection appeals of the first appellant  were
    also unsound.  The report of the expert witness had been ignored by the
    judge without giving any reasons whilst no reference had been  made  to
    relevant jurisprudence in particular country guidance (see AA  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)).  Mr Diwyncz, for  the  Secretary
    of State, agreed with  both  submissions  made  by  Ms  Khan.   In  the
    circumstances, I consider it appropriate to set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  I make the following directions for the  remaking
    of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal:

    DIRECTIONS

    1.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 29  January
         2016 is set aside.  The findings of the Tribunal save  as  provided
         for below are set aside.  The findings of the Tribunal  at  [20-21]
         in respect of Section 72 of the 2002 Act (as amended) shall stand.

    2.   The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that
         Tribunal to remake the  decision  (not  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Chambers).

    3.   Each party shall send to the other party any written evidence upon
         which that party intends to rely at the next hearing no later  than
         21 days prior to the date of the hearing.

    4.   No less than ten working days  prior  to  the  next  hearing,  the
         representatives of OHJ and KSM shall  prepare  a  new  consolidated
         bundle containing the evidence of both parties (including  any  new
         evidence).  The representatives shall send a copy of that bundle to
         the First-tier Tribunal and a copy  to  the  relevant  Home  Office
         Presenting Officers' Unit (HOPU).

    5.   The hearing shall take place in MANCHESTER on a date to  be  fixed
         not  before  1  November  2016.   4  hours  allowed.    An   Arabic
         interpreter shall be provided.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 21  January
2016 is set aside.  I have made directions for the disposal  of  the  appeal
(see above).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 10 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 10 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


