
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01451/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 4 October 2017                     |          On 8 November 2017         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                     N G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Speirs
For the Respondent:    Ms O'Brien


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1990.  His claimed nationality of Eritrean is
    disputed by the Respondent.

 2. The basis of his claim to asylum is,  principally,  that  he  converted
    from Islam to become a Pentecostal Christian in Eritrea.  Also, that he
    had attended in the UK a demonstration against the Eritrean government.

 3. The application was refused, in summary,  for  the  following  reasons.
    First, in respect of his claimed nationality he said he  was  from  the
    Tigrinya ethnic group but although he spoke  some  Tigrinya  which  had
    been his parents' main language, his  main  language  is  Amharic,  the
    national language of Ethiopia.   The  interview  was  in  Amharic.   He
    claimed that the reason he speaks Amharic is because his father used to
    move because of work and his  mother,  when  dealing  with  traders  in
    Assab, spoke Amharic.  However, the background material indicates  that
    Tigrinya, Arabic and English predominate in commerce and not Amharic.

 4. He claims to have been deported from Ethiopia  because  of  the  border
    conflict.  Whilst the background  information  shows  that  during  the
    Ethiopian occupation of Eritrea Amharic was the official language, many
    Eritreans refused to speak and learn it and continued  to  teach  their
    children their native languages.  Therefore, his claim to be an Amharic
    speaking Eritrean was inconsistent with accounts  that  many  Eritreans
    refused to speak Amharic.

 5. As for his claimed change  of  faith  in  2001  there  was  a  lack  of
    evidence.

 6. The political activity, attendance at a demonstration, was  not  solely
    against the Eritrean government but against racism as a whole.

 7. He appealed.

 8. Following a hearing at Glasgow on 10 April 2017, Judge  of  the  First-
    Tier Green dismissed the appeal.   He  noted  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant and a witness, Mr MA both in Amharic.

 9. The crux of Judge Green's decision is at paragraph 12(i) where he found
    that the appellant had not discharged the burden of proving  he  is  an
    Eritrean.  He stated:

    '(i)    I have noted the excerpt from the COI  produced  by  Ms  Speirs
           which  provides  that  because  of  the  legacy   of   Ethiopian
           domination over Eritrea, many Eritreans also speak Amharic (i.e.
           in addition to their mother tongue).  However, it also  goes  on
           to say that Tigrinya and Tigre together are spoken by about  83%
           of the total population and are  widely  distributed  throughout
           the country.  Both languages serve as languages  of  interethnic
           communication.  The COI  recognises  that  many  of  the  ethnic
           groups in Eritrea crossover into Ethiopia.  I  have  noted  from
           the objective evidence exhibited in the Appellant's first bundle
           that his claimed home area is Assab which is in  the  south-east
           of   Eritrea   bordering    with    Ethiopia    and    Djibouti.
           Notwithstanding this objective evidence,  is  it  plausible  and
           credible that the Appellant is Eritrean notwithstanding that  he
           cannot speak Tigrinya?  He claims that he moved  from  Assab  to
           Addis Ababa with his family when he was three years old in 1993.
            At that age, he would be learning to  talk  and  his  immediate
           family, if they  were  Eritrean,  would  almost  certainly  have
           spoken Tigrinya.   That  would  have  been  his  mother  tongue.
           Between 1993 and 2000,  he  claims  that  the  family  lived  in
           Ethiopia until they were returned to Eritrea  where  they  lived
           until 2003.  He would have left Ethiopia when he  was  10  years
           old.  I struggle to see how he  could  have  picked  up  Amharic
           whilst living in Ethiopia given his claim that he never went  to
           school in that country or in Eritrea.  His life would have  been
           focused on the family home and  if  his  parents  were  Tigrinya
           speakers then he would have continued  speaking  that  language.
           This man cannot speak Tigrinya.  He  only  speaks  Amharic,  the
           principle language of Ethiopia.'

10. The judge then went on to conclude that having not established that  he
    is Eritrean the question of whether he is a  Pentecostal  Christian  is
    'essentially academic'.  He noted additionally that no one had attended
    from the church in Glasgow.  In the only comment on Mr MA's evidence he
    also states he can give it very little weight  given  his  observations
    about the appellant's nationality.   He  finds  that  both  might  have
    attended the church but that such was not enough to establish  that  he
    had converted.

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  judge
    failed properly to consider the  background  material.   In  particular
    that it states that Amharic is spoken as a first or second language  in
    Assab due to the Ethiopian dominance.  As such it was  not  implausible
    that he could only speak Amharic.  Also, the judge's comment  that  his
    immediate family would have spoken to him in Tigrinya was speculative.

12. Permission to appeal was refused but was allowed on  re-application  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

13. At the error of law hearing before me Ms  Speirs  essentially  repeated
    the grounds.  She added that the judge had also given no  consideration
    to the evidence on this matter in the appellant's witness statement.

14. Ms O'Brien's response was that  the  judge  had  noted  the  background
    evidence and made findings  which  were  open  to  him  concerning  the
    language used in the appellant's home.

15. I consider that the decision shows material error of law, specifically,
    that he failed to consider material evidence. His comment (at  [12](i))
    that his parents 'would almost certainly have spoken Tigrinya',  in  my
    judgement, is speculation.  The judge failed to engage  with  what  the
    appellant said in his witness statement at [19]  -  [23]  namely,  that
    while his parents did indeed speak Tigrinya they  also  spoke  Amharic.
    His father, a driver, used to travel to different parts of Ethiopia  so
    he used to communicate in Amharic.  His mother dealt  with  traders  in
    Assab which is near the border with  Ethiopia  and  which  is  why  she
    communicated in Amharic.  They also continued to  speak  some  Tigrinya
    which is why he learnt some Tigrinya words.

16. The judge (at [12](i)) notes the appellant's claim that aged  three  he
    moved from Assab to Addis Ababa where  he  remained  for  seven  years.
    However, he failed to consider his evidence that during that  time  his
    mother died and thereafter he had a carer who was  an  Ethiopian  woman
    (Q34-36).

17. Further, the judge while he noted that the  witness  Mr  MA  gave  oral
    evidence did not engage with his comments in his statement in which  he
    claims to have known the Appellant in Assab and that they  communicated
    in Amharic and that most people speak Amharic there.

18. The judge having concluded that the appellant  was  not  Eritrean  gave
    minimal,  if  any,  consideration  to  other  aspects  of   the   claim
    particularly that he suffered difficulties because of  his  Pentecostal
    Christian faith.

19. In the circumstances the case will need to be heard again.

20. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is set aside.   No  credibility
    findings stand.

21. In terms of section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and  of  Practice
    Statement 7.2 the case is remitted to the  First-Tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision.

22. The member(s) of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to  consider  the  case
    are not to include Judge Green.

23. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                             Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


