
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01737/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 June 2021                              |On 13 July 2021               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JARVIS


                                   Between

                                     SO
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M. Moriarty (Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Ms J. Isherwood (Home Office Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction regarding anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,
we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs
otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant or members of
his family. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


Introduction

1. The Appellant is a Nigerian national, born on 17  February  1960.  On  18
   March 1990, the Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor,
   overstayed the terms of that visa and was later granted Indefinite  Leave
   to Remain on 11 August  2000.  On  3  October  2008,  the  Appellant  was
   sentenced to 8 years imprisonment for the attempted importation  of  3.12
   kgs of pure cocaine into the UK. A Deportation Order was  signed  against
   the Appellant on 18 July 2014.

2. The Appellant appealed the decision to deport made on the same  date  (18
   July 2014). Initially his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  allowed
   however that decision was later set aside by the Upper Tribunal  and  the
   substantive appeal reheard in the First-tier Tribunal. This  resulted  in
   the appeal being dismissed in a decision dated 25 May 2016.

3. Subsequently, the Appellant made further representations  which  resulted
   in the SSHD refusing the Appellant's protection and human rights claim on
   6 February 2019.

4. The appeal against that decision was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   JS Burns on 24 January 2020 which resulted in the appeal being  dismissed
   by way of a decision promulgated on 4 February 2020.  In  that  judgment,
   Judge JS Burns concluded that the Appellant had rebutted the  presumption
   that he constituted a danger to the community by reference to  ss.  72(2)
   and 72(6) of NIAA 2002 (exclusion  from  protection  against  refoulement
   under the Refugee Convention) (see para. 41) but also  concluded  that  a
   'former drug smuggler' did not constitute a member of a particular social
   group (para. 51). The Judge also went on to find that the  Appellant  had
   failed to establish that there was a real  risk  of  being  arrested  and
   imprisoned  by  the  Nigerian  authorities  on  return  and   accordingly
   dismissed the Article 3 ECHR appeal (see paras. 42-47), as  well  as  the
   humanitarian protection claim (para. 57).  The  FtJ  also  dismissed  the
   appeal under Article 8  ECHR  on  the  basis  that  there  were  no  very
   compelling circumstances by reference to s. 117C of NIAA 2002, (paras. 65-
   73).

5. The  Appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, but permission was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 27
   March 2020. The Appellant renewed those grounds  directly  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal and permission was granted in  brief  terms  by  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Allen on 11 June 2020. In his decision Upper Tribunal  Judge  Allen
   found arguable all grounds asserted by the Appellant in  the  application
   for permission.

The error of law hearing

6. The appeal before  us  was  an  in-person  hearing.  We  heard  competing
   submissions from Mr Moriarty, Counsel for the Appellant and Ms Isherwood,
   Senior Presenting Officer. We made a written record of those  submissions
   which is  contained  in  the  record  of  proceedings  and  will  not  be
   reproduced in this judgment. At  the  end  of  the  hearing  we  formally
   reserved our decision.

7. There were three grounds of appeal raised by the Appellant:

      1) that the Judge materially erred in finding that the Appellant  had
      not  shown  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  he  would  be
      prosecuted and imprisoned by reference to section 22 of the  National
      Drug Law Enforcement Agency Act ("NDLEAA") by applying  a  subjective
      assessment of plausibility;


      2) that the Judge materially erred in  expecting  to  see  background
      evidence which corroborated the application of section  22  to  those
      who had been arrested and imprisoned abroad for importation of drugs;




      3) even in the absence of such specific evidence  the  Judge  further
      materially erred in  failing  to  have  regard  to  other  background
      evidence which indicated that the Nigerian authorities were  adopting
      an increasingly strict approach to drug offending and drug smuggling.

8. During the hearing, Mr Moriarty mostly focused his  oral  submissions  on
   the narrow issue  of  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  expert  evidence
   relating to the application of section 22 of the NDLEAA (Grounds 2 &  3).
   In doing so, he reminded the Tribunal that the FtJ had concluded that  if
   the Appellant is imprisoned in  Nigeria  then  this  would  constitute  a
   breach of the Appellant's Article 3  ECHR  rights  based  on  the  severe
   conditions in  Nigerian  prisons  coupled  with  the  Appellant's  health
   vulnerabilities (see para. 60 of the FtT decision).

9. We note that, as confirmed by Ms Isherwood, the SSHD has  not  sought  to
   'cross-appeal' that conclusion through a Rule 24  response  (as  per  the
   recent guidance of the UT in Binaku (s.11 TCEA; s.117C NIAA; para.  399D)
   [2021] UKUT 34 (IAC) at paras. 20-63).


FINDINGS AND REASONS

10. We therefore deal firstly with the  main  argument  put  forward  by  Mr
   Moriarty: that the Judge materially erred in his conclusion at  para.  46
   that there was no evidence to show that the provisions in s.  22  of  the
   NDLEAA, which had existed in Nigerian law for over  30  years,  had  been
   particularly utilised by the Nigerian authorities.

11. Section 22 of the NDLEAA reads as follows:

    "(1) Any person whose journey originates from Nigeria without being
    detected of carrying prohibited narcotic drugs or psychotropic
    substances, but is found to have imported such prohibited narcotic
    drugs or psychotropic substances into a foreign country,
    notwithstanding that such a person has been tried or convicted for any
    offence of unlawful importation or possession of such narcotic drugs or
    psychotropic substances in that foreign country, shall be guilty of
    exportation of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances from Nigeria
    under this subsection.


    (2) Any Nigerian citizen found guilty in any foreign country of an
    offence involving narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances and who
    thereby brings the name of Nigeria into disrepute shall be guilty of an
    offence under this subsection.


    (3) Any person convicted of an offence under subsection (1) or (2) of
    this section shall be liable to imprisonment for a term of five years
    without an option of a fine and his assets and properties shall be
    liable to forfeiture as provided under this Act."

   The report of Dr Inge Amundsen


12. In reaching the conclusion at para. 46,  the  Judge  predominantly  drew
   upon an expert report dated 15 October 2019  by  Dr  Inge  Amundsen  (see
   paras. 25, 29, 45 & 46). In his overall  oral  submissions,  Mr  Moriarty
   argued that  the  evidence  cited  by  the  expert  at  page  41  of  the
   Appellant's bundle of  "several  recent  cases  of  people  arrested  and
   charged according to the export ban" meant that it was inherently  likely
   that there had also been arrests in respect of s. 22 NDLEAA and that this
   was materially relevant to the assessment of the risk to the Appellant of
   being  arrested/detained  by  the  Nigerian  authorities  on  return.  Mr
   Moriarty added to this by arguing that the Judge had failed to adequately
   assess  the  evidence  at  page  42  of  the  bundle  that  the  Nigerian
   authorities were actively looking for drug  traffickers  "on  arrival  in
   Nigeria" and had failed to factor in the background evidence relating  to
   the risk of pre-trial detention which was relevant even if the  Appellant
   ultimately was not subject to prosecution.

13. We have considered these submissions with care and, although  they  were
   well made, we have concluded that there is no material error  in  respect
   of the Judge's conclusions.

14. Firstly, there is no suggestion that the Judge erred in looking  to  the
   expert/background evidence to  assess  the  likelihood  of  the  Nigerian
   authorities seeking to arrest the Appellant by reference to  s.  22.  The
   Judge was entitled to assess the evidence  in  order  to  understand  the
   likelihood and potential consequences of return to Nigeria.

15. Secondly, we take the view that the FtJ was perfectly entitled to  reach
   the view that he did at para. 46. Contrary to the Appellant's  criticisms
   of this aspect of the decision, read in the context of the judgment as  a
   whole, it is clear that the Judge was entitled to  reach  the  conclusion
   that there was no  contemporary  evidence  of  s.  22  being  applied  in
   practice thereby meaning that there was no real  risk  of  the  Appellant
   being arrested and subject to prison conditions which  would  breach  his
   Article 3 rights.

16. At this juncture it is apposite to have  regard  to  the  report  of  Dr
   Amundsen in more detail. Dr  Amundsen  stated  that  he  is  a  political
   scientist with a PhD in Political Science from the University of  Troms�,
   Norway. He is a Senior researcher at the Chr. Michelsen Institute  (CMI),
   which is an independent research institution and think tank in Norway. He
   states that his  primary  areas  of  research  include  Nigeria,  Malawi,
   Bangladesh,  Angola  and  Ghana.  He  further  indicates  that   he   has
   "comprehensive experience from Country of Origin reports, with  expertise
   on  human  and  political  rights   abuse,   opposition   and   political
   persecution, risk of return, brutal and degrading treatment and  torture,
   as well as of document authentication." He provided the details  of  four
   publications on Nigeria including  a  chapter  in  a  book  on  political
   corruption in Africa from 2019, a chapter in another book on  corruption,
   natural resources and development from 2017,  a  Norwegian  Peacebuilding
   Resource Centre (NPRC) report on 'Who Rules Nigeria?' from  2012,  and  a
   Norad discussion report on good governance, political economy  and  donor
   support from 2010.


17. We note that the summary of Dr Amundsen's  expertise  does  not  outline
   how long he has worked for the Chr. Michelsen  Institute  nor  any  other
   roles that he  might  have  had  before  taking  up  that  position.  The
   publications  indicate  that  he  has   contributed   to   two   academic
   publications, both on the topic of corruption in Nigeria.  He  also  said
   that he was a "project leader on two large research projects on Nigeria".
   It is unclear from the summary of his credentials whether Dr Amundsen has
   had direct research experience in Nigeria, and if so, to what extent  and
   how recent it might be. The summary of his experience indicates that  his
   field of expertise is more general in nature and appears to focus on  the
   political situation in Nigeria, and specifically on corruption  and  good
   governance. There is  nothing  in  the  summary  of  his  credentials  to
   indicate that Dr Amundsen has any direct experience of the Nigerian legal
   system or of drug enforcement. The report itself does not seek  to  speak
   from direct experience, but conducts an academic review, properly  cross-
   referenced, of background evidence that Dr Amundsen found on the issue of
   drug  enforcement  in  Nigeria.  He  cross-referenced  various   publicly
   available news articles relating to the arrest  of  drug  traffickers  in
   Nigeria.

18. We have looked carefully at the recent cases cited  by  Dr  Amundsen  at
   page 41 of the Appellant's bundle but in our view none of these  examples
   assist the Appellant in disturbing the findings of the FtT:

     a. Unhelpfully, neither the  expert  nor  the  Appellant's  solicitors
        provided the Tribunal with the full reports of the examples  quoted
        and thereby prevented  the  Judge  assessing  the  context  of  the
        summary of those stories. It was not for the Judge to research  the
        full articles himself and so he was  entitled  to  proceed  on  the
        basis of the summaries of those articles in the report;


     b. None of the examples given are of  situations  in  which  a  person
        returning to Nigeria has been arrested on the basis of having  been
        imprisoned for exporting  drugs  into  another  country.  All  four
        examples relate to people who have been arrested whilst  attempting
        to export drugs from Nigeria and we agree with the FtJ's conclusion
        on this part of the evidence at para. 28;


     c. The three examples at page 42 relate to: 1) a person attempting  to
        smuggle 6.5kgs of cocaine into Nigeria; 2)  a  Nigerian  drug  lord
        arrested after deportation from Kenya - there is no detail of  what
        the arrest related to or what the consequences of the arrest  were;
        3) a number of people arrested  for  attempting  to  bring  illegal
        drugs into Nigeria. Again, in our view, none of these examples can,
        on proper analysis of the narrow issue in this case, undermine  the
        finding of the Judge.

19. Additionally, as the FtJ also factored in, Dr Amundsen  expressly  noted
   that there was no evidence of prosecution of those who had been convicted
   of a drugs offence abroad since before 2001 (page 41).

20. Whilst we note Mr Moriarty's further submission that the expert was,  in
   this paragraph of the report, referring to convictions under s. 22(2)  of
   the NDLEAA ('bringing the name of Nigeria into disrepute') and not  those
   under s. 22(1), it is our view that nothing particularly turns  on  this.
   As is clear, even in the context of s. 22(2) of  the  Act,  the  evidence
   quoted  by  the  expert  did  not  show  any  prosecutions  or  attempted
   prosecutions since 2001 and there was no evidence at all  of  convictions
   or attempted prosecutions under  s.  22(1).  In  reality,  Mr  Moriarty's
   submission on this point, merely highlights the absence  of  evidence  as
   properly identified by the FtJ.


21. The Judge also, lawfully in our view, made reference to  a  letter  from
   the Appellant's former solicitors (dated 10 August 2016) which  expressly
   accepted that: "Whilst there are no published examples  of  the  Nigerian
   authorities prosecuting under this legislation it does not mean  that  it
   does not happen" (see para. 28).

22. Our findings so far dispose of Grounds 2 & 3.

23. For completeness, even though Mr Moriarty's  point  in  respect  of  the
   evidence of pre-trial detention was not part of the Grounds of Appeal  to
   the UT (via the FtT) or the UT itself, we have concluded that  there  is,
   with respect,  no  merit  in  this  point  either.  As  Mr  Moriarty  was
   constrained  to  accept  during  the  hearing,  the  pre-trial  detention
   evidence only becomes relevant if the Appellant could show, at the  lower
   standard of proof, that there was a real risk of the Nigerian authorities
   arresting/detaining him in the first place. As we have explained, we have
   concluded that the Judge made findings which were plainly  open  to  him,
   and the Appellant has failed to show that there was any material error of
   law applying the guidance in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State for  the
   Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

24. We should also formally dispose of the Appellant's complaint  in  Ground
   1, that the Judge  impermissibly  applied  his  own  subjective  view  of
   whether or not it was plausible that the Nigerian authorities would  take
   an adverse interest in the Appellant (see para.  47)  contrary  to  HK  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.  In  our
   view this point does not have material relevance on  the  basis  that  we
   have already decided that the predicate finding at  para.  46,  that  the
   Judge lawfully concluded that there was no real  risk  of  the  Appellant
   being arrested/detained, is a lawful one.

25. In any event, for our part, we conclude that the Judge did  not  err  in
   assessing the  likelihood  of  the  Nigerian  authorities  arresting  the
   Appellant  based  on  his  own  individual  characteristics,   this   was
   inherently the legal duty upon the Judge. The Judge's  findings  relating
   to risk on return were within a range  of  reasonable  responses  to  the
   evidence. For the reasons given above it was open to him to conclude that
   the evidence  did  not  show  that  there  was  a  reasonable  degree  of
   likelihood that the Appellant would be arrested or prosecuted under s. 22
   NDLEAA and he would not therefore be at risk of Article  3  ill-treatment
   on return.



DECISION

26. We therefore conclude that the making of the decision by the  First-tier
   Tribunal did not involve any error on a point of law by reference  to  s.
   12(1) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and the appeal  is
   therefore dismissed.


Signed        I.P. Jarvis                        Date 02 July 2021

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Jarvis


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email


