








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01623/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Manchester                         |                                   |
|On 18th March 2019                 |On 21st March 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                              Sangar Jabar Ali

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bednarek of Broudie, Jackson and Canter Solicitor


For the Respondent:    Mr Tan   Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shergill promulgated on the 15th March 2018 whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

    I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 2. Leave to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Davey on 16th November  2018.  Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 3. The material parts of the leave granted provide:-

         1  Many of the grounds are really a disagreement with the  findings
         of the judge, for which sufficient and adequate reasons were given.

         2  In any event the position  for  Kurds  has  materially  changed,
         given the decisions in AAH (Iraqi Kurds-internal relocation) [2018]
         UKUT 212 (IAC) ...  and  AA(Iraq)  [2017],  ...  and  the  changing
         position on  (Article  15(c))  in  relation  to  Diyala  and  other
         contested areas; internal relocation access to CSID returns to  the
         IKR may have in event changed the landscape on safety on return

         ...

         Whilst the difficulties the Respondent may  have  in  removing  the
         Appellant without a current or expired passport or laissaez  passer
         without a CSID or evidence of the real likelihood of being able  to
         obtain one are matters for the Respondent. But the new Section E of
         the Annex to AAH (Iraq)  [2018]  indicate  the  judge's  assumption
         about obtaining new identity documents  within  a  reasonable  time
         finding accommodation and employment may indicate a  real  risk  to
         civilians from Baghdad.

 4. Mr Bednarek despite the clear indication in the leave granted sought to
    argue the findings of fact made by the  judge.  The  findings  made  in
    paragraphs 20 to 31 have not been challenged. The judge has made  clear
    adverse findings there and in paragraphs 32 to 35 finding amongst other
    things that specific elements of the appellant's account as to how  and
    why he left Iraq are not credible. Those findings alone are  sufficient
    to reject the appellant's account as to how he came to leave  Iraq  and
    therefore his claim to have been at  risk  at  the  time  that  he  was
    leaving Iraq.

 5. As identified in the leave granted the grounds of  appeal  set  out  in
    detail challenges to the findings of fact made by the judge. The  judge
    has given valid reasons for his findings and was entitled having  found
    the main substance of the appellant's account not credible to find that
    the appellant's claims to have come from Jalawla was not credible.  The
    judge has given valid reasons  for  the  findings  of  fact  made.  The
    grounds of appeal identified as ground one and two in the circumstances
    are nothing more than a disagreement with the  findings  of  fact.  The
    judge was entitled to make findings that he has.

 6. As identified within the  leave  issues  were  raised  with  regard  to
    whether the decision was in accord with country guidance. The  decision
    in the present appeal was as stated promulgated on 15 March  2018.  The
    country guidance case sought to be relied upon was not  reported  until
    June 2018.

 7. Mr Tan sought to rely upon NA (Libya) 2017 EWCA Civ  143  paragraph  27
    which provides:-

         27 It is no doubt because Country Guidance cases do  not  have  the
         effect of establishing any principle of law, combined with the fact
         that a tribunal cannot be  criticised  for  failing  to  take  into
         account  material  which  has  come  into   existence   after   the
         promulgation of its determination, that as a general rule the  fact
         that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  inconsistent
         with a  Country  Guidance  case  issued  after  the  determinations
         promulgated, will not amount to an error of law.

 8.  It is correct to say in respect of present case the  country  guidance
    relied upon was only  promulgated  some  3  months  after  the  present
    decision had been promulgated.

 9. In any event the judge has made specific findings with  regard  to  the
    appellant's account and rejected the  appellant's  account.  The  judge
    also rejected claims by the appellant that he had lost all contact with
    his family and would not  be  able  to  contact  them.  The  judge  was
    satisfied that even if the appellant's parents were dead the  appellant
    had an uncle who had assisted him in the past and would assist  him  if
    the appellant were return to Iraq.  The appellant therefore had a  male
    member of the family rely for support and assistance and  could  assist
    the appellant in obtaining the required documentation.

10. Taking  all  those  matters  into  account  the  judge  thereafter  has
    concluded that the appellant would be able to obtain a  CSID  card.  On
    the evidence before him the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant would be able to be returned to the  IKR.  Again  those  were
    findings of fact the judge was entitled to make on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him.

11. The circumstances the judge had concluded that the appellant would have
    family connections in the region and would be able  to  rely  upon  his
    family support, accommodation and help. The judge  was  satisfied  that
    the appellant being able-bodied would be able to  find  work.  Again  a
    conclusion he was entitled to make on the evidence before him.

12. Even taking into account the guidance given in the  case  of  AAH,  the
    judge has properly considered all relevant factors and was entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant was not at risk in Iraq. He would  be  able
    to re-establish himself in his home area. The decision  therefore  does
    not contain any material error of law.

    Notice of Decision

13. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 19 March 2019.

