
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01372/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd April 2019                    |On 9th April 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                Ms G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                   mr o h
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Kiai (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Obhi) (FtT)  promulgated  on
    25th July 2018 in which the appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
    claim was dismissed.





Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran, whose date of birth  is  [~]  1998.
    He entered the UK on 14.7.2015 as an unaccompanied minor.   He  claimed
    asylum on 16.9.2015 on the grounds that the authorities  in  Iran  were
    adversely interested in him because he had been spotted near  a  border
    checkpoint.  He  and  his  cousin  were  transporting   illegal   goods
    (unbeknown to the appellant) across the border in to  Iran.   They  ran
    off and escaped. He claimed that he was suspected of having transported
    illegal goods into Iran from Iraq. He ran home and made arrangements to
    leave Iran, illegally. He believed that would not have a fair trial  if
    prosecuted. In addition he claimed that he would face ill treatment  on
    religious grounds because it was known by his Imam that he had not been
    circumcised and he would be forced to  undergo  circumcision.   It  was
    accepted by the respondent that the  appellant  had  been  involved  in
    transporting goods legally across the border.  The  respondent  was  of
    the view that as an adult the appellant would not be forced to  undergo
    circumcision.

FtT findings

3.   The FtT found the appellant's claim to be lacking in credibility  [26].
     It considered if that the appellant had come to the attention  of  the
    authorities it was either by chance or through intelligence.  In either
    circumstance the FtT found that his account of escape from  the  guards
    was  not  credible  having  regard  to  the  background  material.  The
    background material stated that the border guards or authorities  acted
    harshly and would shoot indiscriminately at those found  attempting  to
    smuggle illegal goods.

Grounds of application for permission to appeal

4.   In grounds of appeal  the  appellant  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    failing to make factual findings on  material  issues  central  to  the
    appellant's claim and failing to give adequate reasons for the findings
    made.  The FtT's analysis of the circumstances surrounding  the  escape
    were not rational and failed to engage with the appellant's account.

5.   The FtT failed to properly consider the appellant's explanation  as  to
    why the Imam knew that he had not been circumcised, namely that  people
    were talking about it.  The FtT failed to ask the appellant for a  more
    precise explanation and was wrong to hold any lack of precision against
    him. There was no dispute that the appellant was not  circumcised.  The
    FtT failed to considered the implications of that fact.

Permission to appeal

6.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted on  renewal
    by UTJ Canavan on 13.12.2018.  In granting permission the  UTJ  stated,
    "It is at least arguable that the judge might not have  given  adequate
    reasons to explain why the appellant's account of his escape  from  the
    checkpoint was so implausible given that his  account  appeared  to  be
    limited to saying that they ran away as soon as they saw the guards  at
    the checkpoint [26]. It is also arguable that inadequate  reasons  were
    given to explain why his account of how he left  Iran  was  implausible
    [27].  The judge arguably failed to take into account  the  appellant's
    explanation as to how he thought the authorities might have  identified
    him i.e. through the temporary permit issued to  those  trading  across
    the border. "

Submissions

7.   At the hearing before me Ms Kiai, representing the appellant,  expanded
    on the grounds of appeal and argued that the FtT failed  make  findings
    on material matters in  respect  of  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    escape.

8.   In  response  Mr  Kandola,  for  the  Respondent,  contended  that  the
    decision was sound and the FtT had given sufficient reasoning  for  the
    findings made.

Discussion and conclusion

9.   There was no dispute that the appellant was an Iranian  Kurd,  that  he
    had been involved in transportation of legal goods across the Iran/Iraq
    border and that he left Iran illegally.  Ms Kiai submitted that the FtT
    failed to engage with the  appellant's  factual  account  (that  having
    taken a diversion they ran off  when  spotted  by  the  guards  at  the
    checkpoint)  in  reaching  its  findings  as  to  credibility  and  its
    conclusion was irrational.

10.  The appellant gave an account of the incident claiming that he and  his
    cousin returned across the border without  going  through  an  official
    checkpoint and instead  they  took  a  diversion.   The  appellant  was
    following instructions given by his cousin. He did not know  that  they
    were carrying illegal goods. It was  dark  but  they  were  spotted  by
    guards and his cousin told him to run.  There  were  15-20  guards  who
    shined lights on them.  The appellant would have been identifiable  and
    recognised by the guards. They travelled from Iran  across  the  border
    with a permit recording their personal details. The  authorities  would
    have been able to identify him from the permit or from having seen him.
    The authorities later came to  his  home  looking  for  him.   The  FtT
    recorded a summary of the claim at [2] and his  evidence  under  cross-
    examination [10].

11.  The FtT took into account the background material and  the  appellant's
    own evidence that the Iranian border guards indiscriminately  shoot  at
    people found smuggling illegal goods across  the  border,  killing  and
    wounding them [26]. The FtT also took into account that  the  appellant
    was  a  minor  when  he  made  the  claim.   The  FtT  considered   the
    plausibility of the account in the alternative  that  the  guards  were
    watching (or waiting for)  the  appellant  when  crossing  the  border,
    having been tipped off.  Or, that it was a chance encounter.   The  FtT
    found that in the latter instance it was unclear  how  the  authorities
    would have known that they were carrying illegal goods, given that  the
    appellant himself did not know.  In either scenario the FtT found  that
    appellant's account of his escape was not credible in the light of  the
    background material.

12.  The FtT found that he was vague as to how he  came  to  know  that  his
    cousin was importing  illegal  goods  [26].   The  FtT  emphasised  the
    background material [26-27] and the plausibility of  actually  deciding
    to transport illegal goods,  given  the  risks  posed  to  those  found
    smuggling and the likelihood of being shot at.  There was  no  evidence
    that the guards had found any illegal goods,  the  appellant's  account
    was that because they ran off this raised suspicions.  I  am  satisfied
    that the FtT engaged with the appellant's account sufficiently to  make
    sustainable findings and to give reasons that were adequately explained
    and which justified  the  decision  having  regard  to  the  background
    material.  The appellant had not simply claimed that he and his  cousin
    claimed to have run off, but he described that they were being  watched
    by 15-20 border guards who  were  shining  lights  on  them.   In  that
    context the FtT's findings and  reasons  are  entirely  sustainable  in
    light of the background material.  The appellant's claim was not simply
    that he ran off near the checkpoint, it was that the  guards  had  seen
    them and were acting on that.

13.  I am further satisfied that the  FtT's  finding  that  the  appellant's
    account that he was able to run home and  make  arrangements  to  leave
    Iran before the guards attended  his  home  is  not  plausible.  Whilst
    accepting that the FtT at  [27]  recorded  in  the  decision  that  the
    appellant's  account  cumulatively  implausible  and  did  not  specify
    reasons, I am satisfied that the FtT 's main reasoning in support of an
    adverse credibility finding was sufficient to  reject  the  appellant's
    claim as a whole.  The FtT was entitled to find on  the  evidence  that
    the appellant's account of his contact with his uncle was inconsistent.
     The FtT was aware of the appellant's evidence that the guards may have
    identified the appellant (from recognition at the  scene  or  from  the
    permit) [25] but found that in such circumstances it was  not  credible
    that the appellant was able to run away and return home and  leave  the
    country without being caught.

14.  As to the  issue  of  circumcision,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  FtT's
    conclusions were justified and sustainable on the evidence  before  it.
    The onus is on the appellant to discharge the burden on him to make out
    his claim. The FtT found his explanation that the  Imam  came  to  know
    that he was not circumcised to be lacking in  precision  [28].   It  is
    argued that the FtT ought to  have  asked  the  appellant  for  further
    information.  However, given that it was accepted  that  the  appellant
    was not circumcised the FtT's failure was not material, particularly in
    the light of the fact that  the  appellant's  explanation  was  lacking
    detail and there was no background material to support the  claim  that
    the appellant as an adult could be  forcibly  circumcised  or  that  he
    would be at risk of being suspected on anti Islamic  behaviour.   There
    was no evidence adduced to show  that  the  appellant  would  face  ill
    treatment or persecution for either religious or political reasons.

15.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.

Decision

16.  The appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed   Date 2.4.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 2.4.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


