
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01156/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Tuesday 27 April 2021                   |On 07 June 2021                 |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     H E
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr  R  Spurling,  Counsel  instructed  by  Wimbledon
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves a protection claim, I consider it is appropriate to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

      1. By a decision promulgated on 15 December 2020, I found an error of
         law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S J Steer itself
         promulgated on 7 December 2020 allowing the Appellant's appeal
         against the Respondent's decision dated 15 January 2020 refusing
         his protection and human rights claims. I therefore set aside Judge
         Steer's decision but preserved a large part of that decision.  I
         also gave directions for a resumed hearing.  My error of law
         decision is appended hereto for ease of reference.

      2. I do not need to set out the Appellant's immigration history.  That
         is set out so far as necessary at [2] to [3] of my error of law
         decision.

      3. The directions I gave in my error of law decision permitted the
         Appellant to file further evidence.  His time for so doing was
         extended by an Upper Tribunal lawyer on 5 February 2021.  In
         consequence, on 26 March 2021, the Appellant filed a supplementary
         bundle consisting of an expert report of Dr George Stein dated 11
         March 2021 and the Appellant's medical notes. I refer to documents
         in that bundle hereafter as [ABS/xx].  In addition to those
         documents, I also have the Appellant's bundle of evidence before
         the First-tier Tribunal which I refer to hereafter so far as
         necessary as [AB/xx].  I also have a core bundle also containing
         the Respondent's bundle. As loose documents, I also have decisions
         made by previous Judges in an earlier appeal.  Those are a decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge A Khawar, promulgated on 13 February
         2017 and a decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
         promulgated on 26 February 2018 finding there to be no error of law
         in Judge Khawar's decision and therefore upholding it.  For
         completeness, I also have the refusal of permission to appeal to
         the Court of Appeal of Upper Tribunal Judge Gill dated 5 April
         2018.

      4. In accordance with my directions, I also have a skeleton argument
         of Mr Spurling for the Appellant and of Mr Chris Avery for the
         Respondent.

      5. I have read all of the documents which are of relevance to the
         issues which remain for me to decide but I only refer below to
         those which are relevant to my findings and reasoning.

      6. The hearing was attended by representatives of both parties.  It
         was also attended by the Appellant and his sister [FA].  The
         Tribunal had also booked an interpreter for the hearing to permit
         the Appellant and [FA] to give evidence.  At the outset of the
         hearing, Mr Spurling indicated that he considered that the most
         useful live evidence would be that of [FA] whose circumstances had
         changed to some extent since the First-tier Tribunal hearing
         because she has given birth to a fifth child.  The Appellant lives
         with [FA] and her family and therefore they were sharing a video
         link.  Some concern was expressed about [FA]'s ability to give
         evidence as she was not feeling well. Her fifth child is still a
         very young baby and was also unwell.

      7. I gave Mr Spurling time at the outset to discuss with the Appellant
         and [FA] whether they considered it necessary to give evidence.  Ms
         Cunha indicated that she may wish to ask [FA] a few questions if
         she was able to give evidence but did not consider it likely that
         she would wish to cross-examine the Appellant (although reserved
         her position until after [FA]'s evidence).  As I pointed out,
         although [FA] has had a fifth child, that does not add materially
         to her previous circumstances.  She already had four children and
         the Appellant was living previously with her and her family,
         including those children.  Having taken instructions, when the
         hearing resumed, Mr Spurling indicated that [FA] did wish to give
         evidence, but the Appellant agreed that he did not need to give
         evidence unless Ms Cunha wished to cross-examine him.

      8. [FA] gave her evidence with the assistance of an Afghan Dari
         interpreter.   The Appellant tended to her young child in another
         room whilst she gave her evidence so that she was not distracted.
         I was satisfied that [FA] and the interpreter understood each
         other. I refer to her evidence, both written and oral, as necessary
         below.  Following [FA]'s evidence, Ms Cunha confirmed that she did
         not wish to cross-examine the Appellant.  This was explained to the
         Appellant who agreed therefore that he was content not to give oral
         evidence. Again, I have regard to his written evidence so far as it
         is necessary to do so.

      9. Having heard evidence and submissions, I indicated that I would
         reserve my decision and provide it in writing.  I therefore turn to
         do so.

THE ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED

     10. By my error of law decision, I expressly preserved paragraphs [1]
         to [71] of Judge Steer's decision.  My reasons for so doing are
         explained at [21] of the decision.  I also refer in passing to [12]
         of my error of law decision, recording Mr Spurling's concession
         that the Appellant is not a refugee having been found not to be
         credible in relation to his claim of individualised risk and that
         internal relocation is not relevant where, as here, the Appellant
         has been found not to be at risk in his home area.

     11. I gratefully adopt the summary of the earlier findings which are
         preserved as contained in the Respondent's submissions:

             "The relevant preserved findings are that the account of the
             appellant's difficulties in Afghanistan, in particular, that
             his brothers were kidnapped and one was killed, was found not
             credible.  Furthermore, it was found that the appellant did
             know the whereabouts of his family and was in contact with
             them.  The latter finding was in the context that the sister,
             with who he resided in the United Kingdom, had returned a
             number of times to Afghanistan the last occasion being July
             2019."

         Mr Spurling did not take issue with that analysis. I accept that
         this is the effect of my earlier determination.

     12. Mr Spurling sets out what he considers to be the salient background
         facts as accepted at [4] of his skeleton argument as follows:

             "(a) [HE] is from Ghazni Province in Afghanistan.  He was born
             on 15 December 1999.  He arrived in the UK at the age of 16 on
             24 May 2016.  He is now 21 years old.

             (b)  He has relatives in Afghanistan.  As to his immediate
             family, he has a sister and brother-in-law in the UK and the
             First-tier Tribunal found at �71 that 'he does know the
             whereabouts of his parents, his older brother and his sister
             and her family and can contact them'.

             (c)  [HE] has been living with his sister [FA]'s family since
             his arrival in the UK or shortly thereafter.  At the time of
             the 2020 hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, [FA] and her
             husband [BA] had 4 children in school years 8,6,4 and 2 (which
             would mean that they now range in ages from 7-8 to 13-14) and
             [FA] was pregnant with their fifth child, due in May 2020.
             [HE] has lived with them since he was 16 and his niece and
             nephews ranged in age from 2-3 to 8-9."

         Ms Cunha did not take issue with those factual findings which I
         therefore adopt.

     13. Based on the effect of the preserved findings and the facts as set
         out above, the parties agreed that the issues which remain for me
         to be determined are as follows:

         Issue One:    The impact of return to Afghanistan on the
         Appellant's mental health.  As a sub-set of that issue, I have to
         consider the risk that the Appellant would commit suicide before,
         during or following return and whether he would self-harm if faced
         with the prospect of return.  The issue falls to be considered as a
         human rights claim, under Article 3 ECHR.

         Issue Two:    The impact of return to Afghanistan on the
         Appellant's private and family life.  That issue encompasses not
         only separation from his family in the UK but also obstacles to
         integration in Afghanistan.  Whatever my findings on Issue One, the
         impact on the Appellant's mental health of return to Afghanistan
         falls to be considered as part of his private life (physical and
         moral integrity).

     14. Before I turn to consider those issues in substance, I deal with
         the relevant evidence and my assessment of that evidence.

THE EVIDENCE

The Appellant's Mental Health

     15. I begin with the earlier appeal decisions in light of the
         Devaseelan guidance.  However, I can deal with these very shortly
         as there was no suggestion that the Appellant was suffering mental
         health difficulties at that time (and therefore from January 2017
         to February 2018).  There is also no suggestion that he was unwell
         when interviewed in connection with his asylum claim in mid-2016.
         I note however that the earlier appeal was against the refusal to
         recognise the Appellant as a refugee.  The Appellant had at that
         time been given leave to remain until June 2017 as an unaccompanied
         asylum- seeking child ("UASC").  He was therefore not under direct
         threat of removal, certainly in January 2017 when the First-tier
         Tribunal hearing took place.

     16. The Appellant's witness statement dated 6 March 2020 at [AB/1-8]
         places the start of his mental health problems as being at the
         point when he was detained for removal.  It appears from medical
         records with which I deal below that this was in June to August
         2019.   The Appellant says this:

             "8.  Whilst I was detained, my mental health deteriorated as
             my fear that I would be returned to Afghanistan became very
             real.  I was terrified that I would be sent back and that I
             would be killed under horrible conditions.  I would be sent
             back to a country with no rules, no proper education and
             constant, indiscriminate violence. I would be separated from
             the only family I have and I would be alone.  These thoughts
             made me feel despair, hopelessness and helplessness.  The
             journey I had from Afghanistan to safety in the UK was very
             long and very difficult and the fact that I could so easily be
             sent back to that place I escaped from terrified me.  There is
             no meaning of life in Afghanistan.  I therefore sought medical
             support in detention and after I was released on bail, I
             sought further help from my GP who referred me for counselling
             which I still do today."

     17. That account is developed from an earlier statement dated 19
         October 2019 ([AB/35-39]) at [5] of that statement.  The first part
         is repeated in the statement I have set out above.  It continues as
         follows:

             "... I used to be treated for my mental health condition with
             oral medication as well however my GP stopped the treatment as
             he suggested that it was not helping me and giving me side
             effects.  I now submit a Psychiatric & Scarring Report by Dr J
             Hajioff, which confirms that I suffer from post-traumatic
             stress disorder on account of what I have been through.  I am
             certain that if I am returned to Afghanistan, my mental health
             would deteriorate and I would become suicidal."

     18. There are some contemporaneous documents which deal with the
         Appellant's mental health difficulties at that time and
         subsequently.  I will come on to the medical reports prepared in
         connection with these proceedings in due course.  Independently of
         those reports, the following documents are of relevance:

          1) Letter from Robin White, The Children's Society, dated 23 July
             2019 at [AB/171-172].  Mr White is a practitioner who had some
             limited contact with the Appellant in connection with an
             enquiry about social services support as a former UASC.  Mr
             White has been working with UASCs as a volunteer since
             November 2013 and has worked for the Children's Society since
             September 2017.  He was approached by the Appellant in June
             2018 for advice about access to social services support as he
             wanted support which his sister could not offer and was also
             looking to move out of her house.  Mr White was unable to
             assist as the Appellant was by then over 18.  He met the
             Appellant again by chance at the Home Office in August 2018.
             Mr White says this about the encounter:

                  "... [HE] was in an argument with one of the security
                  staff there and was evidently highly distressed.  I
                  supported security staff to de-escalate the situation and
                  phoned [HE] later that day to see how he was doing.  He
                  informed me that the police had been called because he had
                  threatened to kill himself. I raised this as a
                  safeguarding concern with my managers and provided further
                  support to connect [HE] with mental health support,
                  leading to regular contact (by phone and in person at our
                  office in Stratford) that lasted until late November 2018.
                   I have had no further contact with [HE] since this time.

                  Mental health and support needs

                  [HE]'s mental health issues have been apparent from early
                  on in my work with him.  He explained that he couldn't
                  stay with his sister because doing so exacerbated his
                  depression, though there was no threat to his safety at
                  her house.  His decision making around housing has not
                  always been reasonable, seeming to be motivated by a
                  desire to be by himself rather than in a safe and
                  supported environment.  I have spent long phone calls with
                  him trying to ascertain what was preventing him from
                  staying with his sister, and in November 2018 he told me
                  that he just wanted to be alone.  During the same
                  conversation he spoke to me about his fear of the lack of
                  security in Afghanistan, and his feeling that he is a
                  burden to all those around him.

                  ... it is not my view that [HE] is actually in a position
                  to support himself ... as he does not have the necessary
                  independent living skills to do so ...

                  His need for additional mental health support was most
                  clearly apparent when we reopened his case in late August
                  2018.  In my view his confrontation with staff at Becket
                  House reporting centre was a moment of unhealthy risk-
                  taking and the staff there evidently felt concerned enough
                  about his safety to call the police.  When I checked up on
                  him later he was extremely despondent, and when I asked
                  him if he thought about suicide regularly he told me that
                  he thought about it 24 hours a day.  I strongly advocated
                  for him to see his GP about this, which he agreed to do
                  though he was extremely pessimistic about the benefits
                  this might confer.  He continued to display unhealthy risk
                  taking behaviour, specifically by sleeping rough in
                  November 2018 despite warnings of the dangers of this,
                  though his visit led to him being referred to therapy.

                  Conclusions

                  It is my view that [HE]'s mental health difficulties and
                  lack of independent living skills make him a very
                  vulnerable young person who would struggle to relocate
                  away from his current support network.  Based on my
                  encounters with him, he seems prone to making irrational
                  and self-destructive decisions as he has little concept of
                  his future and places little value in his own life.  The
                  prospect of being returned to Afghanistan clearly fills
                  him with a fear for his own safety, the basis for which is
                  in his knowledge of the security situation in that country
                  and the risks to fighting-age young men.

                  ... From my understanding of conditions in Afghanistan, it
                  seems unlikely that he will encounter similar support
                  where he to be removed to that country.  I consider his
                  hope of being housed independently from his sister to
                  arise from an over-estimation of his own independent
                  living skills and a desire to exert control rather than
                  the competence that would be required to make this
                  workable.  I believe that stable and long-term support
                  from professionals familiar with the context of refugees
                  to the UK and who are experienced in delivering trauma-
                  focussed therapy is the only thing likely to bring about
                  recovery for this young man ..."

             Mr White does not profess to have any mental health
             qualifications or training nor any direct knowledge or
             expertise in relation to conditions in Afghanistan.  He could
             not of course be aware in July 2019 of the adverse credibility
             findings which would be made about the Appellant's claim of
             individualised risk.  He also seems to be unaware of the other
             relatives that the Appellant has in Afghanistan, leaving aside
             the Appellant's parents who it has been found he can contact.
             Nonetheless, Mr White does provide an account of the
             Appellant's mood and reaction to events in mid- 2018 which are
             supportive of the Appellant's account.

          2) By contrast, the letter from the Appellant's GP dated 5 March
             2020 at [AB/16] says only this:

                  "... [HE] was seen by the Talking Therapies team for
                  depression (letter received dated 1/8/19).  The patient
                  was offered cognitive behavioural therapy based techniques
                  and put on the waiting list to be allocated a
                  therapist..."

             I have been unable to find the letter there referred to.  The
             text messages and medical letters produced in the initial
             bundle show only that some appointments were made.  Those
             provide little information about whether the appointments were
             attended or the outcome. There is a letter from Talking
             Therapies (undated) at [AB/42] following an assessment
             indicating that the Appellant would be offered assistance and
             another letter at [AB/50] shows that the Appellant failed to
             attend an appointment made for him in this regard on 18 June
             2019.  That letter indicates that, if the Appellant failed to
             respond within seven days, he would be discharged from the
             service.  I note that the Appellant mentioned having missed an
             appointment with Talking Therapies when he was placed in
             immigration detention which was around this time although
             appears to have been after 18 June.  He was however apparently
             booked for another appointment on 27 June 2019 ([AB/56]) which
             he would have missed due to his detention.  Another letter at
             [AB/54] dated 6 September 2019 suggests that the Appellant had
             regained contact but again reiterated that he would be
             discharged if he did not contact the service by 11 September
             2019.  There is however no evidence from Talking Therapies
             regarding their assessment.

          3) I now have the Appellant's updated medical records at [ABS/16-
             42].  Those show the following:

               a) The Appellant was introduced to F2F in June 2019 ([ABS/34-
                  35]).  He said he had contacted his GP two to three weeks
                  previously and was not on any medication. He said he had
                  no previous mental health problems or experience of
                  psychological therapies.  He said he had no problems with
                  anger or violent outbursts but thought of "punching the
                  wall" when he felt too low.  He had no active plans or
                  intent.  He said that "is not so intense to want to act, I
                  hit my wall and it goes".  He denied any previous attempts
                  to harm himself or take his own life.  The Appellant
                  recounted his claim that his brother had been killed and
                  said that he had experienced difficulties with sleep and
                  depression for two years.  He said he experienced low
                  mood, was tired and "extremely lethargic".  There is an
                  observation that there is "not enough evidence to indicate
                  PTSD".  He described feeling "down, depressed, angry",
                  said that he had "little interest, appetite decreased,
                  irritable, forgetful".  He denied having any friends or
                  family support.  He was offered further sessions and
                  further assessment for PTSD.

               b) The Appellant was seen for initial assessment on 19
                  September 2019 ([ABS/36-37]).  He said that he had
                  counselling once six weeks earlier but had not found it
                  helpful.  When asked about suicide, he said that he had
                  "thoughts of ending [his] life sometimes when [he is] down
                  but [he] distract[s] [himself] and then they go away".  He
                  said he had thoughts sometimes but had not self-harmed.
                  He said that he tried to strangle himself "about 2-3 years
                  ago" but had been stopped.  He denied any plans,
                  preparation or intent.  His friends and family are said to
                  be protective factors.   He also mentioned that he got
                  frustrated "quite a bit" and got angry "if someone says
                  something bad".  He did not want to hit others but he
                  "often" hit walls and hit his head on walls.  It is said
                  that he has "visible injuries on knuckles".  Having again
                  recounted the substance of his asylum claim, he said that
                  he was "feeling low about everything" and wanted to be
                  able to work and study which he could not do due to his
                  status.  He again described loss of appetite and
                  sleeplessness.  The diagnosis on this occasion was said to
                  be "low mood and possible PTSD". Elaboration was provided
                  as follows:

                      "Did not complete detailed assessment as I feel
                      patient suffers from PTSD, completed the trauma
                      scale, will speak to supervisor about stepping this
                      patient up as he gets nightmares and flashbacks about
                      his time and experiences in Afghanistan and with
                      trauma".

               c) A one-to-one assessment session was conducted on 28
                  January 2020 ([ABS/38-39].  Again, the Appellant reported
                  low mood.  The assessor commented that the Appellant
                  "disclosed some symptoms of PTSD" but the Appellant is
                  said not to want to talk about past traumas.  Having
                  reported similar symptoms to those previously described
                  and again recounted the substance of his asylum claim, the
                  following is said about risk:

                      "... reported ideation sometimes, but denies any
                      plans or intent at present.  Scored 0/10 on intent
                      scale this time, however, feels this sometimes goes
                      up to 5-7/10 on a bad day.  Reported he can keep
                      himself safe now, and would let me know if things
                      changed. History of attempted suicide once in
                      Afghanistan when he reported to have taken an
                      overdose, ended up in hospital and one more time in
                      London when he considered jumping in front of a
                      train, but someone helped him out of the situation."

                  The Appellant was offered six sessions and cognitive
                  behavioural therapy (CBT) was explained to him.

               d) The documents at [ABS/40-42] then set out details of the
                  sessions with the same therapist.  The following extracts
                  are relevant:

                      4 February 2020 (Session 2): said to have "frequent
                      ideation, thoughts feel very strong and intense" with
                      a score of 6/10 but denied plans or preparations and
                      said could keep himself safe.  He again reported
                      punching walls but said he had not hurt himself
                      recently.  There was no change in mood.  He scored
                      "severe" when completing an "IES-R".

                      13 February 2020 (Session 3): scored 1/3 for
                      thoughts/ideation of risk but continued to deny plans
                      or intent.  He recounted the same symptoms of mood
                      and again recounted his asylum claim and other past
                      family history.  He was given "homework" to monitor
                      his activities and mood.

                      1 March 2020 (Session 4): his ideation is said to be
                      "occasional," but he denied plans or intent.  Mood
                      and sleeplessness was said to be the same.  He did
                      not complete the homework.  The importance of this
                      was explained to him.

                  The Appellant did not attend an intervening session on 18
                  February 2020.

               e) The records also show that the Appellant missed a number
                  of appointments or could not be contacted to arrange
                  appointments in the period June 2019 to February 2020.

               f) The medical records also show a series of contacts with
                  mental health services from October 2020 to January 2021.
                  He was triaged on 15 October 2020.  He was assessed on 2
                  December 2020 ([ABS/29-32].  Having completed a
                  questionnaire, the assessor considered that the Appellant
                  was experiencing moderate depression and severe anxiety.
                  When asked about previous therapy, the Appellant confirmed
                  that he had undertaken therapy "4-6 weeks (3 years ago)
                  from a college, not sure details, was asked details about
                  my past - wasn't helpful".  He said he had not had
                  previous contact with other services including
                  counselling.  He said that he was not on medication as his
                  GP told him "a year or two ago that the medication was not
                  helping".  When asked about suicide risk and self- harm
                  the Appellant replied that "sometimes it comes to my mind
                  that it is not worth living, 1-2 times a week, only lasts
                  a few minutes".  He again denied plans or preparation.  He
                  said that he had twice in the previous week hit a wall
                  with his fist (which he said was average and was linked to
                  anger).  He said that one year ago he went to a train
                  station intending to throw himself off a bridge, but his
                  friend had stopped him.  He said he had tried to kill
                  himself "once or twice before that" but he did not
                  remember details beyond that it was in the UK.  He said
                  that his sister would prevent him killing himself.   The
                  Appellant also said that he got into a fight with a staff
                  member when he was detained.  The triage supervisor
                  commented that the Appellant might benefit from an
                  assessment in relation to PTSD but that "no immediate
                  risk" had been reported.  It appears that the Appellant
                  was therefore assigned for assessment in relation to PTSD
                  but there is no confirmation that any such assessment was
                  carried out.

          4) The GP records at [ABS/17-25] are largely irrelevant.  They
             show a document received in March 2020 from Psychological
             therapies, Goodmayes hospital (which may relate to the letter
             at [ABS/26-27]).  A telephone consultation on 21 August 2020
             reports depression but that the Appellant did not consider
             medication to assist.  Although there was a history of self-
             harm, he had no suicidal thoughts.  The Appellant wanted to
             see a psychiatrist and a referral was apparently sought.  It
             may be that this is what led to the assessment in December
             2020 (see above).  It appears that the referral was taken
             forward in October 2020.  The Appellant was given the "talking
             therapy" number.   On 13 January 2021, the Appellant had a
             telephone consultation in which he described feeling low and
             sleeping poorly. He asked for medication for depression.  The
             document at [ABS/16] confirms that he was prescribed 28 day's
             supply of Mirtazapine (30mg) on that day.

          5) At [AB/58-71] are medical records from the period when the
             Appellant was detained.  On arrival, the Appellant stated that
             he suffered from depression, was low in mood, had thoughts of
             self-harm and was taking medication but could not remember the
             name of it.  It was however clarified during screening that
             the Appellant had not received medication for mental health
             problems, nor had he received treatment from a psychiatrist.
             There is reference to self-harm and suicidal thoughts and that
             he appeared low in mood.  An entry on 20 July 2019 ([AB/60])
             indicates that the Appellant was placed on constant
             supervision as he said that, if he could, he would end his
             life.  He also said that during an interview with the Home
             Office he had punched the wall.  He made reference to having
             punched the wall a week ago.  He also said that he had been on
             antidepressant medication but that "did not work".  He
             referred to having attended talking therapy in the community.
             Those assertions are repeated in an entry on 21 July 2019 when
             the Appellant said that he had been taking antidepressants for
             "a few months" but when this was not effective, he had been
             referred to talking therapy.  The Appellant did not attend the
             next session with the mental health nurse.  On 23 July 2019,
             he was seen again.  It is recorded that he had no suicidal
             thoughts and no thoughts of deliberate self-harm.  It appears
             however that later on the same day, the Appellant hit his head
             and hand on the wall as he became angry having received a
             letter from the Home Office ([AB/63]).  A record later the
             same day records that he had no bruises on his forehead and he
             had hit his head "due to frustration".  There then follow a
             number of entries concerning the Appellant's low mood.  He was
             assessed by a mental health nurse on 25 July 2019 ([AB/64]).
             On this occasion he is said to have reported suicidal
             thoughts. The nurse referred him to the mental health team and
             indicated that she would ask the GP to consider a prescription
             for Mirtazepine.  The Appellant told the nurse that "he wants
             to die from this life, as he feels he is crazy and what does
             he have for this life".  The Appellant said that he felt like
             this also when not detained and had no protective factors.  It
             appears that he was taken off observations following the
             cancellation of removal.  The Appellant at this stage said
             that he did not wish to hurt himself.  On 29 July 2019, the
             Appellant denied suicidal thoughts.

     19. Beyond the description of the onset of his mental health problems
         to which I have referred at [16] above and the brief summary of
         symptoms and treatment referred to at [17] above, I have no further
         direct evidence from the Appellant about his symptoms and
         continuing problems.  He has not produced a further witness
         statement for the hearing before me.  I have his account as
         provided to the medical experts.  I deal with their reports below.



     20. I have additional witness evidence from the Appellant's sister and
         brother-in-law.  However, neither mention any problems with the
         Appellant's mental health in their statements. The only reference
         to mental health problems is to those experienced by the
         Appellant's sister [FA]. Similarly, in her oral evidence, [FA] was
         asked only about her own health.

     21. I turn then to the reports of the medical experts beginning with
         the report of Dr J Hajioff which appears at [AB/102-129].  His
         report is dated 18 September 2019 and follows an assessment on 16
         September 2019.  Dr Hajioff is a registered medical practitioner
         and a consultant psychiatrist who has worked as such for fifteen
         years.  He has a great deal of experience working with asylum
         seekers.  He also has experience assessing injuries and scarring.

     22. Mr Spurling pointed out that the Respondent had not challenged the
         findings made by Judge Steer regarding Dr Hajioff's report. He
         invited me to accept what was said about Dr Hajioff's diagnosis and
         prognosis.  He accepted that this appears in the part of the
         decision which I have set aside.  In fact, all that is said by
         Judge Steer in that part of the decision in relation to the report
         (at [77]) is that "[t]he Appellant has been diagnosed with PTSD and
         at risk of suicide if removed to Afghanistan.  The Appellant is
         currently being treated by weekly counselling sessions and is not
         taking medication".  Those findings are made by way of asserted
         fact, presumably on the basis that Judge Steer accepted what Dr
         Hajioff reported.  However, in the section of the decision setting
         out the content of the report (at [53] to [60]) Judge Steer makes
         no finding about the content of the report, what weight he gave it
         or why, having rejected the Appellant's credibility in
         circumstances where the report was based on the Appellant's
         account, he accepted the findings of the report. It is also the
         case that Judge Steer did not apparently have the advantage of the
         medical records which I now have.  Those show, for example, that,
         whilst the Appellant may have been receiving weekly counselling
         sessions for short periods between June 2019 and March 2020, he had
         not received such counselling on a regular basis throughout the
         period.  Given the centrality of the mental health issue on this
         occasion, I do not consider it appropriate to simply adopt as
         accepted fact what is said at [77] of Judge Steer's decision.  I
         therefore turn to consider the report for myself.

     23. I begin by noting that Dr Hajioff has proceeded on the basis of
         what he was told by the Appellant about his history.  Although Dr
         Hajioff had before him the decision of Judge Khawar, there is no
         indication that he had read or taken into account the adverse
         credibility findings in relation to the Appellant's asylum claim.
         I accept as Mr Spurling submitted, that the views of a medical
         expert are not necessarily undermined simply because they are based
         on the account of an appellant which is later found not to be
         credible.  However, in most cases, there will not have been a prior
         determination of the credibility of an appellant's account.  In
         this case, the Appellant had been found not to be credible by a
         Judge at the time that Dr Hajioff interviewed him and that finding
         was upheld on further appeal.  There is no indication that Dr
         Hajioff had taken the earlier findings into account when assessing
         the Appellant's presentation.

     24. I accept however that part of the purpose of Dr Hajioff's report
         was to deal with the consistency of the scarring that the Appellant
         said was the result of his ill-treatment by the Taliban with his
         account.  Dr Hajioff says that the scarring attributed to that ill-
         treatment is typical of the injuries which would be suffered by the
         treatment which the Appellant describes. I do not however need to
         consider this part of the report as the findings about the
         relevance of the report to the Appellant's asylum claim are part of
         Judge Steer's decision which I have preserved.  As Judge Steer
         points out at [55] to [60] of his decision, the account of physical
         beatings by the Taliban formed no part of the Appellant's claim
         prior to his assessment by Dr Hajioff.  In spite of what is there
         said by Judge Steer about the content of the report, therefore, it
         made no difference to the Judge's adverse credibility findings.

     25. The Appellant's account to Dr Hajioff about his symptoms as
         described at [25] to [33] of the report is largely consistent with
         the other medical records to which I have already referred.  In
         short summary, the Appellant has problems with sleep, is inactive,
         has a loss of appetite and is sometimes forgetful.  He was not
         receiving medication.  There is no reference at this time to
         counselling.  Asked about suicide, the Appellant admitted to
         feeling low "at times" and to punching walls.  He also said that he
         had made cuts on his left forearm "about a year ago".  Dr Hajioff
         judged the cuts he observed as "highly consistent" with self-
         inflicted injuries whilst observing that "none indicate deep cuts".
          Dr Hajioff also observed that the Appellant bites his nails which
         he considered could indicate "anxiety and tension" where, as the
         Appellant says is the case here, he did not do this as a child.

     26. Having evaluated the symptoms described against diagnostic
         criteria, Dr Hajioff concluded that the Appellant "does not fulfil
         sufficient criteria for a diagnosis of depression".   The reasons
         why Dr Hajioff concludes that the Appellant "fulfils the criteria
         for the diagnosis of PTSD" are based largely on an acceptance of
         the Appellant's account of events in Afghanistan.  There is no
         consideration whether the PTSD (assuming the Appellant would
         otherwise meet the criteria) might be caused by other factors, such
         as the Appellant's period of detention, his uncertain immigration
         status or a fear of return to Afghanistan based only on the general
         situation in that country.

     27. Turning to the risk of suicide, Dr Hajioff again relies on the
         Appellant's account of his "frightening experiences" in Afghanistan
         and fear of return.  Again, there is no recognition that, by the
         time of the assessment, the Appellant had been found not to be
         credible in his account.  Dr Hajioff opines that given the
         Appellant's level of anxiety and self-harm, there was "a risk of
         suicide if he sees no way of avoiding being returned".

     28. Dr Hajioff therefore diagnosed "chronic PTSD" and "injury
         consistent with his account".  Judge Steer having concluded that,
         notwithstanding Dr Hajioff's assessment of the Appellant's
         scarring, his account still could not be believed and Dr Hajioff's
         failure to consider the impact of the earlier adverse credibility
         findings on the acceptance of the Appellant's account leads me to
         give less weight to Dr Hajioff's views.

     29. I do however have regard to what Dr Hajioff says about the risk of
         suicide given his observations about the scarring to the
         Appellant's forearm, the Appellant's level of anxiety and history
         of self-harm.  The Appellant's self-harming is something which
         appears consistently in the medical and other evidence.

     30. Dr Hajioff advocates anti-depressant medication and counselling.
         There is no evidence that the Appellant was prescribed medication
         until quite recently, having rejected attempts to put him on
         medication at earlier stages.  I have referred already to what the
         medical evidence shows about the intermittent counselling treatment
         which the Appellant has received.

     31. As I have already indicated, the Appellant has submitted updating
         evidence in the form of a report, not from Dr Hajioff or any of
         those who have assessed him over time, but of Dr George Stein.  Dr
         Stein, FRC Psych, is a recently retired Consultant General
         Psychiatrist.   He is a Member of the Royal College of
         Psychiatrists.  He has worked as a Consultant Psychiatrist for 25
         years.  He has specialised in general psychiatry, post-natal
         depression, bonding difficulties and post-traumatic stress
         disorder.

     32. Dr Stein's report is dated 11 March 2021 and follows an online
         interview via WhatsApp on 26 February 2021, using an interpreter.
         The interview lasted just under two hours.

     33. Again, I observe that Dr Stein had before him "recent court
         determinations".  I assume these would have included at the very
         least that of Judge Khawar and Judge Steer, together with my
         decision upholding Judge Steer's findings in relation to the
         Appellant's asylum claim.  Notwithstanding that, there is no
         recognition by Dr Stein that the Appellant's claim had been found
         not to be credible nor any consideration what impact that would
         have on his assessment.  Indeed, having set out at length the now
         familiar account of what the Appellant said occurred in
         Afghanistan, Dr Stein goes so far as to say at page [6] of his
         report that, having "looked through the papers ... [he] could not
         work out why [the Appellant] was turned down".  I recognise that it
         does not appear from Dr Stein's report that he has any or any
         significant experience of working with asylum seekers or refugees
         but his failure to take into account when assessing the Appellant's
         mental state, judicial findings in relation to the credibility of
         the Appellant's account causes me to treat Dr Stein's report with
         caution.

     34. Whilst I again accept Mr Spurling's submission that, just because a
         medical expert has accepted the credibility of an account may not,
         in general, undermine the medical assessment, there is a
         significant difference between the acceptance of that account when
         it has not been the subject of independent scrutiny and the
         position here where the Appellant's account had, when Dr Stein
         assessed the Appellant, been found not to be credible on two
         previous occasions by two different Judges.  Dr Hajioff's report
         had been written with a view to supporting the Appellant's case
         notwithstanding the earlier adverse credibility findings.  However,
         Dr Stein was asked to (or should have been asked to) report only on
         the impact on the Appellant's mental health of return to
         Afghanistan on the basis of the preserved finding that his asylum
         claim was not to be believed.   That was the context in which the
         Appellant's case was to be considered by me.

     35. Dr Stein records at [�22] of the report that the Appellant had been
         prescribed "perphenazine" for his depression.  That does not appear
         in the other documents, but I am prepared to accept that the
         prescription may have been changed from that in January 2021.  The
         Appellant told Dr Stein that the medication was "better than
         nothing" which is inconsistent with what he has previously told
         those who have assessed him (that it did not help).  He also told
         Dr Stein that the counselling with Talking Therapies "helps for a
         few hours but that's all, and then the effect wears off".  The
         Appellant also told Dr Stein that he had sometimes had suicidal
         thoughts "because [he had] been in limbo for so long and [he]
         think[s] it's better to kill [himself]".  He said that he had once
         "walked to a railway bridge" but "one of his friends prevented him
         from jumping".  He said that this was in 2019.

     36. I do not need to go through Dr Stein's consideration of the
         Appellant's medical records.  As Dr Stein observes, there is no
         record from those who have counselled the Appellant dealing with
         the substance of their conversations with the Appellant.   Nor do I
         need to deal with what Dr Stein says about Dr Hajioff's report
         since Dr Stein says only that his "findings are basically the
         same".  He offers no reasoning in support of that opinion.  There
         is no indication that he has assessed the Appellant's account of
         his symptoms against any diagnostic criteria.  As such, what he
         says about the Appellant suffering from PTSD or being at risk of
         suicide does not add anything to the findings of Dr Hajioff.  For
         that reason, when it comes to Dr Stein's diagnosis at [�37] of the
         report that the Appellant is suffering from "depression of moderate
         severity" and "post-traumatic stress disorder also of moderate
         severity", I can give that assessment little if any weight because
         it is simply not explained (and interestingly, the first part of
         that diagnosis at least appears at odds with what was said by Dr
         Hajioff).  I can find no reasoning to support what is there said.

     37. Turning then to the reasons which Dr Stein says are the cause of
         the Appellant's mental health problems, I give no weight to those.
         The facts which Dr Stein accepts as true based on the Appellant's
         account are all ones which have not been accepted by the Tribunal.
         Dr Stein goes so far as to say that the Appellant's account "seems
         to be consistent" and that the Appellant "gives the same story at
         every interview" whilst also opining that "the Taliban or warlords
         are unlikely to confirm that they murdered his brother or demanded
         ransoms".  He concludes that "[a]nyway, [he] did not feel [the
         Appellant] was lying to [him]".  As I have already noted, there is
         nothing in Dr Stein's report which suggests that he has experience
         of assessing asylum seekers or refugees let alone any knowledge of
         the situation in Afghanistan.  An expression of that nature
         regarding the credibility of an asylum seeker's account is not a
         matter for a medical expert; it is a matter for a Judge,
         particularly where, as here, the Appellant's account has been found
         by previous Judges to be anything but consistent.

     38. I can give only limited weight for the same reason to what Dr Stein
         says will occur if the Appellant is removed.  He has assumed that
         the Appellant's mental health problems are to be attributed to
         events in Afghanistan which are not accepted as having occurred.
         Based on the medical notes themselves, I accept that the Appellant
         has punched walls and also hit his head when threatened with
         removal.  As I observed in the course of Mr Spurling's submissions,
         Dr Stein's description of that threat having seemingly "sent [the
         Appellant] ballistic and he started punching the walls and stuff
         like that" is not a particularly professional way of expressing
         what occurred.  It is also potentially an exaggeration as it does
         not appear from the detention medical records that the medical
         staff witnessed what had occurred.  Moreover, even the Appellant
         says that he punches walls when he becomes frustrated.  Dr Stein
         does not consider that as a possible cause of the Appellant's
         actions.

     39. Turning to matters about which Dr Stein can perhaps usefully opine,
         he says that the Appellant is able to carry out "day-to-day
         duties".  He also says that "he would be able to care for himself
         and access support and services, and support himself through
         employment".  He considers that, if he were allowed to remain in
         the UK, the Appellant would be likely to find himself working in
         "some unskilled job". He does not consider that the Appellant "is
         vulnerable to trafficking or abuse".  I do not place much weight on
         Dr Stein's opinion in that latter regard given his apparent lack of
         experience dealing with victims of trafficking.  The fact that the
         Appellant is "sturdy" and, in Dr Stein's view, unlikely to be
         "deceived in this way" appears to simplify the characteristics of
         potential trafficking victims.

     40. Dealing finally with potential return to Afghanistan, as I have
         already said, I accept the contemporaneous medical evidence about
         the Appellant's reaction when he was last threatened with removal
         (although I think that Dr Stein's report at [�15] of the report
         once again overstates the position when compared with the records).
          I give no weight to what Dr Stein says about the position after
         return as it relies on an acceptance of the Appellant's account
         about past events.  It is not for a medical expert to opine on what
         would be the risk from non-State actors.  That is a matter for a
         Judge.  In this case, Judge Steer had already found that the
         Appellant would not be at risk.

     41. Dr Stein says that he does not consider that the Appellant "would
         play up on the plane" as "[the Appellant] seemed to be quite a calm
         chap".  That is somewhat at odds with the description of the
         Appellant "going ballistic" (see above).  It is also somewhat at
         odds with what Dr Stein says later in the report about the
         Appellant becoming angry if told to board a plane.  In any event,
         the issue is not whether he would become disruptive but whether he
         might act on any suicidal thoughts.

     42. I note what Dr Stein says about the risk of suicide increasing on
         return to Afghanistan but, given that this assessment once again
         relies on Dr Stein's acceptance of the situation which would face
         the Appellant on return, I can give that opinion little if any
         weight.  In any event, Dr Stein provides no reasoning and admits
         that it is difficult accurately to predict the risk.  Dr Stein's
         observations about the situation which the Appellant would face on
         return also include the lack of support in Afghanistan.  That is
         something with which I deal below.  Dr Stein was apparently unaware
         that the Appellant has other family members in Afghanistan (as I
         will come to).

     43. For those reasons, I give Dr Stein's report very limited weight in
         my assessment.

     44. Finally, although I was not taken to it, the Appellant's bundle
         contains at [AB/130-155] an expert report of Jawad Hassan Zadeh
         dated 1 October 2019.  Mr Zadeh is a national of Afghanistan now
         naturalised as a British citizen.  He has 25 years' work experience
         in Afghani affairs. He holds an LLM in International Law and
         International Relations obtained from the University of Kent.  He
         has studied Afghanistan academically since 2011.  He has provided
         expert reports in a number of cases.

     45. Mr Zadeh has offered some information about the mental health
         services in Afghanistan generally and in Kabul at [46] to [53] of
         his report.  The information is based on two fact finding reports
         which Mr Zadeh has personally commissioned via a lawyer based in
         Kabul who interviewed three individual doctors and via a legal
         translator who interviewed one psychologist.  They were asked to
         provide information about mental health services in Kabul and
         Afghanistan more generally.  It is not clear to me whether these
         reports were prepared for the purposes of the Appellant's appeal or
         more generally.  In either event, it does not appear that the
         doctors or psychologist were given any information about the
         Appellant's medical condition or treatment needs.  It appears from
         what is there said that facilities are limited, that there are no
         specialists dealing with PTSD and that there is a high cost to
         treatment.   The psychologist said that medication was available
         for PTSD but not counselling.

The Situation in Afghanistan

     46. I begin with the security situation in Afghanistan.  The most
         recent country guidance is AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG
         [2020] UKUT 00130 (IAC) ("AS (Afghanistan)") dealing with the
         situation in Kabul.  The Tribunal concluded in AS (Afghanistan)
         that the security situation in Kabul has not reached the level
         where there is a "serious and individual threat to a civilian's
         life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations
         of international or internal armed conflict".  In other words,
         removal to Kabul does not breach Article 15(c) of the Qualification
         Directive.

     47. Mr Spurling accepted that no issue of internal relocation arises in
         this case as the Appellant has not been accepted to be at risk in
         his home area.  Although Mr Spurling accepted that the issue of
         internal relocation is not directly relevant in this case, he
         submitted that I should still be guided by what is said in AS
         (Afghanistan) about the reasonableness of removal to Kabul to where
         the Appellant would be returned.  The part of the guidance relevant
         to the Appellant's case is as follows:

             "Risk of serious harm in Kabul

             (ii)   There is widespread  and  persistent  conflict-related
             violence in Kabul. However, the proportion of  the  population
             affected by indiscriminate violence is  small  and  not  at  a
             level where a returnee, even  one  with  no  family  or  other
             network and who has no experience living in Kabul, would  face
             a serious and individual threat to their  life  or  person  by
             reason of indiscriminate violence.

             Reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul

             (iii) Having regard to the security and humanitarian situation
             in Kabul as well as the difficulties faced by  the  population
             living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other
             returnees, which are not dissimilar to  the  conditions  faced
             throughout many other parts of Afghanistan) it  will  not,  in
             general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh for  a  single  adult
             male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not
             have any specific connections or support network in Kabul  and
             even if he does not have a Tazkera.

             (iv) However, the particular circumstances of  an  individual
             applicant must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of
             conditions in the place of relocation,  including  a  person's
             age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections  with
             Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
             language, education and  vocational  skills  when  determining
             whether a person falls within the  general  position  set  out
             above. Given the limited options for employment, capability to
             undertake manual work may be relevant.

             (v)   A person with a support network or specific connections
             in Kabul is likely to be in a more  advantageous  position  on
             return, which may counter a  particular  vulnerability  of  an
             individual on return. A person without a network may  be  able
             to develop one following return. A person's  familiarity  with
             the cultural and societal norms of Afghanistan (which  may  be
             affected by the age at which  he  left  the  country  and  his
             length of absence) will be relevant to whether, and if so  how
             quickly and successfully, he will be able to build a network."

     48. Although I was not taken to Mr Zadeh's report, it contains some
         information of relevance to this part of the Appellant's case.  I
         do not need to set out much of what is said in Mr Zadeh's report
         since it concerns the history of Afghanistan and the substance of
         the Appellant's asylum claim which has not been accepted as
         credible.  The substance of Mr Zadeh's evidence is set out at [29]
         of Judge Steer's decision.  Mr Zadeh does however go on to deal
         with relocation to Kabul and the impact of that for the Appellant.



     49. I do not need to deal with what Mr Zadeh says about the security
         situation in Kabul as that is covered by the guidance in AS
         (Afghanistan) (see above).  Mr Zadeh opines that "finding a safe
         place to reside in Kabul will be the biggest challenge".  He says
         that, as a single man, the Appellant would find himself residing in
         a "mosaferkhana" which is equivalent to an inn.  He would be unable
         to live in a house with a woman with whom he has no blood or
         kinship ties.  Mr Zadeh says that, due to the stigma of living in a
         mosaferkhana, it is difficult to get employment.   He says that
         inhabitants of such places may also receive unwarranted attention
         from the police. I do not understand the relevance of the footnote
         in Mr Zadeh's report in this regard since it refers to men being
         found in brothels rather than dealing with those living in a
         mosaferkhana.  Mr Zadeh says that if the Appellant were to become
         destitute, he would become a target for the Taliban.  Mr Zadeh also
         points to the high level of unemployment in Afghanistan generally.

     50. Mr Zadeh was not one of the experts who gave evidence to the
         Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan).  The Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan)
         based its findings about the situation in Kabul on the evidence of
         Dr Lisa Schuster.  She has lived in Kabul for a lengthy period.
         Her evidence about the need for family and other networks is
         recorded at [127] to [130] of the decision.  What she says about
         accommodation is at [131] to [134] and about employment at [135] to
         [138].  That evidence (which is largely consistent with what Mr
         Zadeh says) is taken into account in the findings and guidance of
         the Tribunal which I have set out above.

     51. In this case, based on the findings of Judge Steer, the Appellant
         maintains contact with his parents and sister [S] who also lives
         with her family in Turkey ([70] of Judge Steer's decision).  The
         finding there made is that the Appellant's family "were extremely
         wealthy".  I accept that it is not clear whether the Appellant's
         parents are said to be in Afghanistan or Turkey.  Since the
         Appellant claims that he is not in contact with them, he will not
         say where they are.

     52. The Appellant's sister, [FA] in her oral evidence before me,
         accepted that she has returned to Afghanistan on several occasions.
          Although it was her evidence that she spoke to her mother last in
         2016, she said that she has seen her sister [S] in Turkey.  She
         also confirmed that her parents have met her three eldest children.
          They are aged 14, 13 and 10 years.  [FA] said that she had been to
         Afghanistan twice since 2016.  She attended a funeral there and
         went once more in 2019.  She was unable to go in 2020 and had not
         yet been in 2021.  She said that her father had also met her third
         child in 2016 when she travelled to the Appellant's home area with
         that child.  The other two children were left in Kabul with their
         father.  She had travelled to Ghazni with her brother-in-law.

     53.  [FA] confirmed that her husband's family lives in Kabul.  It is
         also recorded at [49] of Judge Khawar's decision that the Appellant
         has "uncles and cousins who continue to reside in and around
         Kabul".  The only reason given why they would not be able to assist
         is that "they have their own lives and their own children".

     54. There is little if any evidence about the Appellant's educational
         background.  He was a minor when he first arrived in the UK and
         presumably therefore benefitted from some education here.   There
         is however no information about any qualifications which he
         obtained.  Since attaining his majority, I accept that the
         Appellant has been unable to work due to his status.  I accept that
         he is unlikely to have had any experience of working in Afghanistan
         due to his age.  There is no evidence that he has previously lived
         in Kabul.

The Situation in the UK

     55. The Appellant lives with his sister and her family in the UK.  I
         accept based on the evidence that they are close.  He has lived
         with them since 2016 - some five years.  I also accept the written
         evidence of the Appellant and [FA] that the Appellant helps out
         with the children.  Although there is no medical evidence to
         support [FA]'s evidence about her depression, I am prepared to
         accept that she finds it difficult to cope with five children.  I
         accept the unchallenged evidence that her husband is sometimes
         absent from home as he needs to travel for his business.   [FA]'s
         husband says that this happens "often" but does not say how often
         nor for how long he is absent.  The Appellant says that [FA]'s
         husband travels two to three times per month "and can stay outside
         of the UK even 7 days at a time."

     56. As Ms Cunha was able to elicit via cross-examination of [FA], if
         the Appellant were permitted to stay in the UK, he is likely to
         wish to study or work here.  As [FA] said however if that were the
         case she was "sure [they] will be able to arrange things".  She
         said that her husband had managed to study and help out.  It
         appears therefore that, except when her husband is away on
         business, he could continue to help out.  Moreover, when Ms Cunha
         asked how [FA] would manage if the Appellant decided to leave and
         set up his own home, [FA] said only that "God will help us".  I
         have regard to the fact that [FA]'s children are aged between one
         and fourteen years.  She had four children prior to the Appellant's
         arrival in the UK (other than the baby, the next youngest is aged
         eight).  [FA] confirmed that they had not ever been supported by
         the authorities other than by way of child benefit.  Moreover, four
         of the children are now in school and the eldest is now aged
         fourteen and could presumably offer some assistance with the
         younger children if needs be.

     57. I accept however that the Appellant has formed a close bond not
         only with his sister and husband but also the children.  In
         particular, the Appellant describes in his statement how he plays
         with the children. [FA] says that he helps with their homework as
         well as taking them to Saturday tuition and after-school classes.
         She says that when she is not well or busy, the Appellant takes the
         children to school.  The Appellant describes the children's
         individual personalities. The Appellant says that he "believe[s]
         that their mental well-being would be affected" if he were removed
         as would be "their daily schedule".  With the exception of that
         evidence as confirmed by [FA] however I have no independent
         evidence about the impact which the Appellant's removal would have
         on the children.

FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION

Issue One: Article 3 ECHR

The Appellant's Mental Health

     58. I begin with the Appellant's case based on Article 3 ECHR founded
         on his mental health condition.  In light of the Supreme Court's
         judgment in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2020] UKSC 17 ("AM (Zimbabwe)") the legal test which
         applies can now be stated with some certainty.  At [31] of the
         judgment and at [32] of the judgment the Supreme Court explains the
         burden and standard of proof which applies.  Those paragraphs read
         as follows:

             "31.  It  remains,  however,  to  consider  what   the   Grand
             Chamber did mean by its reference to a 'significant' reduction
             in  life  expectancy  in  para  183   of   its   judgment   in
             the Paposhvili case. Like  the  skin  of  a  chameleon,  the
             adjective takes a different colour so as to suit  a  different
             context. Here the general context is  inhuman  treatment;  and
             the  particular  context  is  that  the  alternative   to   'a
             significant reduction in life expectancy' is 'a serious, rapid
             and irreversible decline in ... health  resulting  in  intense
             suffering'.  From  these  contexts  the  adjective  takes  its
             colour. The word 'significant' often means something less than
             the word 'substantial'. In context, however,  it  must  in  my
             view mean  substantial.  Indeed,  were  a  reduction  in  life
             expectancy to be less than substantial, it  would  not  attain
             the minimum level of severity which article 3 requires. Surely
             the Court of Appeal was correct to suggest,  albeit  in  words
             too extreme, that a reduction in life expectancy to  death  in
             the near future is more likely  to  be  significant  than  any
             other reduction. But even a reduction to  death  in  the  near
             future might  be  significant  for  one  person  but  not  for
             another. Take a person aged 74, with  an  expectancy  of  life
             normal for that age. Were that person's expectancy be  reduced
             to, say, two years, the reduction might well - in this context
             - not be significant. But compare that person with one aged 24
             with an expectancy of life normal for that age.  Were  his  or
             her expectancy to be reduced to two years, the reduction might
             well be significant.

             32.  The Grand Chamber's pronouncements in the Paposhvili case
             about the procedural requirements of article 3, summarised  in
             para  23  above,  can  on  no  view  be   regarded   as   mere
             clarification of what the court had previously  said;  and  we
             may expect that, when it gives judgment in  the Savran case,
             the Grand Chamber  will  shed  light  on  the  extent  of  the
             requirements. Yet observations on them may even  now  be  made
             with reasonable confidence. The basic principle  is  that,  if
             you allege a breach of your rights, it is for you to establish
             it. But 'Convention proceedings  do  not  in  all  cases  lend
             themselves to  a  rigorous  application  of  [that]  principle
             ...': DH v Czech Republic (2008) 47 EHRR 3, para 179. It  is
             clear that, in application to claims under article 3 to resist
             return by reference  to  ill-health,  the  Grand  Chamber  has
             indeed modified that principle. The threshold, set out in para
             23(a) above, is for the applicant to adduce evidence  'capable
             of  demonstrating  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
             believing' that article 3  would  be  violated.  It  may  make
             formidable  intellectual  demands   on   decision-makers   who
             conclude that the evidence  does  not  establish  'substantial
             grounds' to have to proceed to consider  whether  nevertheless
             it is 'capable of demonstrating' them.  But,  irrespective  of
             the perhaps unnecessary complexity of the  test,  let  no  one
             imagine that it represents an  undemanding  threshold  for  an
             applicant to cross. For the requisite capacity of the evidence
             adduced by  the  applicant  is  to  demonstrate  'substantial'
             grounds for believing that it is  a  'very  exceptional'  case
             because of a 'real' risk of subjection to 'inhuman' treatment.
             All three parties accept that Sales LJ was  correct,  in  para
             16, to describe the threshold as an obligation on an applicant
             to raise a 'prima facie case'  of  potential  infringement  of
             article 3. This means a  case  which,  if  not  challenged  or
             countered, would establish the infringement: see para 112 of a
             useful analysis in the Determination of the President  of  the
             Upper Tribunal and two of its senior judges in AXB v Secretary
             of State for  the  Home  Department [2019]  UKUT  397  (IAC).
             Indeed, as the tribunal proceeded to explain in para 123,  the
             arrangements in the UK are such that the decisions whether the
             applicant has adduced evidence to the requisite standard  and,
             if so, whether it has been successfully countered fall  to  be
             taken initially by the Secretary of State and, in the event of
             an appeal, again by the First-tier Tribunal."

     59. I have already explained why I do not give weight to Dr Stein's
         report.  I give some weight to Dr Hajioff's report.  Dr Hajioff
         does not diagnose depression.  He does diagnose PTSD although, as I
         have pointed out, since this is based on an acceptance of the
         Appellant's account, I can give it less weight at least as to the
         cause.  Ms Cunha did not however suggest that I should not accept
         that the Appellant suffers from depression and PTSD.  The diagnosis
         of depression is supported by some of the other medical evidence to
         which I have referred (although the severity of it is not clear).
         Ms Cunha said however that I should find that the Appellant's PTSD
         was due to other factors, plausibly the uncertainty of the
         Appellant's immigration status, his immigration detention or a
         general fear of return to Afghanistan.

     60. It is difficult to be precise about the cause of the Appellant's
         PTSD not simply because both Dr Hajioff and Dr Stein (adopting Dr
         Hajioff's findings) have assumed it to be caused by events in
         Afghanistan which have been found not to be credible.  It is
         however worthy of note that the Appellant's medical records suggest
         that the onset of his mental health problems coincided with his
         immigration detention and threat of removal.  As I have pointed out
         at [15] above, there was no indication that the Appellant was
         suffering any problems with his mental health following arrival and
         during his asylum interview or previous appeal.  The Appellant
         himself attributes his mental health problems to his fear of return
         (see [8] of his statement as cited at [16] above).  I accept that
         Mr White says that the Appellant's mental health had been "apparent
         from early on in [his] work with [the Appellant]".  However, that
         appears to be based on the Appellant's threat of suicide which I
         come to below and self-harm with which I also deal separately.  Mr
         White is not a medical expert and nor does he purport to have any
         relevant qualifications. I find it more likely therefore that the
         PTSD was caused by the threat of removal, possibly exacerbated by
         the detention leading to that potential removal.

     61. The difficulty for the Appellant in relation to his Article 3 case,
         is the absence of evidence about the situation which would face him
         in Afghanistan in relation to his mental health and specifically
         the impact of that removal on a worsening of his condition to such
         an extent that he would suffer treatment reaching the threshold of
         Article 3 ECHR.  He would need to show to "a significant reduction
         in life expectancy" or "a serious, rapid and irreversible decline
         in ... health resulting in intense suffering".

     62. I leave aside for these purposes a consideration of the suicide
         risk.  In relation to his mental health, there is limited evidence
         that the Appellant's depression or PTSD is impacted by the
         treatment he is receiving in the UK.  There is no record of medical
         intervention until 2019. The Appellant has declined medication on a
         number of occasions on the basis that it does not help him.  He has
         received counselling treatment intermittently.  He told Dr Stein
         that this helped him only for a very short time after the session
         and did not really assist.  There is no evidence about the impact
         of withdrawal of such treatment as the Appellant has received.  In
         short, therefore, there is little evidence that the Appellant's
         mental health problems are managed via medication and counselling.



     63. I accept of course that the care available for mental health in
         Afghanistan is not on a par with that in the UK.  In addition to
         the evidence in the report of Mr Zadeh, the Tribunal at [145] of
         the decision in AS (Afghanistan) accepted the evidence that there
         is an "extremely low availability of psychosocial support services"
         and that "recovery opportunities are likely to be minimal".
         However, there is no evidence showing that the effect of not being
         given counselling or not receiving medication after removal would
         have the sorts of impacts envisaged by the threshold set out in AM
         (Zimbabwe).  There is insufficient evidence to show that his
         condition would deteriorate to such an extent that it would meet
         the Article 3 threshold.

     64. I accept as was said by the Court of Appeal in GS (India) and
         others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ
         40 that the impact of removal on health can be taken into account
         in an Article 8 assessment.  However, as Laws LJ observed at [85]
         of the judgment "Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate or
         additional factual element which brings the case within the Article
         8 paradigm - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships - or a
         state of affairs having some affinity with the paradigm."  The
         Appellant's mental health can be considered as part of his private
         life.   I consider that within the Article 8 assessment below.

Risk of Suicide

     65. I turn then to the risk of suicide. This too is relevant to the
         Article 3 assessment.  I begin with the legal test as set out in J
         v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629
         ("J").  The familiar legal test in relation to an Article 3 claim
         in this regard is set out at [26] to [31] of the judgment.  There
         is no dispute about the test and observations there set out, and I
         therefore summarise it as follows:

          1) The severity of the treatment which the applicant would suffer
             if removed must attain the minimum level of severity.

          2) A causal link must be shown between the threat of removal and
             the Article 3 treatment relied upon.

          3) The Article 3 threshold is "particularly high" in a foreign
             case.

          4) An Article 3 claim can "in principle" succeed where there is a
             risk of suicide.

          5) A "question of importance" is whether the applicant's fear of
             ill-treatment is well-founded.  If not, "that will tend to
             weigh against there being a real risk that the removal will be
             in breach of article 3".

          6) "[A] further question of considerable relevance is whether the
             removing and/or the receiving state has effective mechanisms
             to reduce the risk of suicide".  If there are such mechanisms
             that will weigh against an applicant.

     66. I turn next to the Court of Appeal's judgment in Y and X v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 ("Y
         and X").  In those cases, the Court was considering the fifth part
         of the legal test in J as set out above.  Of particular relevance
         to the instant case was the question whether, if an appellant did
         not have a well-founded fear of persecution, nonetheless the fact
         of the general situation in a country and a "real and overwhelming
         fear" of the position on return could for that reason lead to an
         Article 3 real risk.  In that case, the appellants faced return to
         Sri Lanka.  As here, the appellants had failed in their individual
         asylum claims.  At [16] of the judgment, the Court added to the
         fifth part of the test in J "that what may nevertheless be of equal
         importance is whether any genuine fear which the appellant may
         establish, albeit without any objective foundation, is such as to
         create a risk of suicide if there is an enforced return."

     67. For the sake of completeness on that latter issue, I refer to the
         guidance given in the Tribunal's decision in AXB (Article 3 health:
         obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT 397 (IAC) (as expanded
         upon at [96] to [104] of the decision):

             "(4) Where an individual asserts that he would be at real risk
             of committing suicide, following return to the Receiving
             State, the threshold for establishing Article 3 harm is the
             high threshold described in N v United Kingdom [2008] ECHR
             453, unless the risk involves hostile actions of the Receiving
             State towards the individual: RA (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of
             State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 1210; Y and Z v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ
             362."

         That guidance now has to be read in light of AM (Zimbabwe) and the
         test for what has to be demonstrated by the evidence.  Nonetheless,
         the point remains that the same high threshold applies (necessarily
         as it involves a breach of Article 3 ECHR).

     68. I turn then to the evidence.  I begin by drawing a distinction
         between the evidence about self-harm and risk of suicide.  Whilst
         accepting that the first may be indicative of the second, I do not
         understand the medical evidence to suggest that this is necessarily
         so or that the link is to be assumed in this case.  As shown by the
         medical evidence recorded at [18] above, the Appellant has told
         those who have assessed him that he punches walls when he gets
         angry or frustrated.  The Appellant also said that he was involved
         with a fight with a member of staff when detained.  The episode in
         detention when he apparently hit his head on a wall is said,
         according to the records, to have been triggered by the Appellant
         receiving a letter from the Home Office, presumably rejecting his
         further submissions.

     69. I accept however that the self-harm which is undoubtedly a feature
         of the Appellant's case has on occasions been linked with threats
         to commit suicide.  Mr White records that he met with the Appellant
         by chance at the Home Office in August 2018 when the Appellant was
         in an argument with the security staff.  That was clearly an
         incident when the Appellant had become angry or frustrated but Mr
         White records that the police had been called because the Appellant
         had threatened to kill himself.   Shortly after the episode in
         detention, the Appellant said that he had suicidal thoughts.

     70. I accept that previous attempts at suicide are not a necessary
         feature of a risk of suicide in the future.  Nonetheless, they may
         be indicative of the extent to which an individual might put
         thoughts into action.

     71. In this case, the Appellant's evidence as to past incidents is
         inconsistent.  The high point of the Appellant's case in this
         regard is his account to Dr Hajioff that he self-harmed by cutting
         his left forearm in the previous year.  That would mean that he had
         done so sometime in 2018.  Dr Hajioff says that the scarring he
         observed on the Appellant's forearm is "highly consistent" with
         that causation.  There is however no record of any such injury at
         the time of the Appellant's detention nor has the Appellant
         mentioned it to any of those who have assessed him in the period
         from mid-2019 onwards. It is notable that when the Appellant was
         introduced to F2F in June 2019, he did not mention this.  He
         expressly denied any previous attempts to harm himself or take his
         own life.  Notwithstanding Dr Hajioff's view that the scarring was
         highly consistent with the cause described by the Appellant,
         therefore, I am unable to give weight to his opinion as the
         Appellant's account is inconsistent with other evidence.

     72. Similarly, the Appellant has also been inconsistent in his
         reporting of other events.  When assessed on 19 September 2019, he
         said that he had tried to strangle himself "about 2-3 years ago"
         (ie in 2017) but had been stopped.  Again, that is prior to the F2F
         assessment in June 2019 when the Appellant denied any previous
         attempts to harm or kill himself.  He made no mention of any such
         incident to either Dr Hajioff or Dr Stein. There was no mention of
         any such attempt nor indeed of any mental health problems at the
         time of the appeal in 2017.  That appeal was not concluded until
         2018.

     73. There is no mention of this attempt in other assessments.  He has
         on more than one occasion said that he had once intended to throw
         himself off a railway bridge.  He told Dr Stein that this was in
         2019.  That is broadly consistent with what he told assessors in
         December 2020.  It is also broadly consistent with an account given
         to assessors in January 2020 (although he says in that assessment
         that "someone" prevented him carrying out his intention whereas in
         December 2020 and to Dr Stein he said that it was a friend who had
         stopped him).  He did not however mention this to Dr Hajioff.  Even
         if it may have post-dated Dr Hajioff's assessment in September
         2019, there is no mention of this incident to those who assessed
         the Appellant between January and December 2020.

     74. Finally, in January 2020, the Appellant told assessors that he had
         taken an overdose whilst still in Afghanistan.  That is the only
         mention of this incident which the Appellant did not report to
         either Dr Hajioff or Dr Stein.

     75. I am bound to note also that none of these incidents are mentioned
         by either the Appellant or [FA] in their statements.  Even if [FA]
         was not in Afghanistan when the Appellant says he took an overdose
         I find it highly unlikely that the Appellant or another family
         member would not have mentioned it to her.  She remains in contact
         with her sister in Turkey even if she says that she has no contact
         with her parents.  I also do not believe that, if the Appellant had
         attempted suicide in the UK in various ways as he has told the
         doctors and assessors, that his sister would be unaware of it,
         given that the Appellant has lived with her throughout or that she
         would fail to mention it in her evidence.  There is no explanation
         for the failure of the Appellant to deal with this issue in his own
         evidence.

     76. There have been varying assessments of the risk of suicide made by
         the doctors and assessors in this case.  Again, I begin with Dr
         Hajioff's report.  I accept that Dr Hajioff was of the view that
         there was a risk of suicide if the Appellant were returned to
         Afghanistan or threatened with removal.  However, as I have already
         found, I cannot accept Dr Hajioff's opinion about the previous
         suicide attempt for the reasons I have given.  His acceptance of
         the cause of the Appellant's injury underpins his opinion about the
         risk of suicide.  Further, Dr Hajioff's assessment is also based on
         the Appellant's account of past events which have been found not to
         be credible.  The situation which would face the Appellant on
         return has been found not to be that which Dr Hajioff envisages
         based on the Appellant's reporting.  Similarly, although I can, for
         reasons I have explained, give little if any weight to Dr Stein's
         report, his assessment of the increased risk of suicide is also
         undermined by his acceptance of what would be the position on
         return.

     77. There have been various assessments of the Appellant's intent to
         commit suicide ranging from "0/10" in January 2020, through "6/10"
         in February 2020 and "1/3" later in February 2020.  Those are of
         course based on what the Appellant himself says about his mood and
         intention at specific times.  I accept that he has expressed an
         intention to kill himself on occasion but has generally denied any
         plans or preparation.  I have not accepted that he has gone so far
         as to attempt suicide in the past.

     78. Even when confronted with the threat of removal in July 2019, the
         Appellant did not continually assert that he had suicidal thoughts.
          He told a nurse on 25 July 2019 that he wanted to die, but, by 29
         July 2019, he was again denying suicidal thoughts.

     79. The Appellant's fear of return is one which has not been accepted
         as being well-founded.  Nonetheless, the Appellant did say in his
         witness statements and to me at the end of the hearing that he was
         afraid of returning to Afghanistan because Kabul was not safe.  As
         the Tribunal has found in AS (Afghanistan), the security situation
         in Kabul has not reached the level where there is a "serious and
         individual threat to a civilian's life or person by reason of
         indiscriminate violence in situations of international or internal
         armed conflict".  In other words, removal to Afghanistan does not
         breach Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

     80. I accept that, after five years in the UK, the Appellant will fear
         the general insecurity in Afghanistan.  However, although he was
         still a child when he left Afghanistan and, prior to leaving, had
         the support of his family, he has experience of having to deal with
         the general level of violence in Afghanistan.  I do not
         underestimate the difficulties which that general level of violence
         causes for the Appellant and others like him. As I will come to,
         however, he also has family members around Kabul.  His sister's in-
         laws also live in that city. I do not accept that he will be
         without support.

     81. I have regard to what is said in Y and X in relation to the need to
         show a "real and overwhelming fear" rather than one which is
         necessarily objectively well-founded.  However, on the evidence in
         this case, I am unable to find that the Appellant has such a fear
         or that he has shown that he has such a genuine fear that there is
         a real risk of suicide before, during or after return to
         Afghanistan.  I also observe that Y and X is a very different case.
          In those cases, it was accepted that the appellants had suffered
         severe ill-treatment in the past at the hands of the Sri Lankan
         authorities which had a potential impact on their fear of return
         ([8] of the judgment).  That is not this case.

     82. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that removal of the Appellant
         to Afghanistan would breach Article 3 ECHR.

Issue Two: Article 8 ECHR

The Situation in Afghanistan: security and obstacles to integration

     83. As I have already noted above, the most recent country guidance in
         relation to Afghanistan is that there is no generalised level of
         violence (at least in Kabul), which reaches the threshold of
         permitting the Appellant to succeed on that account alone.

     84. There is a preserved finding that the Appellant remains in contact
         with his parents.  It is not clear to me whether they are in
         Afghanistan or Turkey with his sister.  Since the Appellant and
         [FA] deny that contact, they obviously will not say where their
         parents are.  If they are still in Afghanistan and in his home
         area, the Appellant would doubtless prefer to return there.

     85. I have however assumed it to be more likely that the Appellant's
         parents are no longer in Afghanistan and that he would relocate to
         Kabul.  It is to that city that he would be returned. The family of
         [FA]'s husband lives in Kabul.  Whilst I note what Mr Zadeh says
         about a single man being unable to live in a household with a woman
         to whom he is not related by blood or kinship ties, there is no
         evidence that the Appellant could not be assisted by that family.
         Nor is there evidence that he would not otherwise be assisted by
         those family members in other ways, financially or by assisting him
         to find employment.  The Appellant also has uncles and cousins
         living in or around Kabul.  There is no evidence that they would be
         unable to help the Appellant either by providing accommodation or
         other financial support or help with finding a job.

     86. I appreciate that the Appellant does not have work experience from
         either Afghanistan or the UK.  He arrived in the UK aged sixteen
         and will therefore presumably have received some education here.  I
         have no evidence about his qualifications.  I also heard briefly
         from the Appellant at the end of the hearing when he expressed
         concern that if he were returned to Afghanistan, he would be unable
         to continue his studies which he was keen to do if permitted to
         remain.  I accept that it is unlikely that he will have access to
         education if he returns to Afghanistan.  He will need to work to
         maintain himself.  Due to his lack of experience, he may find it
         difficult to obtain employment.  It is likely that he would have to
         resort to unskilled labour.

     87. I have already dealt with the impact on the Appellant's mental
         health as part of the assessment under Article 3 ECHR.  I accept
         based on what is said in AS (Afghanistan) and Mr Zadeh's report
         that the Appellant would not have access to the counselling and
         medication which he has here.  However, as I have pointed out, the
         treatment he has received in the UK in that regard has been
         intermittent.  I do accept however, on account of his mental health
         problems, that the Appellant cannot be said to be "in good health".



     88. I have taken into account what is said in AS (Afghanistan) about
         the "particular circumstances of an individual" which need to be
         taken into account.  Although there is no evidence that the
         Appellant suffers physical ill-health to such an extent that he
         would not be able to undertake manual labour, I accept that his
         mental health condition might have some impact on his ability to
         work.  The evidence is that he is inactive and lethargic due to his
         mental health.  That is not helped, however, by his inability to
         work in the UK due to his immigration status.  I note in this
         regard Dr Stein's opinion that if the Appellant were granted leave
         to remain in the UK, he would likely to be able to work in some
         unskilled employment.  It is not said that the Appellant's mental
         health would prevent him from working if employment could be found.



     89. Taking all the evidence and the above findings in the round,
         although I accept that the Appellant suffers mental health problems
         which, at present, have an impact on his motivation to work, I do
         not accept that those would prevent him finding work in unskilled
         employment were such work to be available.  In any event, as I have
         found, the Appellant has family members in and around Kabul who
         could support and assist him in the short term while he finds his
         feet.

     90. I do not accept that the situation which faces the Appellant on
         return to Afghanistan amounts to very significant obstacles to
         integration for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
         Immigration Rules ("Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)").  The test in that
         regard was explained by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State
         for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 as follows:

             "14.  In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a  foreign   criminal's
             'integration' into the country to which it is proposed that he
             be deported, as set out in section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
             399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the  mere  ability
             to find a job or to sustain life while  living  in  the  other
             country. It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language
             as subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for
             a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms  that
             Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of 'integration'  calls
             for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the
             individual  will  be  enough  of  an  insider  in   terms   of
             understanding how life in the society in that other country is
             carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to  have
             a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
             operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build  up
             within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships  to
             give substance to the individual's private or family life."

     91. The Appellant was born and grew up in Afghanistan.  He did not
         leave until he was in his teens.  He continues to speak the
         language.  He continues to have family ties there. I have found
         that he will be able to find support from those family members.
         Although the Appellant has not worked in that country and may find
         it difficult to obtain employment, he is not physically
         incapacitated.  Given the high threshold which applies, I do not
         find that Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is met.

     92. My findings in this regard are also however relevant to the Article
         8 assessment outside the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") which I
         conduct below, having regard to the impact of removal also on the
         Appellant's family and private life in the UK.

Article 8 assessment

     93. For the foregoing reasons, the Appellant cannot meet the Rules
         based on his private life.  I have rejected his case that there are
         "very significant obstacles" to his integration in Afghanistan.  He
         cannot therefore meet Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  Nor can he meet the
         remainder of Paragraph 276ADE based on his length of residence in
         the UK. It is also accepted that the Appellant cannot meet the
         Rules based on his family life.  He has no partner or child in the
         UK.

     94. Since the Appellant cannot meet the Rules based on his family and
         private life, I turn to conduct an assessment outside the Rules.
         In so doing, I am required to balance the interference with the
         Appellant's family and private life caused by removal against the
         public interest justification for his removal (see Hesham Ali v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60).  The
         issue is whether the Appellant's removal is necessary and
         proportionate.  It is for the Appellant to make out his case in
         relation to the strength of his private and family life with which
         removal will interfere and for the Respondent to justify the
         proportionality of the interference caused by removal.

     95. Given the close emotional bond which the Appellant has with [FA]
         and her family, I accept that the Appellant has formed a family
         life with them.  That finding is not undermined by what is reported
         by Mr White regarding the Appellant's wish to move out from his
         sister's home (in 2018).  I accept that the Appellant is of an age
         where he is likely to want to move away from his family and form an
         independent life.  I accept that he may do so whether he is removed
         or permitted to remain in the UK.  I have to assess the position
         however as at the date of hearing.  I am satisfied on the evidence
         I received that there is presently a close interdependency between
         the Appellant and his sister's family which engages Article 8(1) as
         part of the Appellant's family life.

     96. I have no independent evidence about the impact which the
         Appellant's removal would have on his nieces and nephews.  Several
         of them are at an age where they are likely to be aware of his
         absence and the effect of that absence on their everyday life.
         However, they have their mother and father in the UK.  They will
         remain living with them and socialising with their friends if the
         Appellant is removed.  It may also be the case as I have pointed
         out that the Appellant would move away if permitted to remain.
         Whilst the children may well be distressed by the Appellant's
         departure, the children's best interests are unlikely to be
         seriously adversely affected in the longer term by his absence.
         Those best interests, whilst a primary consideration, do not weigh
         heavily in the balance.

     97. I also take into account the impact of removal of the Appellant on
         [FA].  She places some reliance on the Appellant to help around the
         house and with the children.  However, as Ms Cunha pointed out (and
         as I have accepted above), even if the Appellant were to remain in
         the UK, it is likely that he will wish to form his own independent
         life here.  As I have already pointed out, it was reported by Mr
         White that the Appellant was seeking to leave his sister's home in
         order to live independently in 2018.  Whether the Appellant is
         removed or remains and decides to move out, [FA] will no doubt miss
         the support of her brother.  However, she has her husband to
         support her and her own family to care for.  I do not place much
         weight on this aspect of the Appellant's case.

     98. There will, I find, be a greater impact on the Appellant himself.
         He has lived with his sister since arriving in the UK aged sixteen.
          He has spent the period of transition from childhood to adulthood
         in a strange country supported by his sister.  Although I have
         pointed to the lack of evidence from either the Appellant or his
         sister about the detail of the Appellant's mental health problems,
         I have accepted that he has problems.  He is therefore likely to be
         more dependent on his sister for that reason.  On the other hand,
         as I have pointed out, the Appellant told Mr White that he wanted
         to move out of his sister's home.  He also told me that he wanted a
         future in the UK.  He wants to get an education and to improve
         himself.  That suggests that he is still looking for a life
         independently of his sister.  I give some weight to the impact on
         the Appellant's family life of removal but that is not a
         significant factor for the reasons I have given.

     99. There is limited evidence about the Appellant's private life in the
         UK.  I take into account that he came to the UK whilst still a
         child.  Although there is limited evidence as to his integration
         here, I accept that the period from teenager into adulthood is an
         important one.  The Appellant is finding his feet and gaining some
         independence (although limited in this case by his circumstances).
         He is likely to have become accustomed to life here.  I accept his
         evidence that he will find it very difficult to leave the UK, if
         nothing else based on the relative security of this country
         compared to Afghanistan.  I place some weight on this factor.

    100. I have already made findings about the impact of removal on the
         Appellant's private life based on the situation which he will face
         in Afghanistan.  Although I have not accepted that the obstacles he
         will face can properly be described as very significant, it is
         undoubtedly the case that the Appellant will find it very difficult
         to adjust back to life in Afghanistan even with family support.
         That is not simply because of the period he has lived outside the
         UK but also because of his age and mental health condition.  He
         left Afghanistan when he was a child.  At that time, he had the
         support of his parents.  I have found that he will have some
         support from extended family members in Kabul and from his brother-
         in-law's family.  However, he will still essentially be alone as a
         young man having no familiarity with Kabul, with how to find work
         and accommodation there and faced with a difficult security
         situation.  It may be that the Appellant's mental health will
         improve in the longer term if it is indeed the uncertainty of his
         immigration status which is causing or exacerbating his symptoms.
         However, that is unpredictable.  On the evidence, the Appellant's
         mental health problems are likely to impact on his ability to form
         new relationships on return.  I accept also that he will not have
         counselling or medication to the extent that he may want or need
         it. His expressed fear of returning to Afghanistan given the
         general security situation there appeared to me to be genuine.  The
         interference with the Appellant's private life caused by removal is
         for those reasons a factor on which I place significant weight.

    101. Against those factors, I have to weigh the public interest.  I have
         regard to Section 117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
         2002.  I accept that the maintenance of effective immigration
         control is in the public interest.  I accept that an effective
         immigration control system generally requires the removal of those
         who are unable to meet the Rules in order to achieve fairness for
         those who seek to enter and remain lawfully and in order to deter
         those who would otherwise enter or remain in breach of those Rules.
          I accept that the Appellant falls into the category of those who
         should generally be removed in the interests of preserving
         effective immigration control.  I do not suggest that he has
         remained unlawfully.  He had discretionary leave when he came to
         the UK as a child and has been seeking to regularise his stay since
         via his asylum claim(s).  However, his individual asylum claim has
         been found not to be credible and he has no other claim which can
         succeed within the Rules.

    102. The Appellant spoke to me in English briefly at the end of the
         hearing and he therefore speaks some English.  He is not in receipt
         of public funds.  As I understand it, he is supported by his sister
         and her husband.  He is not financially independent.  In any event,
         those are neutral factors in the public interest balance.  They do
         not weigh in the Appellant's favour.

    103. The Appellant had discretionary leave for a year when he arrived in
         the UK.  His immigration position has however always been
         precarious.  For that reason, I am directed to give his private
         life little weight.

    104. I recognise that the Appellant could not expect that he would be
         permitted to stay if his asylum claim failed.  I take into account
         the precariousness of his situation.  However, the weight which I
         give to the Appellant's private life depends on the factors in his
         case and the strength of the private life and interference with
         that private life as demonstrated by the evidence in his case.

    105. Although I accept that I have limited evidence of the strength of
         the Appellant's private life in the UK, I have explained why I give
         substantial weight to the interference with that private life
         caused by removal to Afghanistan based on the cumulative effect of
         all the factors to which I have made reference.  Although I have
         not given a great deal of weight to the interference with the
         Appellant's family life, that is a factor which weighs additionally
         in the balance.

    106. Having balanced the interference with the Appellant's private and
         family life against the public interest, I have reached the
         conclusion that removal would be disproportionate.  I therefore
         allow the appeal on human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds.

CONCLUSION

    107. The Respondent's decision to remove the Appellant  to  Afghanistan
         amounts to a disproportionate interference  with  his  private  and
         family life.  It is therefore a breach of  the  Appellant's  rights
         under section 6 Human Rights Act 1998.



DECISION

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed: L K Smith
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated: 25 May 2021


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01156/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Business                                |                                   |
|On Monday 7 December 2020               | 15 December 2020                  |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                                     H E
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr  R  Spurling,  Counsel  instructed  by  Wimbledon
solicitors

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves a protection claim, I consider it is appropriate to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  I refer to the
         parties hereafter as they were before the First-tier Tribunal for
         ease of reference.  The Respondent appeals against the decision of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge S J Steer promulgated on 2 April 2020
         ("the Decision"). By the Decision, the Judge allowed the
         Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 15
         January 2020 refusing his protection and human rights claims.

      2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born in December 1999.
         He arrived in the UK on 24 May 2016 whilst still a minor.  Although
         his asylum claim was refused at that time, he was granted
         discretionary leave until 15 June 2017 on account of his age.  The
         Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim was
         dismissed in February 2017 and onward appeals were also rejected.
         He became appeal rights exhausted on 8 May 2018.  He made further
         submissions on 23 July 2019 leading to the decision under appeal.

      3. The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis that his family was
         targeted by the Taliban following a lottery win by a family member
         who lives in the UK.  The Appellant claimed that his older brother
         and then his younger brother were kidnapped.  He said that his
         older brother was released on payment of a ransom, but no ransom
         was paid for his younger brother who was killed.  The Appellant's
         claim to be at risk based on those facts was rejected as not
         credible.

      4. In spite of further documentary evidence being produced with the
         submissions made after the appeal, the Respondent concluded that
         the claim of an individualised risk still lacked credibility.  The
         Judge similarly found the claim not to be credible ([71] of the
         Decision).  She also there found as fact that the Appellant "does
         know the whereabouts of his parents, his older brother and his
         sister and her family and can contact them".  There has been no
         challenge by way of a cross-appeal or Rule 24 Reply to those
         findings.  Mr Spurling accepted that those findings should stand.

      5. However, the Judge went on to consider background evidence
         concerning the situation in Kabul in the context of return of the
         Appellant who has been diagnosed as suffering from PTSD and to be a
         suicide risk.  She reached the conclusion at [77] of the Decision
         that "the Appellant is a refugee".

      6. By reference to [77] of the Decision, the Respondent challenges the
         adequacy of the Judge's reasons, particularly given the earlier
         finding that the individual asylum claim was not credible.

      7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge L
         Murray on 12 May 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  It is arguable that the Judge has not given adequate
         reasons in relation to the finding that the Appellant could not
         internally relocate in light of the adverse credibility findings
         and the findings in relation to the presence of his family in
         Afghanistan".

      8. By a Note and Directions dated 10 August 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge
         Norton-Taylor reached the provisional view that the error of law
         hearing should be conducted remotely via Skype for Business.
         Neither party objected to that course.  There were no technical
         problems encountered during the hearing.

      9. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision
         contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make
         the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do
         so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

     10. Ms Everett indicated at the outset that the parties were agreed
         that there was an error of law in the Judge's conclusion that the
         Appellant is a refugee.  There remained however a dispute as to the
         materiality of that error.  Mr Spurling argued that it was simply a
         technical error which I could correct without more.  Ms Everett
         submitted that at least that part of the Decision on which the
         conclusion was based could not stand and that the basis on which
         the appeal was allowed needed to be reconsidered.

     11. I begin by setting out the content of [77] of the Decision as that
         is the reasoning lying behind the conclusion on which the allowing
         of the appeal is based:

             "Ms Bell stated that the Appellant would be removed to Kabul.
             Given the UNHCR 30 August 2018 Guidelines, I find that
             internal relocation to Kabul is generally likely to be
             unreasonable or unduly harsh.  The Appellant has been
             diagnosed with PTSD and at risk of suicide if removed to
             Afghanistan.  The Appellant is currently being treated by
             weekly counselling sessions and is not taking medication.  The
             Respondent referenced the MedCOI response, dated 10 December
             2018 which noted that outpatient and inpatient treatment for
             mental health conditions was available, but accepted that such
             treatment may be difficult to access.  Jawad Zadeh, country
             expert, detailed two fact-finding reports from July 2019 (AB
             152-153) in which mental health care specialists advised that
             PTSD could not be treated in Afghanistan.  It was not a
             recognized condition, there was medication available, but
             there were no counselling services, making treatment
             incomplete.  For this reason, only, I find that the Appellant
             is a refugee."

     12. Mr Spurling accepted that, whatever the Judge's intentions, the
         conclusion that the Appellant is a refugee cannot stand.  He
         accepted that internal relocation is not relevant where the
         Appellant has not been found to be at risk in his home area.

     13. Mr Spurling submitted however that the basis of the Judge's
         conclusion at [77] of the Decision was in reality the Appellant's
         human rights claim based on his medical condition.  He argued
         therefore that all I needed to do was to find an error in relation
         to the conclusion and by reference to the finding on internal
         relocation/refugee law and substitute a conclusion that the
         Appellant should succeed on human rights grounds based on the
         findings as to his mental health.  The fallacy of that argument
         however is shown by the fact that Mr Spurling could not identify
         whether the Judge intended to allow the appeal under Article 3 ECHR
         or Article 8 ECHR and nor could he show me where in the Decision
         the Judge has directed herself on the legal principles relevant to
         a conclusion on that basis.

     14. The only references to the applicable legal principles in a "health
         case" appear at [15] and [16] of the Decision where the Judge
         recites the Respondent's consideration of this issue and at [45] of
         the Decision where the Judge sets out the Appellant's submissions.
         In fact, the law has moved on since the Respondent's consideration
         of the issue but I accept that, if I could identify the basis of
         the Judge's conclusion as being the Appellant's human rights based
         on his health, that would not of itself amount to an error as the
         threshold is now somewhat lower.  The Judge does refer at [45] of
         the Decision to the submission that the Appellant would be "at real
         risk of treatment contrary to Article 3, ECHR due to the risk of
         suicide and the lack of, or access to, treatment, including
         counselling, for his PTSD in Afghanistan".  However, the only
         reference to the legal threshold or principles in human rights
         cases in the section headed "Applicable Law" at [47] to [50] of the
         Decision is extremely general and does not focus on the health
         aspect.

     15. I accept of course that there is some potential read across from an
         outcome that internal relocation is "unduly harsh" in refugee law
         terms to the real risk of ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.
          However, taken in the context of what precedes [77] of the
         Decision, I am quite unable to read that paragraph as any intention
         by the Judge to allow the appeal purely on the basis of the
         Appellant's mental health condition.

     16. As I have already noted, the Decision, in the "Findings and
         Reasons" section up to and including [71] is concerned with the
         individual asylum claim which is found not to be credible.
         Thereafter, the Judge turned to consider the position on internal
         relocation to Kabul.  As I have noted above, Mr Spurling accepted
         that, since the Judge had found there not be a risk in the
         Appellant's home area (or perhaps more accurately not to have
         reached any finding in that regard), internal relocation was not an
         issue.

     17. Having directed herself to this Tribunal's country guidance on the
         issue of internal relocation to Kabul in AS (Safety of Kabul)
         Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC) ("AS"), the Judge referred to
         the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines August 2018 which post-dated that
         guidance.  At the time of the hearing before Judge Steer and the
         Decision, the guidance in AS had been the subject of an appeal to
         the Court of Appeal. As the Judge noted at [74] of the Decision,
         the Court of Appeal had allowed the appeal but remitted on the
         basis that the Tribunal need consider only its conclusions on the
         security incidents in Kabul.  However, as the Judge noted that was
         "subject to the qualification that it was for the Upper Tribunal to
         consider whether, following the new 2018 UNHCR Guidelines on
         returns to Afghanistan, a reconsideration of its country guidance
         on a more extensive basis was required".  Having made reference to
         the Home Office's own policy guidance seeking to maintain the
         existing country guidance in AS pending the reconsideration, the
         Judge went on to say this at [76] of the Decision:

             "Whilst it is correct that AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG
             was not displaced by AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG, the
             findings in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG, however, were
             maintained in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG but were
             dealing with the specific concept of the risk of harm from
             indiscriminate violence and not the wider concept of the
             reasonableness of internal relocation, of which the security
             situation is only one factor in the exercise that is conducted
             to determine the reasonableness of internal relocation."

     18. That is then the basis on which the Judge proceeded at [77] to
         conclude that internal relocation would be unduly harsh and
         therefore that the Appellant is entitled to refugee status.
         Moreover, she did so on the basis of the UNHCR 2018 Guidelines.  As
         she indicated at [73] of the Decision, the tenor of those
         guidelines is that "internal relocation was not generally available
         in Kabul".

     19. Whilst I accept that the Judge's conclusion is largely based on the
         Appellant's mental health, therefore, I cannot accept that her
         reasoning is the same as it would be if that were the only issue.
         Since Mr Spurling accepted that internal relocation was not
         relevant based on the Judge's previous finding, the error is not
         simply a technical one based on the way in which the Judge has
         expressed herself but is an error in the approach taken which
         cannot therefore simply be read across to a finding that the
         Appellant would be at real risk of ill-treatment contrary to
         Article 3 on return to Afghanistan generally.

     20. Put another way, as the Respondent contends in her grounds, there
         is an inadequacy of reasons for reaching a conclusion that removal
         of the Appellant would breach his Article 3 (or Article 8) rights
         based solely on his mental health.  Nor indeed is there any
         discernible finding or conclusion to that effect. Whilst the
         Appellant may succeed based on the evidence as to his mental
         health, therefore, I am not confident that I can say that this
         would necessarily be the outcome.  For that reason, the errors
         which I have identified are material.

     21. I move on then to next steps.  Neither party suggested that this
         appeal needs to be remitted.  There is no error identified in the
         Judge's fact finding up to and including [71] of the Decision.
         There is therefore no need to revisit those findings.  I therefore
         preserve the Decision for the most part and I set aside only
         paragraphs [72] to [77] of the Decision. Whether or not internal
         relocation is said to be relevant based on the earlier findings,
         the Tribunal has now reconsidered the guidance in AS and that later
         guidance would have to be brought into account if it is relevant.

     22. Mr Spurling asked for the opportunity to file more evidence if that
         were thought to be appropriate.  As this appeal now centres mainly
         if not entirely on the Appellant's mental health and nine months
         have passed since the hearing and the medical evidence then relied
         upon, I agree that it would be of assistance to the Tribunal to
         have updated medical evidence, either by way of a further report or
         at the very least production of updated medical records.  Ms
         Everett did not object to that course.

     23. If there is to be more evidence, and also in light of the changing
         case-law, particularly in relation to health cases, it is also
         appropriate for there to be a resumed hearing so that oral
         submissions can be made and further oral evidence taken if that is
         thought to be necessary.

     24. I have therefore given directions below to the above effect.



DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S J Steer promulgated on 2 April
2020 involves the making of an error on a point of law but only in relation
to paragraphs [72] to [77] of the Decision and the outcome allowing the
appeal.  I therefore set aside those paragraphs and the allowing of the
appeal.  I preserve paragraphs [1] to [71] of the Decision.

I make the following directions for the resumed hearing:

 1. Within six weeks from the date when this decision is sent, the parties
    shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the other party any
    additional evidence on which they seek to rely at the resumed hearing.

 2. Within eight weeks from the date when this decision is sent, the
    parties shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the other party a
    skeleton argument identifying the legal issues which require to be
    determined and setting out (briefly) the applicable case law and
    statutory provisions relied upon.

 3. The resumed hearing will be relisted on the first available date after
    eight weeks from the date when this decision is sent for a hearing of �
    day.

 4. Unless either party files an objection in writing within 28 days from
    the date when this decision is sent, the resumed hearing will take
    place via Skype for Business. The parties are required to provide
    joining details for that hearing within 28 days from the date when this
    decision is sent for those who are to attend the hearing which may
    include the Appellant, his witnesses and legal representatives for both
    parties.

 5. If an interpreter is required for the hearing, the Appellant shall
    notify the Tribunal accordingly within 28 days from the date when this
    decision is sent.

 6. Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions  may  be
    sent by, or attached to, an  email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's
    reference number (found at the top of these directions) as the  subject
    line.  Attachments  must  not  exceed  15  MB.   This  address  is  not
    generally available for the filing of documents which  should  continue
    to be sent by post.

 7. Service on the Secretary  of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  on  the
    Appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction, by  use  of  any
    address apparent from the service of these directions.

 8. The parties have liberty to apply to the Tribunal for further
    directions or variation of the above directions, giving reasons if they
    face significant difficulties in complying.


Signed: L K Smith
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated: 10 December 2020
