

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/01264/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 August 2017                       |      On 30 October 2017            |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR SAMER IGHERIA
                       (ANOMYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy         (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Frantzis    (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal,
brought with the permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal") made after
a hearing of 29 March 2017, whereupon it allowed the claimant's appeal from
a decision of the Secretary of State of  8 September 2015,  to  refuse  to
grant him asylum or any other form of international protection.

2.    The claimant, who was born  on  1 January 1977,  is  a  national  of
Afghanistan.  It is not in dispute that he is from  a  part  of  Afghanistan
called Wardak.  In seeking asylum he said that he was at risk at  the  hands
of the Taliban because he had previously worked for the American Forces  as
a labourer.  He claimed to be  a  Shi'a Muslim.   The  Secretary  of  State
refused the application because it was not believed that  he  had  attracted
the adverse attention of the Taliban and that, put simply, he  had  made  up
his claim to be at such risk. The respondent, at that stage, took  the  view
that he could safely return to Wardak but that, if  that  were  not  so,  he
would be able to internally relocate to Kabul.  So, protection was  refused.


3.    Matters did not, by any means, stop there.  The claimant appealed  and
his appeal was heard on 26 May 2016 by Judge Mensah.  She too disbelieved
him about his being at risk at the hands of the Taliban.  But she  was  also
faced with an argument that he would be at real  risk  of  serious  harm  in
consequence of a serious and individual threat to  his  life  or  person  by
reason of indiscriminate violence in a situation of internal armed  conflict
(Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive).   She  concluded  that  he
would not face such a risk relying, at least in part for her conclusions  as
to  that,  upon  the  well  known   country guidance   decision   of   the
Upper Tribunal of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC).
There  followed  an  application   for   permission   to   appeal   to   the
Upper Tribunal.  That application  was  granted  and  after  a  hearing  of
10 August 2016 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral set aside the decision of
Judge Mensah on the basis that, as was conceded before her, there had  been
a material error of law through failing to consider  an  expert  report  and
failing to adequately consider background country material relevant  to  the
Article 15(c) arguments.  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral  decided  to
remit the case to  the  First-tier Tribunal  so  that  arguments  could  be
considered and findings could be made  regarding  the  Article 15(c)  issue
only.  The findings of fact relating to  Judge Mensah's  disbelief  of  the
claimant's expressed fear of the Taliban were preserved.   It  was  on  that
basis that the matter came before the tribunal on 29 March 2017.

4.    It is apparent from the tribunal's  determination  of  30 March 2017
that argument focused upon whether or not there had been a  material  change
in conditions in Kabul such that the claimant would face  an  Article 15(c)
risk there.  In looking at  what  is  said  from  paragraphs 27-29  of  the
determination it does not appear that it was argued before  the Judge  that
the claimant could, in fact, safely return to  Wardak.   So  the  focus  was
upon Kabul.  In that context it was contended  on  behalf  of  the  claimant
that there had been a change in conditions in Kabul,  said  to  be  properly
evidenced, and which justified departure from what  had  been  said  in  the
country guidance case of AK, cited above.  Pausing there, it had been  said
that conditions in Kabul did  not,  in  general  terms,  make  return  there
unsafe or unreasonable and that there was not, in Afghanistan, such  a  high
level of indiscriminate violence as to establish the Article 15(c) risk.

5.    The tribunal was provided with extensive  written  material  regarding
conditions in Kabul.  There  was  a  report  of  16 May 2016  prepared  by
Dr. Antonio Giustozzi along with an addendum to that report, a Human Rights
Watch Report of 12 October 2016, an Office  of  the  United  Nations  High
Commissioner  for  Human  Rights/United  Nations   Assistance   Mission   in
Afghanistan Report of 6 February 2017 and various other materials.  Having
considered the written material and having heard the oral  submissions,  the
tribunal concluded that it should depart from country guidance  in  AK  and
that the claimant would face an Article 15(c) risk in Kabul which  was  the
part of Afghanistan to which he would be returned.

6.    The Secretary of State applied for and obtained permission to  appeal.
 The grounds, in summary, contended that  the tribunal  had  erred  through
conducting  an  insufficient  analysis  of  the  evidence;  through   giving
inadequate reasons  for  its  decision  to  depart  from  country guidance;
through  conducting  an  inadequate  scrutiny  of  Dr. Giustozzi's  report;
through misunderstanding the evidence such that it treated  certain  figures
in the information before it as relating to  deaths  rather  than  injuries;
and through basing its ultimate conclusions as to risk  upon  an  inadequate
number of civilian deaths. There is a degree  of  overlap  with  respect  to
certain of those grounds.   The  subsequent  grant  of  permission  was  not
limited.  I have not, as yet, set out the tribunal's reasoning  but  I  will
do, below, during the course of my consideration of the grounds.

7.    Permission having been granted the matter was  listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that consideration could be  given
to  the  question  of  whether  or  not  the  tribunal  had  erred  in  law.
Representation at that hearing was as stated above  and  I  am  grateful  to
each representative.  At the hearing Mr Duffy confirmed he would rely  upon
the written grounds and accepted that the focus should be on the  tribunal's
reasoning in relation to Kabul.  He observed that it  was  accepted  by  the
Secretary of State that "there is flux outside Kabul".  He also, at a  later
point in the hearing, acknowledged that the  tribunal  had  directed  itself
appropriately   as   to   when   it   was   appropriate   to   depart   from
country guidance.  But he drew  attention  to  the  claimed  factual  error
regarding the figures for deaths and injuries and  asserted  that,  overall,
the tribunal's conclusions had simply not been correct.   Ms Frantzis,  for
her part, argued that the tribunal's determination was  comprehensive,  that
the  approach  to  when   it   might   be   appropriate   to   depart   from
country guidance had been "impeccable" and that the  tribunal's  conclusion
had been open to it on the material before it.

8.    To be clear, though, I did not understand Ms Frantzis to be  inviting
me to actually adjudicate for  myself  upon  and  make  findings  about  the
question of the existence or otherwise of an Article 15(c)  risk  in  Kabul
or, for that matter,  in  any  part  of  Afghanistan.   The  thrust  of  her
submissions was that,  whatever  anyone  else's  view  might  be  (including
mine),  the  tribunal  had  followed  the  correct  approach,  had   reached
conclusions open to it and had not erred in law in the processes  which  had
led it to arrive at its conclusions.

9.    The tribunal's determination is certainly a  thorough  one.   It  has
been prepared with evident care.  Having set out the relevant law  and  case
law regarding Article 15(c) the tribunal reminded itself (it  quoted  from
the headnote) what had been said in AK.  Then, in  a  section  running  from
paragraph 10-13 of its determination it set out the considerations  it  was
required to have regard to  in  deciding  whether  or  not  to  depart  from
country guidance.  As to that, it said:

      "     10.  I am being  asked  to  depart  from  the  Country Guidance
      contained in AK and, therefore, it is relevant to set out the terms of
      Practice Direction 12.2 and 12.4.:

                 12.2  A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or
           IAT  bearing  the  letters  'CG'  shall   be   treated   as   an
           authoritative finding on the country guidance  issue  identified
           in the determination, based upon the evidence before the members
           of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that determine  the  appeal.
           As a result, unless it has been expressly superseded or replaced
           by any later 'CG' determination, or is inconsistent  with  other
           authority that is  binding  on  the  Tribunal,  such  a  country
           guidance case is authority in any subsequent appeal  so  far  as
           that appeal:-

                       (a)    relates  to  the  country  guidance  issue  in
           question; and

                       (b)   depends upon the same or similar evidence.

                 12.4  Because of the principle that like  cases  should  be
           treated  in  like  manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a   clear,
           apparently applicable country guidance case or to  show  why  it
           does not apply to the case in question is likely to be  regarded
           as grounds for appeal on a point of law.

            11.  In  the  Upper Tribunal  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber
      Guidance Note 2011 No 2, at paragraph 11, it is stated:

                 If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to  the  issue
           that has not been considered in the country guidance case or, if
           a subsequent case includes further issues  that  have  not  been
           considered in the CG case, the judge will reach the  appropriate
           conclusion on the evidence, taking into account  the  conclusion
           in the CG case so far as it remains relevant.

            And at paragraph 12:

                 Where country guidance has become  outdated  by  reason  of
           developments in the country in question, it is anticipated  that
           a judge of the First-tier Tribunal will have such credible fresh
           evidence as envisaged in paragraph 11 above.

            12.  In the case of SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 the Court of Appeal held:

                 '     46.   The system of Country Guidance  determinations
           enables appropriate resources, in terms of the re  presentations
           of the parties  to  the  Country Guidance  appeal,  expert  and
           factual evidence and the personnel and time of the Tribunal,  to
           be applied to the determination of conditions in, and  therefore
           the risks of return for persons such as the  appellants  in  the
           Country Guidance appeal  to,  the  country  in  question.   The
           procedure is aimed at arriving at a reliable (in  the  sense  of
           accurate) determination.

                       47.   It  is  for  these  reasons,  as  well  as  the
           desirability  of   consistency,   that   decision makers   and
           tribunal judges  are  required  to   take   Country Guidance
           determinations into account, and  to  follow  them  unless  very
           strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence,  are   adduced
           justifying their not doing so.'

            13.  EM and  others  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]  UKUT 98
provides that:

                 '     71.   The proposition that a  country guidance  case
           should provide the 'starting point' for a subsequent  case  that
           relates to  the  country guidance  issue  is  inherent  in  the
           Practice Direction  (and  its  AIT  predecessor).   Where  the
           subsequent case is being 'set down to  review  existing  country
           guidance' or not,  the  effect  of  Practice Direction 12  and
           section 107(3)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
           Act 2002 is to require the existing country guidance case to be
           authoritative,  to  the  extent   that   the   requirements   in
           Practice Direction 12.2(a) and (b) are met.  This is fully  in
           accord with what the House of Lords (per  Lord Brown)  held  in
           R (Hoxha) v Special Adjudicator [2005] UKHL 19.  If the existing
           country guidance is such as to favour appellants (to a  greater
           or lesser extent), it will in practice be for the respondent  to
           adduce before a  subsequent  Tribunal  'sufficient  material  to
           satisfy them' that the position has changed' (Paragraph 66)'.

                       72.   ...  We recognise that  the  country guidance
           system has limitations if extant decisions become  out of date
           and not based on relevant  assessments  a  close  as  reasonably
           practicable to the  date  of  the  decision.   The  solution  is
           two fold.  First, in individual appeals where  there  is  fresh
           material not available at the time of the country guidance  the
           Immigration Judge  will  be  entitled  to  depart   from   the
           country guidance in the  particular case on the basis that  the
           guidance was either not directed to the particular issue in  the
           subsequent appeals, or the factual assessment  in  the  guidance
           case has now to be updated in the light of relevant cogent fresh
           information.  Second, it is for the Tribunal to identify appeals
           as suitable for  fresh  country guidance  where  a  fundamental
           review of all relevant material  should  be  undertaken  to  see
           whether the situation has changed.  The observations in TK  were
           directed to the first class, rather than  setting  a  test  for
           departure  from  country guidance  in  all  circumstances.   We
           nevertheless recognise that  where  a  previous  assessment  has
           resulted in the conclusion  that  the  population  generally  or
           certain sections of it may be at risk, any assessment  that  the
           material circumstances have changed would  need  to  demonstrate
           that  such  changes  are  well  established   evidentially   and
           durable.  ...'

10.   Before me, Mr Duffy did not contend that the tribunal  had  erred  in
looking at the above matters and cases for guidance.  Indeed,  he  expressly
acknowledged that the Judge had "looked at guidance  and  directed  himself
appropriately".  That comment was made to me in  the  context  of  departure
from country guidance.  There was no contention  in  the  written  grounds,
notwithstanding the  various  other  points  made,  that  the  tribunal  had
misdirected itself in this regard.  Indeed, for  myself  I  would  take  the
view that the tribunal meticulously considered the material  which  informed
it as to when it might be appropriate to depart from  country guidance.   I
also note that at paragraph 49 of the determination the Judge summed up the
position by saying:

      "     49.  The test I must apply is, are there  very  strong  grounds,
      supported by cogent evidence, of change which is well established  and
      durable?"

11.   No challenge has been made to that  summary  either.   I  cannot,  for
myself, detect any fault in it.

12.   Having considered where the country guidance might be departed  from,
a consideration which I find to be free of legal error,  the  tribunal  then
set out certain points which had been made by the parties  at  the  hearing.
It then turned to the current evidence informing  as  to  the  situation  in
Kabul, which had been placed before it.  That  included  the  expert  report
and its addendum as well as various other material  some  of  which  I  have
already referred to.  I have  hesitated  before  setting  out  all  of  what
the tribunal had to say in this regard but  I  have  done  so,  not  least,
because it is illustrative of its care and attention to detail.  As  to  the
evidence it said this:

      "The Current Evidence

            30.  I am referred by  Miss Frantzis  to  the  European  Asylum
      Support Office Country  of  Origin  Information  Report:   Afghanistan
      Security Situation [2.  Regional description of the security situation
      in Afghanistan - 2.1. Centre] dated 9 November 2016.  Particularly I
      consider paragraph 2.1.1. 'Kabul City' (bundle A2), the most relevant
      section of which reads (my emphasis):

                 Recent security trends

                 From 1 September 2015 to 31 May 2016, Kabul City counted
           151  security  incidents.   The  following  table  provides   an
           overview of the nature of the security incidents ([251]):

                       Violence targeting individuals          21

                       Armed confrontations and air strikes          18

                       Explosions                         50

                       Security enforcement                    31

                       Non-conflict related incidents                28

                       Other incidents                      3

                       Total security incidents               151

                 The Austrian Centre  for  Country  of  Origin  and  Asylum
           Research and Documentation (ACCORD) compiled all major incidents
           that happened in Kabul for the last  few  years  ([252]).   Here
           follows a non-exhaustive listing of incidents for the  reporting
           period September 2015 to August 2016 according to this ACCORD-
           compilation and, where referenced  differently,  completed  with
           other sources.  In September 2015, a police officer was  killed
           by a MIED attached to his car.  The same month, the head of  the
           ALP in  Logar  was  shot.   In  October 2015,  at  least  seven
           policemen were injured in an attack on the adjacent houses of  a
           tribal elder and the former governor of  Helmand  ([253]).   One
           civilian was  killed  and  three  wounded  in  an  attack  on  a
           religious congregation site in the Chendawol area.  In the  same
           month, an attack on a restaurant was thwarted  by  the  security
           forces killing two suicide bombers.  A  convoy  of  UK  military
           vehicles was targeted with an IED causing seven victims but  not
           hitting the intended target.  In November 2015 a former diplomat
           and political analyst was shot.  In the same month, an  election
           commission official was  targeted  by  a  suicide  attack  which
           killed  a  security  guard   and   injured   his   driver.    In
           December 2015, a complex attack on an international  guesthouse
           near the Spanish embassy killed four Afghan  policemen  and  two
           Spanish guards and injured seven others.  A suicide  car  bomber
           targeted a convey of IMF near the airport but instead killed  at
           least one civilian.  At the start  of  2016,  a  suicide  bomber
           targeted the French restaurant, Le Jardin, killing  two  Afghan
           civilians, including a child, and injuring 18 more ([254]).  The
           next day a compound for foreign contractors near the airport was
           targeted with a truck bomb, killing one  civilian  and  wounding
           22.  A magnetic bomb was attached to a car in Wazir Abkar  Khan,
           and a driver  exploded  his  suicide  vest  when  stopped  at  a
           checkpoint near the airport but failed to detonate his car  bomb
           ([255]).  In January 2016,  a  minibus  carrying  personnel  of
           Tolo News TV station was targeted by a suicide bomber after the
           Taliban declared Tolo News a military target for reporting  the
           events in Kunduz in September 2015.  In this incident at  least
           seven people were killed and 25 injured.  In February 2016, the
           headquarters of the ANCOP were targeted  by  a  suicide  bomber,
           killing 20 police officers and injuring 29.  The  same  month,
           another suicide bomber targeted the Ministry of Defense, killing
           12 people and wounding eight others including  many  civilians.
           In  March 2016,  a  bomb  targeted  a  former  senator  in  the
           Panjshir Watt area, but instead killed a  man,  woman  and  two
           children, all pedestrians, and  wounded 15  ([256)].   Security
           forces thwarted an attack on the house of the head  of  the  NDS
           and against the Ministry of Interior in May 2016  ([257]).   In
           April 2016, a magnetic bomb was  attached  to  a  bus  carrying
           Ministry of Education personnel, killing one person and wounding
           five ([258]).  On 19 April 2016, a  truck  bomb  exploded  and
           targeted a former NDS building housing a unit  tasked  with  the
           close protection of senior government officials and  VIPs.   The
           attack resulted in at least 68 dead and 347  wounded.   As  the
           explosion took place in a civilian area, next to a bus stop, the
           vast majority of the dead  and  wounded  were  civilians.   This
           attack recalls  in  magnitude  and  method  the  attack  in  the
           Shah Shahid neighbourhood in August 2015 (259]).  In May 2016,
           NDS shot a suicide bomber  before  he  could  reach  his  target
           ([260]).  A retired judge was gunned down in Kart-e Naw ([261]).
            In June 2016, an Afghan MP was killed in an explosion near his
           house ([262]).  In June 2016, 14 Nepali security  guards  were
           killed after a suicide bomber hit a minibus  in  Kabul  ([263]).
           In August 2016, AGEs conducted a  complex  attack  against  the
           American university  of  Kabul,  killing  13 people,  including
           students and a professor, and injuring dozens of others ([264]).



                 The most deadly attack happened on 23 July 2016, when two
           explosions targeted a demonstration by  members  of  the  mainly
           Shi'te Hazara minority in Kabul.  This attack  resulted  in  at
           least  80  dead  and  230  wounded.    Islamic State   claimed
           responsibility for the  attack.   This  was  one  of  the  worst
           attacks in many years in terms of casualties in Kabul ([265]).

                 In January 2016, the Italian embassy  was  targeted  by  a
           rocket and in  March 2016  three  rockets  were  fired  at  the
           Parliament building, both incidents without casualties  ([266]).
           During a visit of  US Secretary  of  State  in  April,  several
           rockets exploded outside the Presidential Palace and outside the
           US Embassy.  This attack led to no  casualties,  but  a  girls'
           school was hit ([267]).  Another girls' school was torched after
           the guard was killed in Kabul.  This  is  reportedly  the  first
           such incident in Kabul ([268]).

            31.  From a reading this litany of violence it becomes  apparent
      that many of  the  victims  are  from  the  security  forces  or  have
      connections with the authorities.  One exception to this is underlined
      in the above extract, being the targeting of Hazara,  which,  notably,
      is the appellant's ethnicity.

            32.  Paragraph 2.1.6 of the EASO Report  details  the  security
           situation in Wardak:

                 Recent security trends

                 From 1 September 2015 to 31 May 2016,  Wardak  Province
           counted 359 security incidents.  The following table provides an
           overview of the nature of the security incidents ([457]):

                       Violence targeting individuals          28

                       Armed confrontations and airstrikes          277

                       Explosions                         33

                       Security enforcement                    21

                       Non-conflict related incidents                  0

                       Other incidents                       0

                       Total security incidents               359

            33.  Miss Frantzis also draws my attention to three Radio  Free
      Europe reports (A1-87 & 89).

            34.   The  first  relates  to  an  incident  which  occurred  on
      7 February, 2017 when at  least  20 were  killed  and  48 wounded,
      including women and children in a suicide attack outside Afghanistan's
      Supreme Court building in Kabul.

            35.  The second describes two Taliban suicide bombers  attacking
      a District  Police  Headquarters  in  western Kabul  and  a  National
      Directorate of Security office on 1 March, 2017.  At least 16 people
      were killed and 40 wounded.  The report does not indicate the  number
      of civilian victims but I note that the targets are involved with  the
      security forces.

            36.  The third report is of more than 30 dead and 50 wounded in
      an attack on Kabul Military Hospital on 8 March, 2017.   Again,  the
      target is related to the security forces.

            37.  Miss Frantzis referred me to the  United  Nations  Report:
      The situation in Afghanistan and its  implications  for  international
      peace and security:  Report of the Secretary-General (March 2017):

                 '3.   The security  situation  continued  to  worsen,  with
           armed clashes between security forces and the Taliban reaching a
           record high in 2016 and  continuing at that pace in 2017.   High
           levels of violence against civilians continued to be recorded as
           a result,  with  a  significant  increase  in  casualties  among
           children  and  in  internal  displacements.   Service   delivery
           remained challenging given  the  difficult  security  situation.
           The economic situation remained fragile, with  persistently  low
           rates of economic growth and low investment rates.

                       ...

                       13.   The overall  security  situation  continued  to
           deteriorate throughout 2016 and into 2017.  The  United Nations
           recorded  23,712  security  incidents,  an  almost  5 per cent
           increase compared with 2015 and the highest number in  a  single
           year ever  recorded  by  UNAMA.   While  the  fighting  remained
           particularly  prevalent  in  the  five  southern   and   eastern
           provinces of Helmand, Nungarhar,  Kandahar,  Kunar  and  Ghazni,
           where 50 per cent of all incidents were recorded, the  conflict
           spread in geographical scope, with increasing Taliban activities
           in northern and north-eastern Afghanistan, as well as  in  Farah
           in the west.  The Taliban  continued  to  put  pressure  on  the
           Government's  control  of  the  provincial  capitals  of  Farah,
           Kunduz, Lashkar Gah, Helmand Province, and  Tirin  Kot,  Uruzgan
           Province.   International  and  Afghan  air  support   and   the
           deployment of Afghan special forces  remained  critical  to  the
           holding of these cities.  In late November, The Taliban captured
           the Ghorak district administrative centre of Kandahar  Province,
           bringing to 14 the total number of  districts  claimed  by  the
           Taliban to be under their control.  In addition, the control  of
           a number of districts has  been  contested,  with  some  reports
           claiming an increase in the percentage of Afghan territory under
           Taliban influence.  The fighting evolved further in character as
           the number of armed clashes between the Taliban  and  Government
           security forces increased by 22 per cent in 2016, accounting for
           63 per cent of all security incidents, the  majority  of  which
           were initiated by  the  Taliban.   Improvised  explosive  device
           attacks continued to decline in 2016, however, and were  25 per
           cent lower than during the previous year.

                       ...

                        23.    The  human rights  situation   deteriorated
           further in 2016 and into 2017, with the continued  growing  toll
           of the fighting on the civilian population.  On 6 February 2017,
           UNAMA released its annual report for 2016 on the  protection  of
           civilians  in  armed  conflict.    It   found   that   civilians
           increasingly  suffered  the  consequences  of  the  conflict  in
           Afghanistan, with the highest number of civilian casualties in a
           single year documented by UNAMA since  2009.   UNAMA  documented
           11,418 civilian casualties (3,498 dead  and  7,920  injured),  a
           3 per  cent  increase  compared  with  2015.  Conflict-related
           violence  also  destroyed  homes,  livelihoods   and   property,
           displaced  thousands  of  families  and  restricted  access   to
           education, health and other services throughout the year.  UNAMA
           attributed 61 per cent of  all  civilian  casualties  to  anti-
           government elements and 24 per cent to pro-government forces, of
           which 20 per cent was attributed to  Afghan  national  security
           forces, 2 per cent to international military forces and  2 per
           cent to pro-government armed groups.  Ground engagements between
           pro-government forces and anti-government elements remained  the
           leading cause  of  civilian  casualties,  accounting  for  4,295
           casualties (1,070 dead  and  3,225  injured),  followed  by  the
           detonation of improvised explosive devices, complex and  suicide
           attacks and targeted and deliberate killings.

                       24.   UNAMA has documented  an  increase  in  attacks
           carried   out   by   ISIL-KP   targeting   civilian   government
           administrations, tribal  elders  and  places  of  worship.   The
           mission attributed 899 civilian casualties (209  dead  and  690
           injured)  to  ISIL-KP  in  2016,  compared  with   82 civilian
           casualties (39 dead and 43 injured) in 2015.   The  majority  of
           these casualties resulted from a pattern of deliberate sectarian
           attacks against the minority  Shia Muslim  community.   ISIL-KP
           claimed responsibility for three separate attacks  on  23 July,
           11 October and 21 November 2016 that targeted members of  the
           community living in Kabul.

                         25.     Anti-government   elements   continued   to
           perpetrate  deliberate  attacks  targeting  civilian  government
           officials, including women, during  the  reporting  period.   On
           21 December, the Taliban claimed responsibility for  a  complex
           attack against the home of a member of parliament in  Kabul,  in
           which eight civilians were killed and seven others were injured.
            In addition to the attack by anti-government  elements  on  the
           residence of the Governor of Kandahar Province on 10 January, on
           the same day, the parliamentary administration compound in Kabul
           was hit by a suicide  attack,  for  which  the  Taliban  claimed
           responsibility  and  in  which  34 civilians  were  killed  and
           75 others were injured.  On 7 February, 20 civilians were killed
           and at least 40 injured in a suicide attack outside the Supreme
           Court in Kabul.

                       ...

                         39.     The    humanitarian    situation    further
           deteriorated in 2016 and into 2017, with record numbers of  new,
           conflict-induced internal displacement, a  situation  compounded
           by the return of more than  620,000  refugees  and  undocumented
           Afghans from Pakistan.  The number of newly internally displaced
           persons in 2016 was recorded as 651,751 in 32 of  34  provinces,
           with more than 45 per cent of them displaced between October and
           December.  This is the highest number  of  internally  displaced
           persons recorded in the region,  with  220  districts  recording
           conflict-induced displacement and a 38 per cent overall increase
           compared with 2015.  To date in 2017, 12,863 persons  have  been
           newly displaced, with 17 of 34 provinces already recording  some
           level of forced  displacement.   The  United  Nations  and  non-
           governmental  organizations  provided  humanitarian  assistance,
           including cash, health services and supplies, shelter, food  and
           non-food items, to the displaced populations.

                       ...

                       52.    Afghanistan  continues  to  face  a  range  of
           complex challenges.  Worsening conflict has resulted  in  record
           levels of civilian casualties and internally displaced  persons.
           The  rising  numbers  of  returning  refugees  and  undocumented
           Afghans  has  put  further  strain  on   social   and   economic
           conditions.  The Government also continues to face both internal
           and external political  challenges.   Addressing  all  of  those
           challenges will continue to require the  determined  resolve  of
           the Government.  In that regard, a cohesive working relationship
           between the President and the Chief Executive will remain vital.



                       ...

                       57.   Civilians continue to pay  a  heavy  price  for
           the conflict.  UNAMA recorded the  highest  number  of  civilian
           casualties in a single year, partly as a  result  of  escalating
           ground engagements.  The rising number of  children  killed  and
           injured is  unacceptable.   I  call  upon  all  parties  to  the
           conflict to take urgent steps to halt the killing and maiming of
           civilians and stress the need for accountability for  violations
           of international humanitarian law and  human  rights  law.   The
           full implementation of the national civilian casualty prevention
           and mitigation policy is of  the  utmost  urgency.   Attacks  on
           health-care  facilities,  educational   facilities,   healthcare
           workers and educators must cease.'

            38.  There is before  me  the  United Nations  Office  for  the
      Coordination  of  Humanitarian  Affairs  Report  of  02/01/17.   I  am
      referred to pages 140, 141, 143 of bundle A1.  I have read but do not
      set out all the references.   However,  the  first  paragraph  of  the
      'Humanitarian  Needs  Summary'  at   page 140  appears  particularly
      relevant.

                 Afghanistan remains one of the  most  dangerous,  and  most
           violent,  crisis  ridden  countries  in  the  world.   [1]  The
           continued deepening and geographic spread of  the  conflict  has
           prompted a 13% increase in the  number  of  people  in  need  of
           humanitarian assistance in 2017, now 9.3 million.  Violations of
           International Humanitarian Law (IHL) and Human Rights Law  (HRL)
           occur  regularly  -   including,   targeted   killings,   forced
           recruitment [2]  and attacks on health and education facilities.
            [3]  The 8,397 civilian casualties in the first nine months of
           2016 is the highest recorded and  included  a  15%  increase  in
           child casualties compared to 2015.  [4]  In  2016  increasingly
           frequent ground engagements continued to be the  main  cause  of
           civilian  casualties,  [5]  while  also  limiting  freedom  of
           movement for civilians and contaminating  areas  with  explosive
           remnants of war (ERW) which disproportionally  affect  children.
           [6]  Health  partners  reported  57,346  weapon  wounded  cases
           between January and September alone, compared to 19,749 in 2011,
           representing almost a three-fold increase.  [7].

            39.  Of particular  interest  is  the  European  Asylum  Support
      Office:  The implementation of Article 15(c) QD in EU Member  States.
      I note the report is dated July 2015.  It  considers  the  issues  in
      respect of Afghanistan [A1 69, 70].

                 Indiscriminate violence

                  In  order  to  assess  level  of   violence   and/or   its
          indiscriminate  nature,  following   indicators   are   considered
          particularly relevant in the case of Afghanistan10:

             . Government presence, including security forces, and  control
               over the territory;

             . Accessibility of an area, including road security and access
               to airports;

             . The  impact of  the  violence  on  the  daily  life  of  the
               population, including  indirect  effects,  such  as  limited
               access to health care and education and/or  restrictions  on
               women's participation in public life (on the condition  that
               the indiscriminate violence was  the  effective  cause  that
               triggered them).

                 Long-lasting effects of  decades  of  war  in  Afghanistan,
          hampered economic development and living standards and  consequent
          negative outlook  or  prospect  for  the  future  are  taken  into
          consideration as well, especially in comparison with situations in
          other parts of the world (e.g. Iraq and Syria).

                 Some Member States  (MS)  compare  the  level  of  violence
          and/or its indiscriminate nature with previous periods and/or with
          other regions or provinces in Afghanistan.   Thus,  provincial  or
          district capitals, especially  some  main  urban  centres  (Kabul,
          Mazar-e Sharif, Hirat Ghazni) are usually considered to  be  safer
          than other areas.  However, it has to be noted,  that  areas  with
          less security incidents can also reflect a retreat or  absence  of
          security forces.

                 Serious and individual threat

                 In March 2015, two MS assessed the level  of  violence  as
          sufficiently high for a civilian to face a real  risk  of  serious
          harm solely by being present  in  the  territory  of  Afghanistan.
          Eight MS consider that this is the case in certain  most  volatile
          regions, provinces or districts in Afghanistan only.  For  six  MS
          the level of violence was nowhere in Afghanistan sufficiently high
          for  such  conclusion,  two  of  them  clarifying  that  only   an
          exceptional situation would qualify for  this,  meaning  the  most
          extreme situation of violence.  Elements leading to the conclusion
          that such threshold was not met include:

             . armed conflict not being durable and widespread;

             . incidents happening with low frequency; occasional fighting;

             . government or groups controlling the territory in a  durable
               way;

             . the violence being  more  concentrated  in  areas  and  more
               targeted (such  as  on  troops,  supporters  of  government,
               foreigners,  etc.)  and  not  very  indiscriminate  in   its
               intention;

             . number of victims and IDPs not being so  high,  compared  to
               other conflicts (e.g.  Iraq and Syria).

            40.  I have been referred by Miss Frantzis to other  background
      evidence which I have read and  taken  into  account  in  reaching  my
      decision in this appeal.  I set out the references below but have  not
      set out the texts because, largely, they repeat  other  incidents  and
      statistics which I have included in this  decision.   Page  references
      are to the appellant's bundle marked A1.

                 Amnesty International's Report of 22/02/17 [91, 92, 93];

                 South Asia Intelligence Review of 13/02/17 [98, 99];

                 Office of the UN High Commissioner for  Human  Rights/UNAMA
          Report of 06/02/17 [104, 105, 108, 109, 124];

            41.  Miss Frantzis, directed me to the evidence of  Dr Antonio
      Giustozzi in his report of 16 May 2016 which provided as follows:

            Of Wardak:

                  'The  situation  changed  in  part  due  to  the  fall  of
          neighbouring Ghazni province under the influence  of  the  Taliban
          and in part due to t he appointment  of  a  very  ineffective  and
          abusive chief of police in Wardak.'  (paragraph 4, page 15 A1)

                 '[There were 378 reported insurgent attacks  in  Wardak  in
          2012 ... in 2013  429 insurgent attacks took place, a 12% increase
          on 2012.  In 2014 the level of insurgent violence did not  change,
          whilst in 2015  470 attacks took place, a  9.6%  increase  on  the
          previous year'  (paragraph 4, page 16 A1)

            Speaking generally, Dr Giustozzi wrote

                 'In 2015, 18,958 insurgent attacks took place, another  14%
          increase that took Taliban violence at  its  highest  level  ever'
          (paragraph 14, page 22 A1)

                 'It is clear that violence  has  been  intensifying  during
          the autumn of 2015'  (paragraph 15,     page 25 A1)

            Of Kabul City:

                 'In general violence reached a new high in Kabul  in  2014.
          By the autumn of 2014,  the  level    of  violence  in  Kabul  had
          reached such levels that the cit Chief of  Police  was  forced  to
          resign'  (paragraph 22, page 30 A1)

                 'Between August 2015 and January 2016  an  escalation  of
          terrorist attacks in Kabul has taken place"  (paragraph 23,  page
          30 A1)

                 'A letter has been sent  to  all  the  relevant  embassies,
          saying that the Afghan will no longer accept deportees as it falls
          outside the scope of the Memorandum  of  Understanding  since  the
          Kabul internal flight alternative is not viable as a  genuine  and
          safe alternative'  (paragraph 24, page 30 A1)

                 'Finding accommodation in  the  central  neighbourhoods  of
          Kabul will b  e,  however,  difficult  and  probably  forbiddingly
          expensive' (paragraph 25, page 31 A1)

                 'Earning a living whilst staying out of danger would  be  a
          major challenge for Mr Igheria'  (paragraph 26, page 31 A1)

             42.   Dr Giustozzi  has  provided  an  updated  report  dated
      24 October 2016.  His conclusions in respect of  Wardak  appears  at
      paragraph 4 [43-44 A1].

                       4.    Maps 1 and 2 show the situation in  Wardak  in
           terms of violence and Taliban control as  of  mid-2016.   During
           the first three  quarters  of  2016,  the  number  of  insurgent
           attacks remained almost unchanged at 14,628 (vs 14,646  in  the
           same period of 2015).

            43.  In respect of Kabul he reports at  paragraphs 9-10.

                       9.    The Taliban have continued using large  amounts
           of explosive in attacks in Kabul after May 2016.  In August they
           targeted a hotel used by  contractors,  and  in  September  they
           attacked the Ministry of Defence.   In  both  cases  there  were
           heavy collateral casualties among bystanders.

                       10.   The level  of  violence  so  far  in  2016  has
           remained very close to the record levels of 2015.  According  to
           UNAMA, 2562 civilians were killed and 5835  injured  because  of
           the conflict in January - September 2016, vs  2681  killed  and
           5805 injured during  the  same  period  of  2015.   61%  of  all
           civilian casualties were caused by insurgents, while  government
           forces were responsible for 23%.  The remaining casualties could
           not be attributed to either side in the conflict.

13.   Having carried out that quite exhaustive survey of  the  evidence  the
tribunal then set out its reasoning as to its ultimate conclusions  in  this
way:

      "Findings and Reasons

            44.  In determining this appeal I have carefully considered  all
      the evidence and the submissions on behalf of both parties  If I  have
      not  specifically  mentioned  a  document,  certain  evidence   or   a
      particular submission in this decision I does  not  mean  I  have  not
      considered it and given it appropriate weight in reaching my decision.



            45.  The appellant claim to be  at  real  risk  of  serious  and
      individual threat by reason of indiscriminate violence  on  return  to
      Afghanistan.  I find that this must not be looked at in the  light  of
      his personal  characteristics.   As  stated  above  in  HM  the  legal
      principles include the following:

                 (c)   It is concerned with  'threat ...  to  a  civilian's
                 life  or  person'  rather  than   to   specific   acts   of
                 violence ... the threat is inherent in a general situation
                 of ... armed conflict ...  The violence that gives rise to
                 the threat is described as  indiscriminate,  a  term  which
                 implies that it may extend to people irrespective of  their
                 personal circumstances (Elgafaji [34]).

            46.  I must consider whether there is a  real  risk  of  serious
      harm to the appellant from indiscriminate violence simply by him being
      present in Afghanistan.

            47.  The current country  guidance  case  of  AK  finds  that  a
      situation sufficient  to  trigger  Article 15(c)  did  not  exist  in
      Afghanistan when the case was decided in 2012.

            48.  A distinction has been drawn in  this  appeal  between  the
      risk to the appellant in his home province of  Wardak  and  in  Kabul.
      Unfortunately, in AK the situation in Wardak was  not  considered  but
      the situation in Kabul was considered.  In my  consideration  below  I
      will also only consider Kabul.  It is  apparent  from  the  background
      evidence and it is generally accepted that the situation  in  most  of
      the provinces around Kabul (and Wardak, is adjacent to the south-west)
      is worse than in the capital.

            49.  The test I must apply is, are there  very  strong  grounds,
      supported by cogent evidence, of change which is well established  and
      durable?

             50.   I  find  that  Miss Frantzis  has  provided  me  with  a
      considerable volume of background evidence which I find to be reliable
      and authoritative.   The  background  evidence  is  supported  by  the
      helpful  reports  of  Dr Giustozzi.   I  rely  on  his  opinions  and
      statements.  I find the evidence, especially when treated as a  whole,
      to be cogent.

            51.  This evidence is  consistent  throughout  the  sources  and
      each gives a clear picture of increasing violence  since  2012.   That
      violence has been at a particularly  high  level  in  2015  and  2016.
      Thus, it follows that I am able to find that there is change  for  the
      worse and so that part of the test is met.

            52.  I find that because of the high  levels  of  violence  over
      the last two years and the  indication  in  the  evidence  that  those
      levels will be maintained or exceeded in 2017 I am able to  find  that
      the change is durable.

            53.  The only element of the test that has not yet been  met  is
      whether the levels of violence are sufficiently serious such that,  if
      present there, the appellant would be at real  risk  of  serious  harm
      from indiscriminate violence.

            54.  In AK it is noted that the number  of  civilian  deaths  in
      Kabul in 2011 was 71.  Miss Frantzis has  drawn  my  attention,  (the
      details are above), to two incidents in Kabul this month (March 2017)
      which have killed 46 and an incident  at  the  beginning  of  February
      which killed a further 20.   Regrettably, it is safe to say  the  2017
      figure of 71 will be well exceeded.

            55.  In avoiding  counting  security  and  government  personnel
      casualties and looking only at civilian casualties I note the  report,
      Afghanistan:  Protection  of  Civilians  in  Armed  Conflict:   Annual
      Report 2016 [Executive Summary; I. Human Rights Protection in Conflict-
      Affected  Areas].   It  is  up  to  date,  having  been  published  on
      6 February 2017.  There are two tables and text  which  I  reproduce
      below and can be found in the appellant's bundle [A1 105, 113]:

                 Civilian Deaths and Injuries
                 January to December 2009 - 2016

                       2009: 5969
                       2010: 7162
                       2011: 7842
                       2012: 7590
                       2013: 8638
                       2014: 10535
                       2015: 11034
                       2016: 11418

                 Civilian casualties  increased  in  five  of  Afghanistan's
           eight regions in 2016.  The armed  conflict  most  affected  the
           southern region, which recorded 2,989 civilian casualties (1,056
           deaths and 1,933 injured), a 17 per cent increase  compared  to
           2015.  [11]  The central region  recorded  the  second  highest
           number of civilian casualties - 2,348 civilian  casualties  (534
           deaths and 1,814 injured) - an increase of 34 per cent compared
           to 2015 due to  suicide  and  complex  attacks  in  Kabul  city.
           [12]  The  north-eastern  and  eastern  regions  experienced  a
           decline  in  civilian   casualties;   however,   both   recorded
           significant numbers - 1,595 civilian casualties (433 deaths  and
           1,162  injured)  in  the  eastern  region  and  1,270   civilian
           casualties (382 deaths and 888  injured)  in  the  north-eastern
           region.  [13]  UNAMA documented 1,362 civilian casualties  (384
           deaths and 978  injured)  in  the  northern  region,  [14]  903
           civilian casualties (340 deaths and 563 injured) in  the  south-
           eastern region, [15]  836 civilian casualties (344  deaths  and
           492 injured) in  the  western  region  [16]  and  115  civilian
           casualties (25 deaths and 90 injured) in the  central  highlands
           region.  [17]

|Women Deaths and Injuries      |                   |
|January to December 2009 - 2016|                   |
|                               |                   |
|                               |2013               |
|2009                           |Deaths:  236       |
|Deaths:  133                   |Injuries:  514     |
|Injuries:  152                 |Total:  750        |
|Total:  285                    |2014               |
|2010                           |Deaths:  298       |
|Deaths:  167                   |Injuries:  611     |
|Injuries:  202                 |Total:  909        |
|Total:  369                    |2015               |
|2011                           |Deaths:  334       |
|Deaths:  203                   |Injuries:  913     |
|Injuries:  247                 |Total:  1247       |
|Total:  450                    |2016               |
|2012                           |Deaths:  341       |
|Deaths:  196                   |Injuries:  877     |
|Injuries:  352                 |Total:  1218       |
|Total:  458                    |                   |

            56.  I find the above figures of  assistance  in  assessing  the
      proportionate increase in violence over the years 2011 (as this is the
      year for which statistics would be available for the Court in AK)  and
      2016 (being the last full year available to his Tribunal).

            57.  The relevant figures in the Civilian Deaths  table  are  in
      2011:  7842 and in 2016:  11,418.  I find this  to  be  a  substantial
      increase.

            58.  When compared with the civilian deaths I find the  violence
      suffered by women is, in my view, a better reflection of the level  of
      violence suffered by the civilian population, particularly in the male
      dominated society of Afghanistan.  Furthermore, I consider,  not  only
      the figures for deaths but for injuries because,  if  combined,  these
      better reflect the risk of 'serious harm'.

            59.  In 2011 the deaths and injuries  for  woman  totalled  450.
      In 2016 the figure was 1218, a threefold increase.   I  find  this  is
      particularly strong evidence of the seriousness of the situation  that
      prevails in Afghanistan.

            60.  Weighing  all  the  evidence  for  what  it  is  worth  and
      considering it cumulatively in the light of the challenges  to  it  by
      the respondent I find that the appellant has proved  to  the  required
      standard of reasonableness degree of likelihood that  if  returned  to
      Kabul, or any other area of Afghanistan, he will be at  real  risk  of
      suffering   serious   harm   is   defined   in   Article 15    (and
      Paragraph 339CA(iv) of Cmnd 6918).

            61.  I am satisfied that substantial  grounds  have  been  shown
      for believing that the appellant, if returned  to  Afghanistan,  would
      face a real risk of suffering serious harm and hence the appellant  is
      entitled to humanitarian protection under Paragraph 339C of Cmnd 6918.

14.   Having set out all of that I now return  to  the  written  grounds  of
appeal.  It seems to me  it  is  simply  unsustainable  to  argue  that  the
tribunal  erred  through  carrying  out  an  insufficient  analysis  of  the
evidence.  It has clearly read and indeed reproduced to some extent much  of
the written material which was before it.  It has then identified trends  in
the evidence  at  paragraphs 51  and 52  of  its  determination.   It  has
highlighted certain statistical  indicators  at  paragraph 55  and  it  has
explained its view that statistics concerning  violence  suffered  by  women
represent "a better reflection of the level  of  violence  suffered  by  the
civilian population", as opposed to non-civilians.  I am satisfied that  its
analysis was not, in any sense, insufficient or inadequate.

15.   Did the tribunal  provide  inadequate  reasons  for  its  decision  to
depart from country guidance?  It properly identified, as has already  been
stated, the test it had to apply.  After that  its  key  reasoning,  in  the
context of this ground of appeal, is to be found from paragraph 50  of  the
determination onwards.  In this context, I  remind  myself  that  I  am  not
asking myself whether I would  have  reached  the  same  view  on  the  same
material.  I am concerned with the tribunal's approach.  The  tribunal  said
it found the background country material provided to it to be "reliable  and
authoritative".  It does not appear that it had  been  put  to  it  that  it
should conclude otherwise.  Further, it seems  to  me  it  was  entitled  to
reach that view. It felt able to rely upon the opinion of Dr. Giustozzi and
at paragraph 50 it noted that (on my reading this is  a  reference  to  the
expert report and the background material when taken together) it found  the
evidence to be cogent.  It noted that the overall  evidence  was  consistent
in giving a picture of  increasing  violence  since  2012.   It  noted  high
levels of violence in 2015 and 2016.  It was open to the tribunal,  as  it
did at paragraph 52, to project that there would be levels of  violence  in
2017 which would be at the same or a greater level  than  had  gone  before.
All of that led to the tribunal concluding that  there  had  been  a  change
which was "durable".  The tribunal then went  on  to  explain  why,  in  its
view,  figures  demonstrating  increased  deaths  and  injuries  meant   the
15c threshold in Kabul had now been reached.  In light of  all  of  that  I
cannot say that the tribunal's reasons as to why it was departing  from  the
country guidance in AK , even though some or perhaps many may disagree, was
legally inadequate.

16.   There is then the discrete challenge to the tribunal's  assessment  of
Dr. Giustozzi's evidence.  Again, that is said to be  inadequate.  But  the
tribunal pointed  out  at  paragraph 24  of  its  determination  that  that
evidence had not been challenged.  I take that to be a  reference  to  there
being a lack of any  challenge  to  the  expert  evidence  at  the  tribunal
hearing.  Perhaps  the  lack  of  challenge,  of  itself,  might  have  been
sufficient for the tribunal to accept the views  contained  in  the  report.
But the tribunal's consideration of the  expert  evidence  went  further  in
that it set out certain  of  what  the  expert  had  to  say  at  a  passage
commencing at paragraph 40 of the determination and it noted, as I read it,
that there was consistency between the  expert  evidence  provided  and  the
background  country material  (see   paragraphs 50   and 51   of   the
determination).  In the circumstances I do not detect any error  of  law  in
the tribunal's treatment of Dr. Giustozzi's  evidence  and  I  specifically
conclude it has  not  been  shown  that  the  tribunal's  scrutiny  of  that
evidence was legally inadequate.

17.   So, that deals with three of the grounds.  I would  also  observe,  at
this stage, that I did not interpret anything Mr Duffy said before me as an
attempt to add to or support those particular grounds.  But that  cannot  be
said of the remaining two to which I now turn.

18.   It is well established that an error of fact can  sometimes  translate
into an error of law.  It was asserted  in  the  written  grounds  that  the
tribunal had made an error of fact in  that  it  had  treated  some  figures
which related to both civilian death and injury rates as  relating  only  to
civilian deaths.  The complaint relates to  the  content  of  paragraphs 55
and 57 of the determination.  Indeed, it  would  appear  that  whereas  the
tribunal said, at paragraph 57, that there had been 7,842  civilian  deaths
in Afghanistan in 2011 and 11,418 in 2016, the figures the tribunal had in
mind were cumulative ones being total figures for both civilian  deaths  and
civilian injuries for those years.  But the point the tribunal  was  seeking
to make, as is evident from what it had  to  say  at  paragraph 56  of  its
determination, was that the available figures demonstrated  an  increase  in
violence.  It seems to me that that conclusion is  untouched  or  unaffected
by the factual error which was made.  In any event,  civilian  injuries  are
relevant to the question of the existence or otherwise of an internal  armed
conflict as well as civilian deaths.  In my judgment this factual error,  if
it is to be characterised as such,  is  not  one  which  impacted  upon  the
tribunal's reasoning.  It does not translate into an error of law.

19.   The final ground is really  an  assertion  that  there  have  been  an
inadequate  number  of  deaths  (and  presumably  injuries)  to  justify   a
conclusion that there is an internal armed conflict or to justify  departure
from the country guidance.  But there are no set threshold figures for  any
of this and there is no specific applicable mathematical  formulae.   I  can
quite see that many differently constituted tribunals might have  reached  a
view that, most unfortunate as all of these  incidents  no  doubt  are,  the
number of civilian deaths and civilian injuries do  not  indicate  that  the
Article 15c threshold  has  been  reached.   But  I  cannot  see  that  the
tribunal's conclusion here was perverse or irrational.  Indeed, the  grounds
have never gone so far as to suggest so. The tribunal,  then,  was  entitled
to conclude as it did.

20.   In light of all of the above, therefore, I have reached  a  conclusion
that the tribunal did not err in law when it decided, on the  basis  of  the
particular material before it and the particular arguments presented to  it,
to depart from country guidance.  But it is also important to stress what I
am not  deciding.   This  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal  has  never  been
designated as a country guidance  case.  I  am  absolutely  not  giving  or
purporting to give new country guidance to any  extent  whatsoever.  I  have
not been invited to decide  that  previous  country guidance  was,  in  any
sense, wrong or has been overtaken by events.  I have only ever  been  asked
to decide whether in making its decision on the material  in  front  of  it,
the tribunal took a lawful approach. So, the mere fact that I  have  decided
it did not err in law does not mean I have concluded anything  beyond  that.
In particular, I have not decided that there has been  any  material  change
in Kabul or, indeed, elsewhere in Afghanistan since  AK  was  been  decided.
This decision of the Upper Tribunal,  therefore,  is  not  to  be  used  as
authority for and indeed is expressly  not  authority  for  the  proposition
that there has been a material change.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, that decision shall stand.


Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.  None  had  been  sought  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal and none was sought before me.

Signed:                           Date: 26 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed:                           Date: 26 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

