
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01913/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1st November 2018                      |On 30th November 2018             |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [M r]
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Sachdev (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tann (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Davies, promulgated on 23rd August 2018, following a hearing at
    Manchester Piccadilly on 17th August 2018.  In the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereby  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, applied for, and was granted, permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and was  born  on  23rd
    April 1989.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 25th January  2018,  refusing  his  claim  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection pursuant to  paragraph  339C  of  HC
    395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of the Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  worked  for  a  non-
    governmental organisation called "Noble Cause" in  Pakistan  from  2009
    onwards, before arriving in the United Kingdom on 22nd June 2012,  with
    valid leave as a Tier 4 student.  This Leave was subsequently curtailed
    on 16th June 2004, due  to  the  licence  of  the  college,  where  the
    Appellant was attending, being revoked.  The Appellant  then  submitted
    an EEA application which was withdrawn on 19th October  2015.   On  2nd
    May 2016 he was encountered and arrested, whereupon he  claimed  asylum
    whilst in detention on 4th May 2016.

 4. The Appellant maintained that as a result of the work he was doing  for
    Noble Cause he received threatening telephone calls from extremists  in
    April 2012.  On 15th May 2012 whilst working  home  from  work  he  was
    kidnapped by members of the Taliban,  and  held  for  four  hours,  and
    tortured.  The Appellant  then  received  threatening  calls  from  his
    kidnappers and on 25th May 2012, he went  to  stay  with  an  uncle  in
    Islamabad, for a week, and then a sister in Faisalabad.  He applied  to
    come to the UK as a student thereafter, and was  issued  with  a  visa,
    arriving on 22nd June 2012.

 5. All these matters  are  properly  recounted  by  Judge  Davies  in  his
    determination, when setting up the Respondent's case (see paragraphs 13
    to 18 of the determination).

The Judge's Finding

 6. At the hearing before Judge Davies, the Appellant was cross-examined by
    Mr Bilsland at some length, as  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.
    However, as the judge pointed out the Appellant was not  cross-examined
    about the treatment he claims to have received in Pakistan and nor  was
    there any cross-examination in relation to the report of the expert, Dr
    Mary Anderson, or the report of  the  country  expert,  which  directly
    relates to the  authenticity  of  the  documentation  produced  by  the
    Appellant (see paragraph 33 of the determination).

 7. The judge took into account the fact  that  there  was  a  medico-legal
    report and a country expert's report before  him  (paragraph  64).   He
    took into account the fact that the Appellant claimed asylum only after
    he was encountered as an overstayer (paragraph 65).   Nonetheless,  the
    judge found that the Appellant was a truthful witness, and, bearing  in
    mind the doctor who prepared the medico-legal report, it could  not  be
    said that the  Appellant  "could  have  fabricated  such  an  elaborate
    account of the circumstances in which he left Pakistan and why he fears
    returning to Pakistan" (paragraph 66).

 8. Applying the lower standard in asylum claims,  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    provide adequate reasons for his analysis in resolving the conflicts in
    the Appellant's evidence.  For example  paragraphs  30  to  34  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter (which had raised several credibility issues
    with respect to the Appellant's claimed employment with the NGO by  the
    name of "Noble  Cause"),  given  that  this  NGO  had  not  started  in
    operation until eight years later on 20th April 2017, if one is  to  go
    by the date of incorporation.   Furthermore,  the  refusal  letter  had
    drawn attention to a range of credibility issues (see paragraphs 60  to
    83 of the refusal letter), which  were  simply  not  addressed  by  the
    judge.

10. On 17th September  2018,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Tribunal.  It was stated that "exactly why the Appellant's  account  is
    accepted and why the extra report resolves these issues"  where  regard
    is had to the seven credibility issues that were raised  at  paragraphs
    34 to 54 of the refusal letter.

11. Thereafter, a Rule 24 response was entered by  those  representing  the
    Appellant (of twelve paragraphs).

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 1st November 2018, Mr  Tann,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, relied upon the grounds of
    application.  He  submitted  that  there  were  two  essential  issues.
    First, the Appellant claimed to have worked for "Noble Cause"  an  NGO,
    which operated on a  charitable  basis,  but  which  had  not  been  so
    registered.  The evidence, however, showed that  this  NGO,  where  the
    Appellant claimed to have started employment in 2009, did not  actually
    come into existence until eight years later on 20th  April  2017,  when
    the NGO was actually incorporated.  To this, however, Miss Sachdev, who
    appeared for the Appellant, pointed out that there was a confusion here
    between the NGO by the name of "Noble Cause", and  another  NGO,  which
    had initially started off life in India, by the name  of  "Noble  Cause
    Foundation", and  it  is  the  latter,  which  the  refusal  letter  is
    confusing the reference to "Noble Cause" with.   This  is  because  the
    latter is the organisation with which the Appellant worked,  but  which
    has since ceased to  exist,  because  it  was  unregistered.   Mr  Tann
    submitted, that he was in no position to say whether this was right  or
    wrong, but he would simply rely upon the grounds  of  application,  and
    state that the Appellant had still not been able to show  that  he  had
    worked for an NGO at any point at all  during  his  time  in  Pakistan,
    prior to coming to the UK.

13. Second, Mr Tann submitted that, even  if  Miss  Sachdev  was  right  in
    relation  to  the  existence  of  "Noble   Cause"   as   a   charitable
    organisation, the fact still  remained  that  there  were  a  range  of
    credibility issues raised in the refusal letter from paragraphs  60  to
    83, which had simply not been addressed  by  the  judge.   It  was  not
    enough for him to say, that the Home Office Presenting  Officer  failed
    to cross-examine on these issues, and that being so, what the Appellant
    said, as supported by the medico-legal report, would be taken  at  face
    value.  That did not follow.  The concerns raised in the refusal letter
    were basic enough and serious enough to enable the judge  to  draw  his
    own conclusions without accepting at face value what the appellant  was
    saying.

14. For her part, Miss Sachdev, took me through the contents of the  expert
    reports, and submitted that if one looked  at  these  reports,  it  was
    plain that the judge had ample basis upon which to  allow  the  appeal.
    The judge had made it clear (at paragraph 12)  that  he  had  read  and
    evaluated all the evidence that was before the Respondent at  the  date
    of  the  decision  appealed  against,  together  with  the   additional
    evidence.  He had made it clear (at paragraph  33)  that  he  found  it
    "significant" that the cross-examination by  the  HOPO  did  not  raise
    questions in relation to Dr Mary Anderson's report for the Helen Bamber
    Foundation, or the country expert report, which directly related to the
    authenticity of the documents produced by  the  Appellant.   The  judge
    also found (at paragraph  69)  that  the  Presenting  Officer  made  no
    reference to the medico-legal report or the country expert report.  The
    judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant,  on  the  lower
    standard had satisfied the burden of proof that was upon him.

15. In addition, Miss Sachdev submitted that the  cross-examination  by  Mr
    Bilsland, the Presenting Officer on the day  of  the  hearing,  focused
    essentially on the Respondent's immigration history after  arriving  in
    the United Kingdom, and the judge expressly stated that the Appellant's
    credibility was not damaged as a result of such cross-examination  (see
    paragraph 64).  The plain fact was that there were no challenges to the
    medical or country expert reports (see paragraphs 43 to  51).   All  in
    all, therefore, this was nothing more than an attempt to  re-argue  the
    case.

16. In reply, Mr Tann submitted that the judge was not entitled  to  simply
    state that the medical expert report resolves the issues that he had to
    deal with.  The medico-legal report was simply supporting  the  account
    that the Appellant himself gave.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

18. First, there is the question of the Appellant  having  worked  for  the
    charity by the name of "Noble Cause".  There is a considerable lack  of
    clarity about this issue.  The expert report  by  Dr  Farhan  Wali,  of
    Bangor University, dated 16th March 2018, simply refers to there  being
    "limited operational history regarding the Noble Cause  because  it  no
    longer operates" and that one reason for this may  have  been  that  in
    2013 the Pakistani government passed a Regulation requiring all NGOs to
    get a  memorandum  of  understanding  from  the  Division  of  Economic
    Affairs, with the result that 131 NGOs  did  not  receive  approval  to
    operate and thus ceased operations.  Dr Farhan Wali states that,  "this
    may have happened to the  Noble  Cause  NGO".   Such  a  conclusion  is
    speculative, and required the judge to  come  to  a  firm  decision  in
    relation to its existence and the Appellant having worked for it.

19. This was because the history of the Appellant having  made  his  asylum
    claim is significant.  He arrived in the  UK  as  a  student,  had  the
    licence of his college withdrawn, made  an  EEA  application  which  he
    subsequently withdrew, and then was apprehended working, and only  when
    in detention did he then make an application for asylum.   The  expert,
    Dr Farhan Wali, ends his analysis of "Noble Cause" with  the  statement
    that, "During its alleged operation, the Noble Cause did  not  formally
    register its establishment with  the  Federal  Authority  of  Pakistan,
    which may have resulted in  this  determination".   This  statement  is
    problematic, which is not to say that Dr Farhan Wali is not speaking in
    the best way that he possibly could, because what it refers to is  "its
    alleged operation", in a way that raises a question mark as to  whether
    this charitable organisation ever existed in the first place, and  what
    its offices were.

20. The issue is important because in the refusal letter, the point is made
    that the Appellant's FIR states that the  incident  that  he  complains
    about occurred "near Kalamaki Lma Chowk at the  distance  of  1  to  1�
    kilometres towards south from police station".   However,  the  refusal
    letter states that the Noble Cause office is located in "Mianwali,  not
    Lahore, which  is  over  300  kilometres  away"  (paragraph  38).   The
    question is whether this is correct or not.  It was  incumbent  on  the
    judge to consider whether this was so, because  if  it  was  not,  then
    plainly the Appellant was not right in saying that he  had  worked  for
    Noble Cause in the way that he attested.

21. Second, and in any event, whether or not there was a confusion  between
    "Noble Cause" and another organisation by  the  name  of  "Noble  Cause
    Foundation", the fact  is  that  the  judge  does  not  deal  with  the
    credibility issues raised in the refusal letter.  The Appellant  stated
    that there  were  three  threatening  phone  calls  whilst  he  was  in
    Pakistan, and the judge does refer  to  this  as  the  case  being  put
    forward, when the Respondent described  the  contents  of  the  refusal
    letter (at paragraph 15).  However, what the refusal letter then states
    is that this was not credible, when the Appellant was  aware  that  his
    friend had received anonymous threats and was then killed  for  working
    for an NGO, and the Appellant clearly did not consider this a  hoax  as
    he reported this to the police and was told that they could not help as
    the call  was  anonymous  (paragraph  36).   When  there  is  a  second
    threatening phone call on 15th April 2012, the Appellant states that he
    ignored it and continued to work, but the refusal letter suggests  that
    this is inconsistent given that he carried on his employment  following
    the kidnapping of colleagues and the death of a  friend  due  to  their
    involvement with NGOs, and this was after claiming to have received two
    targeted threats due to his own involvement with NGOs (paragraph 37).

22. In the same way in relation to the FIR, the Appellant  states  that  he
    contacted his  father  after  being  tortured  and  he  was  taken  for
    treatment.  The FIR submitted  claims  had  been  registered  with  the
    medical report.  It was  not  considered  credible  that  whilst  being
    treated in the hospital, that within some seven hours of being admitted
    and still being treated, a report was produced that was able to support
    the FIR being registered at 8.25am.  This raises  an  issue  about  the
    authenticity of the FIR (paragraph 39).  I am  aware  that  the  expert
    evidence is to the effect that there is a document verification  report
    attesting to the authenticity of the FIR.  However, all  this  suggests
    is that the document was officially issued from an official source.  It
    does not necessarily mean that the contents of  the  FIR  are  actually
    authentic.

23. This was an issue raised  in  the  refusal  letter  itself.   When  the
    Appellant submitted a copy of the FIR, it was noted that  in  a  letter
    from his father, that this was  a  new  copy  of  the  FIR,  which  was
    obtained on 23rd October 2017, as the original FIR had some  "misprints
    and a clear attested copy would be required".  The FIR also stated that
    the father was the applicant and had reported the crime.  When asked in
    the asylum interview who filed the FIR, the Appellant said, "My  father
    took me to the hospital.  My  father  contacted  the  police  and  then
    police came to the hospital and took my statement".  The refusal letter
    states that this is inconsistent with the FIR  which  states  that  his
    father was the applicant and it was his account.   It  was  also  noted
    that the card was written by the Appellant's father.  However, half way
    through the FIR, the wording of the account  changes  to  first  person
    rather than the  third  person  narrative  as  the  report  began  (see
    paragraph 44).

24. Similarly, the Appellant's claim in relation to being kidnapped by  the
    Taliban, and then released after  only  four  hours,  was  held  to  be
    lacking  in  credibility,  because  the  Appellant  claimed  that   his
    colleagues, who had also been kidnapped at different  times,  had  been
    held for months, and it was not clear why the Appellant himself,  given
    his own involvement in the same way with charitable organisations,  was
    released so quickly.  When the matter was put to the Appellant he said,
    "I do not know that" (see paragraph 42 of the refusal letter).

25. That leaves the question  of  the  medico-legal  report.   The  refusal
    letter addresses Dr Anderson's assessment, and takes the view  that  it
    cannot be conclusive in its overall  findings  because  they  were  not
    typical of or diagnostic of the Appellant's  account  of  his  torture.
    Whilst weight was given to the report it did not outweigh all the other
    findings that were detailed in the refusal letter (paragraph 52).   The
    Appellant also is said in the medico-legal report to have not consulted
    his GP in the UK about the trauma he was suffering as a result  of  his
    torture, because he maintained that he was not aware that a GP in  this
    country would be able to offer any help.  However, this was  considered
    not to be credible because in Pakistan itself, the Appellant  had  gone
    to a private doctor who had come to his home to  assess  him,  and  had
    prescribed him with anti-depressants (see paragraph 53).

26. All in all, therefore, these were matters that needed  proper  probing,
    because they comprised the basis of the refusal in the decision of  the
    Respondent.  There is no engagement with these matters, and whilst  the
    shortcomings on the part of the Home Office Presenting Officer  on  the
    day of the hearing, cannot be laid at the door of the Tribunal,  it  is
    nevertheless incumbent upon the Tribunal to consider  the  reasons  why
    the Respondent Secretary of State objected to the claims raised by  the
    Appellant, and to give  reasons  for  why  those  objections  were  not
    sustainable.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal.  I remake the decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by a judge  other
than Judge M Davies, pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(a) of the  Procedure
Rules.

An anonymity order is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd November 2018

