
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01747/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On February 6, 2018                       |On February 9, 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                    [A J]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adebayo, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Ms Swareldhab


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity order.

 2. The appellant is a Kuwaiti national.  He  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely on November 17, 2015 and claimed asylum the same day.

 3. The respondent refused his protection claim on February 11, 2016  under
    paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal
    on  February  22,  2016  under  Section  82(1)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His appeal came before Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Sharkett (hereinafter called "the Judge") on  April
    4, 2017 and in a decision promulgated on May 4, 2017 the Judge  refused
    the appeal on all grounds. The appellant appealed this decision on  May
    17, 2017. Permission to appeal was  granted  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Gibb on September 1, 2017 and on  December  6,  2017  I  heard
    submissions on whether there was an error in law.

 4. I agreed with Mr Adebayo that the Judge failed  to  take  into  account
    that the respondent had already accepted, in February  2016,  that  the
    appellant's brother and sister were undocumented  Bidoons  as  was  the
    appellant's sister's husband. The fact the respondent had accepted  the
    appellant's brother was an undocumented Bidoon was something the  Judge
    should have given due consideration to and in my opinion it should have
    been at the forefront of her mind.

 5. Mr Adebayo's firm had taken over conduct of this matter and requested a
    short adjournment to consider whether any  further  evidence  would  be
    called. I agreed to this request.

 6. An additional statement from the appellant was  served  late  yesterday
    but in truth this statement took the case no further as the content  of
    this statement was contained in the original statement and formed  part
    of his oral evidence as recorded by the Judge. A second statement  from
    [HA] was not relied on due to the late service of the bundle.

 7. Having read the papers I indicated to Mr McVeety  that  the  difficulty
    the respondent had was that the appellant's two siblings  (similar  age
    to the appellant) had both been recognised as undocumented Bidoons. The
    respondent had accepted this as fact in February 2016 and  referred  to
    it in the decision letter.

 8. I posed the question to him that unless he was submitting  the  adverse
    credibility points outweighed  the  starting  point  that  undocumented
    Bidoons were at risk of persecution then this appellant  must  win  his
    appeal  bearing  in  mind  the  country   guidance   decision   of   NM
    (documented/undocumented Bidoon risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 356 (IAC).

 9. Mr McVeety agreed that bearing in mind the agreed  evidence  about  the
    appellant's siblings and applying the lower standard of proof it  would
    be very difficult for him to argue constructively  that  the  appellant
    was not an undocumented Bidoon. He agreed that if the appellant was  an
    undocumented Bidoon then he won his appeal.

    FINDING

10. When the appeal came before the FTT Judge no consideration was given to
    the fact the appellant's siblings were undocumented Bidoons. The  Judge
    assessed credibility solely on the appellant's account of what happened
    but attached no weight to the fact his two siblings had  been  accepted
    as undocumented Bidoons.

11. Even if he had exaggerated or lied about aspects of his claim the  fact
    remained he was the sibling of two people  recognised  as  undocumented
    Bidoons. It lacked credibility that one  sibling  (of  a  similar  age)
    would be documented and his other two siblings would not.

12. In the circumstances I was satisfied, based on the written evidence  of
    the appellant and his two siblings and the DNA evidence which confirmed
    their relationship, the appellant was also an undocumented  Bidoon  and
    as such he would be at risk of persecution.

    DECISION

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

14. I set aside the FTT Judge's decision.

15. I have remade the decision and allow the appeal on protection grounds.


Signed                              Date     06/02/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as no fee was paid.


Signed                              Date     06/02/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
