
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01374/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22nd February 2019              |On 18th March 2019                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                 SAIWAN [M]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal brought against a decision by Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal Mackenzie dismissing an appeal on protection and human
       rights grounds.

    2. The appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.  He
       originates from a village in the vicinity of Sulaymaniyah in the IKR
       (Iraqi Kurdish Region).  He came to the UK in 2004 and claimed asylum
       on the basis that he was at risk from a blood feud with the Sheikh
       Ismaely tribe.  In 2004 he had an appeal hearing against the refusal
       of protection (AS/06959/2004) at which his fear of the blood feud was
       found to be credible.  However, the Adjudicator who heard the appeal
       found there would be a sufficiency of protection for the appellant
       from the authorities in the Kurdish Autonomous Zone, as it was termed
       then, and internal relocation was also a valid option.  The appeal
       was therefore dismissed.

    3. In 2010 the respondent began a review of the appellant's position.
       This concluded in 2017 with a refusal decision in response to further
       submissions from the appellant.  Following a judicial review there
       was a further reconsideration by the respondent, ending in a refusal
       decision subject to a right of appeal, which the appellant is now
       exercising.

    4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal began with reference to the
       principles set out in the case of Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1 in
       relation to findings made in an earlier appeal.  The judge then went
       on to make a finding that the blood feud was no longer "live".  The
       reason why the judge made this finding was because she was not
       satisfied by the evidence the appellant gave before her about contact
       he might have had with his family in Iraq.  The judge did not believe
       that the appellant had not been in touch with his family for the
       fourteen years he had been in the UK.  According to the judge, the
       appellant did not provide any evidence, from his parents or any other
       source, confirming that the blood feud was still active.  The judge
       drew an adverse inference from the appellant's failure to provide
       supporting evidence or to offer a credible explanation for why it had
       not been sought.  The judge was not satisfied that the appellant had
       a genuine fear for any reason of returning to Iraq.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the grounds
       that the judge arguably erred by not properly applying the Devaseelan
       guidelines and by not properly assessing the viability of internal
       relocation.



Submissions

    6. At the hearing before me Mr Winter relied upon the application for
       permission to appeal.  He submitted that the evidence before the
       First-tier Tribunal was the same as in the previous appeal apart from
       the addition of an expert report by Dr Fatah.   Further submissions
       had been made.  There was no adequate basis for the Judge of the
       First-tier Tribunal to depart from the findings which had been made
       in the previous appeal.  Mr Winter acknowledged that the issues
       relating to internal relocation would arise only if the judge was
       found to have erred on the Devaseelan point.

    7. For the respondent Mr Matthews pointed out that removals had resumed
       to Erbil in the IKR.  This was now where it was proposed the
       appellant be returned to, instead of Baghdad.  Relocation would be
       possible within the IKR or in Baghdad.  Mr Matthews contended that
       the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not depart from the findings
       in the previous appeal.  The judge was entitled to ask if the risk
       from the blood feud continued today.  The judge had regard to Dr
       Fatah's report, which was referred to at paragraph 29 of the
       decision.  If the judge had erred the proper course would be
       remittal.



Discussion

    8. Mr Matthews made the not unreasonable point that in the current
       appeal the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to ask if
       the blood feud was still continuing.  Mr Winter made the point that
       the only new evidence before the appellant in relation to this, apart
       of course from the appellant's own evidence, was the expert report by
       Dr Fatah.  It is unfortunate then that in attempting to answer the
       question of whether the blood feud was continuing the Judge of the
       First-tier Tribunal should have completely disregarded the evidence
       of Dr Fatah on this point.  In his conclusions, at paragraph 68 of
       his report (Appellant's bundle, p 20) Dr Fatah wrote: "Blood feuds
       can last for a very long time, the passing of 14 years is not a
       reason in itself for a blood feud to die out."

    9. Of course, the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find
       that the appellant was not telling the truth about whether he had had
       any contact with his family.  What she could not do, however, was to
       use this as a reason to depart from the findings made in the previous
       appeal without regard to the other new evidence before her, which was
       Dr Fatah's opinion as an expert witness that the passing of 14 years
       was not a reason in itself for a blood feud to die out.  In departing
       from the previous finding without considering Dr Fatah's evidence the
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

   10. The consequence of this is that the finding by the Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal as to whether the blood feud is continuing is unsound
       and her decision should be set aside.  I informed the parties at the
       hearing of my decision on this point.  Having regard to the previous
       appeal and the evidence of Dr Fatah, the finding in the previous
       appeal as to the existence of a blood feud still stands.

   11. The approach taken by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to the
       issue of internal relocation was predicated on the erroneous finding
       that the appellant was no longer at risk.  For reasons recognised in
       the grant of permission to appeal, the findings made by the Judge of
       the First-tier Tribunal on this issue are not adequate.  I invited
       the parties to address me on the question of internal relocation with
       a view to re-making the decision.

   12. In relation to internal relocation Mr Winter relied upon the skeleton
       argument for the appellant lodged before the First-tier Tribunal.  It
       would be unreasonable to return the appellant to Erbil.  The
       appellant could be identified at a road block in IKR or when
       registering with a Mukhtar.  Reliance was also placed upon Dr Fatah's
       report.

   13. Mr Matthews submitted that the appellant could live elsewhere in IKR,
       away from his home area.  If he needed a CSID he could ask his family
       to obtain this for him and relocate elsewhere in Iraq.

   14. I informed the parties that I would reserve my decision on the issue
       of internal relocation and would have the appeal listed for a further
       hearing if I considered that further documentary evidence and
       submissions were required.

   15. I have, however, been able to re-make the decision having had regard
       to the report by Dr Fatah, the Home Office Note of September 2017 on
       "Return/Internal relocation", to which I was referred by Mr Winter,
       the Court of Appeal decision in AA(Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and the
       country guideline cases of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017]
       UKUT 00018 and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG
       [2018]UKUT 00212.

   16. The country guideline case of AAH refers to Kurds returning or
       relocating to IKR.  At the time this decision was issued there were
       no international flights to IKR.  Mr Matthews informed me that
       flights to Erbil have now been resumed.  According to previous Home
       Office guidance on flights to Erbil, in the Note of September 2017 on
       "Return/Internal relocation", a person being returned to Erbil from
       the UK required "pre-clearance" from the authorities in IKR.  The
       Home Office Note addresses this at 4.2 (Appellant's bundle, p 125) as
       also very briefly does Dr Fatah (Appellant's bundle, p 52).  Pre-
       clearance seems to require some evidence of identity acceptable to
       the authorities in IKR.  Of course, the feasibility of return is a
       separate issue from the need for international protection.  However,
       the availability of identity documentation may be relevant to the
       viability of internal relocation, in accordance with AA (Iraq).

   17. The case of AAH points out that if a returning Iraqi Kurd has family
       members in the IKR the family would normally accommodate the
       returnee.  Support from family members would mean that if this was
       not a returnee's home area relocation would not be unduly harsh.  In
       the case of this appellant, however, he is at risk from the blood
       feud in his home area where his family members reside.

   18. In his first appeal in 2004 it was established that the appellant
       would have a sufficiency of protection from the Kurdish authorities.
       Country conditions have changed significantly since then and there is
       new evidence before me on these, including Dr Fatah's report and the
       recent country guideline cases.  Dr Fatah concluded there would not
       be a sufficiency of protection in the IKR and his conclusions have
       not been challenged by other evidence.  At paragraph 54 Dr Fatah
       points out that members of the security forces have a tribal loyalty
       as well as a loyalty towards their employers.  In smaller towns and
       villages the authorities were often unable to prevent killings in
       tribal disputes.  At paragraph 57 Dr Fatah points out that the
       appellant would need substantial evidence to prove to the security
       forces that he required protection and any protection would be
       limited in duration and degree.  The population of IKR was about 5.5
       million.  A person searching for someone can ask around in local
       communities.  The system of patronage means that use may be made of
       friends or family in positions of power or access to databases to
       look for information.  Dr Fatah also points out that whereas in the
       past an entire tribe would pursue a feud this was no longer the case.
        Members of tribes were also more spread out than previously,
       although this might spread their influence beyond their traditional
       homeland.

   19. Dr Fatah is sceptical about the viability of internal relocation.  In
       AAH there is reference to the difficulties in obtaining accommodation
       and employment in IKR for those not able to avail themselves of
       family support.  Dr Fatah states that to relocate the appellant would
       require a CSID.  Dr Fatah states at section 7.1 of his report
       (Appellant's bundle, p 46) that it is possible to renew or replace a
       CSID at the Iraqi Embassy in London if certain documents are
       provided, such as an Iraqi passport and an Iraqi National
       Certificate, neither of which the appellant has, as well as a copy of
       the previous CSID.  It should be borne in mind that the appellant has
       now been away from Iraq for nearly fifteen years and any
       documentation he might have had is likely to be significantly out-of-
       date.

   20. Mr Matthews suggested that the appellant could ask his family to
       obtain a CSID for him.  To do this, however, Dr Fatah indicates that
       the appellant would have to obtain an Iraqi passport from the Embassy
       and to obtain this he would need a CSID issued no more than 10 years
       previously and an Iraqi National Certificate (section 7.3).  It does
       not seem to be feasible to obtain either a passport or a CSID outside
       Iraq unless a person already has one of these documents in their
       possession.

   21. According to Dr Fatah, at section 7.2 of his report, to obtain a CSID
       within Iraq the appellant would have to attend the official
       registration office in his home area.  In the IKR the appellant would
       also need the recommendation of his Mukhtar.  Thus to obtain a CSID
       in Iraq the appellant would not only have to go to his home area he
       would also have to notify the local Mukhtar of his whereabouts.  This
       would seem to defeat the concept of internal relocation.

   22. Dr Fatah addresses the possibility of relocation outside the IKR but
       points out at section 7.5 that without proper documentation the
       appellant would be unable to access basic rights and services.  Dr
       Fatah concludes that the lack of a CSID would be an obstacle to
       internal relocation.

   23. In summary, the position of this appellant is that he cannot return
       to his home area in IKR because of the risk from the blood feud.  The
       authorities would be unable to provide him with a sufficiency of
       protection.  Internal relocation within IKR is unlikely to be a
       reasonable alternative for the appellant because of the ease with
       which an individual can be traced within this area.  The lack of a
       CSID also detracts from the viability of internal relocation.  The
       only feasible way the appellant can obtain a CSID is by applying in
       person in his home area, with the support of his Mukhtar, thereby
       revealing his presence there.  Relocation in Iraq generally would not
       be viable without a CSID.

   24. In these circumstances consideration needs to be given to the type of
       protection to which the appellant is entitled.  His fear is of a
       blood feud and does not arise for a reason recognised by the Refugee
       Convention.  The appellant nevertheless faces a real risk of serious
       harm and qualifies for humanitarian protection.



Conclusions

   25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
       making of an error on a point of law.

   26. The decision is set aside.

   27. The appeal is re-made by allowing the appeal.



Anonymity

  The First-tier Tribunal made a direction for anonymity.  I have not been
  asked to renew this direction and as the appeal succeeds I see no reason
  of substance for doing so.



Fee Award   (N.B. This is not part of the decision)

No fee has been paid or is payable so no fee award is made.


M E Deans   13th March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


