

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/01107/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 September 2017                        |On 18 September 2017           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     AN
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Masih, instructed by Bankfield Heath Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision and  reasons
    statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler  that  was  issued  on  7
    April 2017.  Judge Butler decided the appellant was not a refugee  from
    Iran or otherwise in need of international protection.

 2. Judge Butler made an anonymity direction  because  of  the  nature  and
    content of the appeal.  It is appropriate to maintain anonymity  and  I
    make the appropriate order at the end  of  this  decision  and  reasons
    statement.

 3. The grounds on which permission to appeal was granted can be summarised
    as follows. Judge Butler erred at [60] when he said the  appellant  had
    failed to provide an explanation for two  inconsistencies  because  the
    appellant had in fact provided explanations in two letter sent  to  the
    respondent on 12 December 2016 and 17 January 2017, and  reference  had
    been made to those letters in the appellant's witness statement and the
    skeleton arguments.  The failure to take account  of  the  explanations
    undermines the credibility assessment and conclusions at  [61]  because
    Judge Butler did not  consider  all  the  evidence  provided.   If  the
    appellant were found to be credible, then his appeal was bound to  have
    been allowed because the  appellant  would  be  a  genuine  convert  to
    Christianity.

 4. Ms Masih expanded on the grounds and pointed out that the  explanations
    provided by the appellant were that question 28 of  the  interview  had
    confused him and he was not sure what he was being  asked  to  explain.
    The appellant added further information about his evangelising in  Iran
    to clarify his answer to question 41.  Ms Masih reminded  me  that  the
    written representations were sent to the Home Office the day before the
    protection claim was refused by the respondent and that this was not  a
    case where the explanation has been provided in response to the reasons
    for refusal.

 5. In addition to these points, Ms Masih argued that Judge  Butler  failed
    to take account the appellant's  continued  attendance  at  church,  as
    witnessed by Mr Johnston,  who  gave  evidence  at  the  hearing.   The
    continued attendance was a factor that should have been considered when
    assessing whether the appellant was a genuine convert.

 6. Mr Mills relied on the rule 24 reply dated 7 July 2017.  The thrust  of
    that response is that it can be inferred that Judge Butler  had  regard
    to the two letters because he  referred  at  [58]  to  the  appellant's
    witness statement.  In the alternative, the respondent argues that  any
    error along the lines described would not affect  the  outcome  because
    Judge  Butler  made  many  other  findings  against   the   appellant's
    credibility.

 7. Mr Mills took me to [19] where Judge Butler made specific reference  to
    the  appellant's  "comments  on  the  interview  record  and  screening
    interview".  This strengthened the respondent's view that Judge  Butler
    had the explanations in mind  when  assessing  credibility.   Mr  Mills
    argued that the findings at [58] had to be read in that context;  Judge
    Butler was therein rejecting the explanations given in the two letters.
     Judge Butler gave adequate reasons for rejecting the explanation,  his
    concerns focusing on the appellant's  inability  to  give  an  accurate
    chronology.  It was open to Judge Butler to find  this  undermined  the
    appellant's reliability.

 8. Mr Mills accepted that at [59] Judge  Butler  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's explanation about who knew in Iran that he had converted to
    Christianity.   Mr  Mills  accepted  that  Judge  Butler  believed  the
    appellant only provided the explanation after he received  the  reasons
    for refusal when in fact he had provided his explanation without  sight
    of the reasons for refusal.  Mr Mills submitted that such error was not
    material  because  there  was  a  clear   inconsistency   between   the
    appellant's  answers  at  questions  18,  19,  and  41  of  the  asylum
    interview.  The explanation  provided  did  not  directly  explain  the
    different accounts, as admitted by Ms Masih,  because  the  explanation
    merely provided further information.

 9. Mr Mills also sought to rely on the finding made  by  Judge  Butler  at
    [64], to the effect that Judge Butler had found the appellant  had  not
    evangelised because of a lack of evidence.  That finding was unaffected
    by the  claimed  errors  and  would  have  led  to  the  same  outcome.
    Therefore, any error was immaterial.  As to risk on  return,  Mr  Mills
    said that because the appellant was not a genuine convert, he would not
    have to lie on return because he  would  be  able  to  explain  to  the
    Iranian authorities that he only claimed to  be  a  convert  to  secure
    refugee status.

10. Having considered the decision and reasons statement, the evidence that
    was provided to Judge Butler and the arguments provided to me,  I  have
    decided there is legal error in the decision that requires it to be set
    aside.

11. The error is simply explained.  It is trite law that the Tribunal  must
    demonstrate anxious scrutiny when deciding a  protection  claim  appeal
    because of the serious consequences  that  might  arise  if  the  wrong
    decision is made.  Anxious scrutiny includes  the  requirement  that  a
    judge examines all the evidence submitted  to  assess  credibility  and
    risk on return.  I am satisfied that there are two  areas  where  Judge
    Butler's decision and reasons appear to overlook relevant evidence that
    was provided.  The first relates to the point  conceded  by  Mr  Mills.
    Judge Butler did not take into consideration the explanations  provided
    by the appellant regarding who knew of his conversion in Iran  and  his
    efforts to evangelise.  Secondly, I find that Judge Butler  has  failed
    to show that he had regard to the appellant's continued  attendance  at
    church when assessing whether the  appellant  was  a  genuine  convert.
    Judge Butler, instead, focusing on the lack of evidence about what  the
    appellant believed (i.e. the omission of evidence from the  pastor  who
    taught the appellant about  Christianity)  rather  than  examining  his
    behaviour.  It is well established that a judge cannot  look  into  the
    heart of a person to see what they may or may not believe, but they can
    examine how a person behaves.

12. I am also satisfied that Judge Butler erred in failing to  explore  the
    appellant's answer to question 28 of the asylum interview, relating  to
    the appellant's chronology, I bear in mind that question 28 was clumsy.
     It reads, "When was the time from when you first met your friend again
    after the period of absence when you had this discussion  with  him  in
    the park?"  The appellant's answer is  puzzling.   He  says,  "6  or  7
    months we did not see each other.  First after 22nd  June  2015."   The
    first part suggests he thought he was answering a  question  about  how
    long the period was between meetings.   In  context,  the  second  part
    suggests he was answering a question about when they first met up again
    rather than when they first met.  Bearing in mind that the question had
    to be interpreted into Farsi, I find little weight could  realistically
    have been placed on the answer and it would not be reasonable given the
    lower standard of proof to draw an adverse credibility conclusion  from
    this point alone.  Yet that is what Judge Butler has done.

13. Because I find the credibility assessment is  fundamentally  flawed,  I
    cannot accept that the other findings made regarding  evangelising  are
    sound.  I do not find they stand alone, as Mr Mills avers.

14. Although I reserved my decision and reasons, I asked the parties what I
    should do if I found there was an error.   Both  indicated  that  if  I
    found errors in the credibility assessment, then I should set aside the
    decision in full and remit the appeal to be heard by a different  judge
    in the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with  the  Senior  President's
    guidance.  I agree and make the necessary direction below.





Decision

The appeal is allowed because Judge Butler's decision and reasons statement
contains legal errors.

The decision is set aside.

The appeal is remitted for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal
before a judge other than Judge Butler.

No findings are preserved.



Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the parties or any other person
from disclosing or publishing any matter likely to lead members of the
public to identify the appellant.  The appellant can be referred to as
"AN".



Signed                                  Date     15 September 2017

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
