
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/01790/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5th July 2019                        |On 16th July 2019                   |
|Extempore decision given at hearing     |                                    |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                     SF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel, instructed by Shawstone
Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant, SF, is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity, born 7
January 1991.  He appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Rodger promulgated on 16th April 2019 dismissing his asylum and
humanitarian protection claim made to the respondent on 19th August 2018.
His claim was refused by the respondent on 15th February 2019 and came
before Judge Rodger on appeal on 26th March 2019.

Background

The basis of the appellant's claim, as set out at [11] of Judge Rodger's
decision, was as follows.  The appellant was born in Qala Village in
Jawlala, Iraq.  In June 2014 he evacuated his home area and moved to
Khanaquin, having fled the ISIS occupation of the area.  He returned to his
village two years later, following the overthrow of ISIS by the Kurdish
Peshmerga and Hashd Al-Shaabi, who assumed control of the village.  In
2017, the appellant was beaten by Hashd Al-Shaabi simply for being Kurdish.
 In mid-2018, all families in the area were issued with a letter from Hashd
Al-Shaabi warning them to evacuate or be killed.  This led to the appellant
fleeing Iraq two weeks later.  His family left at the same time.  He claims
not to know where they are.  There was a suggestion during the asylum
interview that the appellant's family had stayed in the area, but that is
not clear.

The essence of the appellant's claim is that he fears that his life would
be at risk upon return and that he would be killed by either ISIS or Hashd
Al-Shaabi.  He contends that there would not be a sufficiency of protection
available, and that internal relocation would be unduly harsh.

Permission to appeal

Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal in response to
an application which consisted of four grounds of appeal.

Ground 1 was that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing properly
to apply the relevant country guidance concerning the difficulties
associated with obtaining a Civil Status Identity Document ("CSID")
pursuant to the cases of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)
and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC).
In addition, the appellant relied on before me the case of AA (Iraq) v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944.

Secondly, the judge is said to have failed to consider the appellant's
credibility in the context of the background materials which established
that there was clear and indiscriminate danger existing in his home area at
the time.

Thirdly, the grounds contend that the judge applied the wrong standard of
proof in finding that the appellant would have certain opportunities for
obtaining the necessary documentation, by virtue of it being reasonably
likely that his family would be able to assist him.  The essence of this
ground is that pursuant to the case of Karanakaran [2000] 3 All E.R. 449 at
22, it was not possible to reach a finding that it is reasonably likely
that the appellant would not enjoy the assistance of his family unless the
tribunal had "no real doubt" about that he would not be able to obtain such
assistance.  The correct standard is that a decision maker must have no
real doubt that the relevant matters would be able to take place.

Finally, the grounds contend that the judge erred procedurally when
refusing to adjourn the proceedings in order to allow the appellant to
obtain a medical report into his mental health conditions.





Analysis

Adjournment

First, addressing the issue of the adjournment application, the judge dealt
with this at [24] of her decision.  There is a hint of frustration in the
judge's discussion of the late adjournment application, which was made on
the morning of the hearing.  The focus of her analysis is the
unreasonableness of the appellant's request.  The judge noted that he had
been represented throughout the proceedings, and it was submitted by the
Presenting Officer before me that the Case Management Review hearing
provided every opportunity for the appellant to put forward his request for
an adjournment to obtain the medical report at that stage.

Although the judge referred to the interests of justice and fairness being
consistent with not adjourning the hearing, she did so towards the end of
her operative analysis.  It is not clear from the content of her operative
analysis that she had in mind the approach required by Nwaigwe
(adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  The key issue for
consideration pursuant Nwaigwe is not the reasonableness or otherwise of
the conduct of the appellant, but rather whether the appellant can have a
fair hearing.  While the judge's understandable concern at having to
adjourn matters at such a late stage is to be expected, her analysis
addressed the issue primarily from the perspective of reasonableness,
rather than primarily from the perspective of the fairness to the
appellant.

The appellant sought an expert report because he contended that he
experienced mental health difficulties which preventing him from recalling
events with clarity.  In his asylum interview, in answer to the second
question concerning the state of his mental or physical health, he said
that he would easily forget matters, and could not focus.  He had attempted
to attend his general practitioner to seek referral on account of this
condition but, as the decision notes at [23], he was hampered during that
consultation by the absence of an interpreter who was able to speak both
his language, Kurdish Sorani, and English.  He did take an English-speaking
friend along with him, but his friend could not speak Kurdish Sorani.

The judge concluded at [24] that she was satisfied that she would be able
to accept the appellant's evidence concerning his mental health conditions,
rather than needing to adjourn for an expert's report.   As such, an
adjournment would not be required, she concluded.

Although the judge considered the appellant to have had sufficient time to
obtain an expert report, it is not clear from her reasoning whether she
ascribed significance - as she should have done - to the fact that the
respondent's decision was issued just over six weeks before the hearing.
On any view, that is a minimal amount of time to secure an expert's report.
 Again, it is difficult to be confident that the judge had regard to the
guiding principle of fairness when assessing the impact of not adjourning,
in light of this chronology.

In my view, the judge's failure to consider fairness as being the guiding
principle in deciding whether or not to grant an adjournment was an error
of law.  The judge should have focused on the fairness of the proceedings
rather than the unreasonableness of the appellant or his representatives
when deciding whether to adjourn the proceedings.

I turn now to whether that was a material error.

The judge found the appellant to lack credibility partly on account of what
she perceived to be his evasiveness.  His evidence lacked plausibility, and
did not have "the ring of truth", she found (see [35]).  The judge
highlighted various inconsistencies between what the appellant said in his
screening interview, on the one hand, and in his substantive interview, on
the other.  She also highlighted the fact that there were aspects of the
appellant's account which had been introduced for the first time during his
oral evidence.

Although the judge reminded herself at [32] for example that it is
necessary to take into account the fact that those seeking to flee
persecution often experience difficulties when recounting traumatic
experiences, there was little by way of calibration of her analysis by
reference to the difficulties that the appellant claimed to experience with
his memory.  Indeed, despite having said that the appellant himself would
be able to provide evidence concerning his mental health which would
obviate the need to obtain a professional medical opinion, at [40] the
judge held against the appellant the fact that there was no persuasive or
credible evidence that the appellant suffers from any memory problems or
other problems focusing such that it would affect the consistency and
credibility of his account.

That this was a material error is confirmed by the extracts of [40] to
which I have just referred.  It is clear that the absence of medical
evidence which could have shown the appellant to experience problems in
recalling the events from which he claimed to be fleeing, that was clearly
a potential factor which would have gone to the assessment of the
credibility of his account.  It was inconsistent and materially unfair for
the judge to conclude, on the one hand, that an adjournment was not
necessary for she would be able to treat the appellant's evidence as a
proxy for formal medical evidence, and then find that there was an absence
of such formal evidence, on the other.

The Presenting Officer realistically conceded at the hearing that the judge
did fall into error in this respect.  I accept that that is a concession
that was properly made.  It follows therefore that the credibility
assessment which permeates the judge's decision was tainted by the
unfairness of the proceedings.  At various points the judge held against
the appellant the perceived inconsistencies at the core of his account, and
those relating to his family and his ability to obtain documents.  In my
view, those findings cannot be said to have been arrived at in a
procedurally safe manner, given the appellant did not have the opportunity
to obtain medical evidence which could have provided an explanation for
those difficulties.  Of course, medical evidence does not necessarily
render an incredible account credible.  However, in the absence of such
evidence, and informed decision cannot be taken, and it would be
speculative to assume that the appellant would not be assisted by it.

It follows that the remainder of the decision was based on a flawed
assessment of the appellant's credibility.

Redocumentation

There is another reason why I consider the decision to feature a material
error of law.  It is clear from the case of AA in the Court of Appeal that
those who are from a "contested area" such as this appellant is, namely the
Diyala region, would be "seriously hampered" in attempting to obtain a
replacement CSID document.  Even if it were the case that the appellant did
have family members with whom he was still in contact in Iraq, it follows
that those family members would be "seriously hampered" in attempting to
obtain those documents for him.  The judge did not engage with that aspect
of the country guidance when finding that his family members in Iraq would
be able to assist him.  I find the judge materially erred in law in her
analysis of the CSID issue.

Credibility and standard of proof

It is not necessary for me to engage in detailed analysis of the remaining
aspects of the judge's credibility assessment in light of the background
materials, given my conclusions on the two grounds of appeal outlined
above.

Similarly, turning to Ms Radford's submissions concerning Karanakaran and
the burden of proof in relation to the appellant's ability to contact his
family and obtain a CSID document, it is not necessary for me to make a
finding on those submissions.  Even if the findings reached by the judge
concerning the appellant's contact with his family were sound, her
application of the country guidance was not.

Conclusion

In my view, the remedy for these errors of law is for the matter to be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the appellant to have a fresh
hearing before a different judge.  I have considered carefully whether it
is possible to keep the matter in this Tribunal but have concluded that it
is not on account of the flawed nature of the hearing in the First-tier
Tribunal.

This appeal is allowed and the decision of Judge Rodger is set aside.  It
is to be remitted to a different Judge of the First-tier Tribunal for a
fresh hearing with no findings preserved.

Given this is a protection appeal, and given these decisions are routinely
published online, I make a direction for anonymity, in the terms set out
below.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.  The decision of  Judge  Rodger  is
set aside and the case is to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
heard by a different judge.

Directions

In addition to  the  standard  directions,  the  appellant  is  directed  to
obtain, and serve upon the respondent, any medical evidence  upon  which  he
seeks to rely as soon as possible and in any event at least 14  days  before
the date of the remitted hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  (the  date  of
which is to be advised by the First-tier Tribunal in the usual way).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                              Date 10 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


