
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01296/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 August 2019                    |On 11 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     P P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Dr Chelvan of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant  appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Phull promulgated on 29 May 2019, in  which  his  appeal
    against the refusal of his protection  and  human  rights  claims  were
    dismissed.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a minor  with  leave  to
    remain as an unaccompanied asylum seeking minor to  28  February  2018.
    When his claim was initially refused he appealed against the refusal of
    his asylum claim, which was dismissed in 2016.  Prior to the expiry  of
    his leave to remain in  February  2018,  he  made  an  application  for
    further leave to remain which again  relied  on  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.  That claim was refused by the Respondent on 8 November
    2018, on the basis that the new documents that were  submitted  at  the
    time of the later claim were not  credible  and  added  little  to  the
    weight of the claim.  Reliance was placed on the  earlier  2016  First-
    tier Tribunal decision.

 3. When the matter came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  2019,  the
    Appellant was legally represented, albeit he has since  made  a  formal
    complaint against those representatives for failing to give him  proper
    advice and failing to properly prepare his appeal before the First-tier
    Tribunal.   In  particular,   the   Appellant   had   spoken   to   his
    representatives about his friend Ali, who had  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the same time as the applicant and whose asylum  claim  was,
    to a great extent,  factually  linked  and  whose  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal of his claim had been successful,  after  the  the
    date  of  the  Appellant's  first  appeal  in  2016.   The  Appellant's
    representatives had not taken steps to obtain  or  submit  evidence  of
    this to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  2019,  although  the  potential
    significance  and  relevance  of  these  facts   to   the   Appellant's
    credibility  and  appeal  were  recognised  by  both  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer and the First-tier Tribunal at the hearing.   As  is
    recorded in the decision,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  had,
    during the course of the hearing, sought to  find  further  information
    about Ali's claim but was unable to do so on the  day  for  lack  of  a
    reference number and specific details.

 4. In making the decision on appeal, the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered
    that the evidence of the Appellant's friend would have  been  relevant,
    in  particular  in  relation  to  assessing  the  credibility  of   the
    Appellant's claim.  However, in the absence of that evidence, the First-
    tier Tribunal did not find the  Appellant  credible,  the  claim  being
    found to be implausible and the Appellant not therefore being  at  risk
    on return to Iran.

 5. The application for permission to appeal was on the  grounds  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to take into account  the  determination
    of the Appellant's friend's appeal; that the evidence was now available
    and accompanied by a Rule 15(2A) application and further that there was
    also a failure to apply the correct standard of proof and a failure  to
    attach appropriate weight to documents.  Specifically,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to attach proper weight to a hospital letter about  the
    Appellant's father because it did not show that he was in prison  prior
    to admission; however, it is accepted by both parties that the document
    expressly stated that he  was  transferred  from  prison  to  hospital,
    consistent with the Appellant's claim.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on the
    basis that there had been a complaint to previous solicitors about  the
    conduct of the appeal and applying Ladd v Marshall [1953] 1  WLR  1489,
    the new material may arguably need to be taken into  account,  although
    all limbs of that test must be satisfied.  The Rule 15(2A)  application
    consists of a witness statement of the Appellant dated 8 August 2019, a
    letter of complaint to his previous solicitors of the  same  date,  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision of his  friend  dated  23  May  2016,  his
    friend's asylum interview records from the 19 May 2015  and  a  written
    statement from his friend.

 7. The three limbs of the test in Ladd v Marshall for new evidence  to  be
    admitted are, in summary, first, that the fresh evidence could not have
    been obtained with reasonable diligence for use at the trial; secondly,
    that if given, it probably would have had an important influence on the
    result; and, thirdly, that  it  is  apparently  credible  although  not
    necessarily incontrovertible.  Both parties accept that there  is  some
    flexibility in the application of these principles in the context of  a
    protection claim and that the fact that failure to adduce the  evidence
    was that of the previous legal representatives should not, particularly
    where a formal complaint has been made, prevent the satisfaction of the
    principles in this case.

 8. I accept, in accordance with the principles in Ladd v Marshall  and  in
    the particular factual circumstances of this appeal, that these further
    documents should be  admitted.   Although  in  relation  to  the  first
    principle, it is at least arguable that the material was  available  at
    the time of the First-tier Tribunal decision with  due  diligence  from
    legal representatives, a flexible  approach  must  be  taken  to  those
    principles in a protection claim and to satisfy the requirements of the
    interest of justice in the circumstances of this case.   The  documents
    primarily emanate from the Respondent and the First-tier Tribunal  such
    that their credibility is not in doubt and as recognised by the  First-
    tier Tribunal at the time,  they  would  clearly  be  relevant  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.  In all of these circumstances, I find  that  it
    is appropriate and in the interests of justice  to  admit  the  further
    material.

 9. The further material shows that the appellant's friend's  asylum  claim
    has been  considered  and  found  to  be  credible  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  the  claim  being  a  substantively  similar  one   to   the
    Appellant's claim both relying on  a  joint  enterprise  between  their
    respective fathers.  Once that further material is taken into  account,
    the credibility findings of the First-tier Tribunal are  undermined  as
    it  significantly  supports  the  Appellant's  claim.    Taking   these
    documents into account, I find  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  I would add that is not a case in which the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge can directly be criticised  because  these  further
    documents were not before the Tribunal at the relevant time, but it  is
    right and proper in this case to set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and remit it back to for a de novo hearing.

10. For completeness, the parties are in agreement that there was  also  an
    error of law in relation to the hospital letter, the contents of  which
    were not accurately considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  In  reality
    this ground adds little to the finding of an  error  of  law  on  other
    matters which necessitates the setting aside  of  the  decision  to  be
    reheard de novo in any event.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  the  appeal
for a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor  House  hearing
centre) before any Judge except Judge Phull.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]         Date         5th September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
