
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01683/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st October 2018                          |On 22nd October 2018          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MR K S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by Arshed & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008  (the  UT  Procedure  Rules)  I  make  an  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure  or  publication  of  specified  documents  or   information
    relating to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members  of
    the public to identify any person whom  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers
    should not be identified. The effect of such an "anonymity  order"  may
    therefore be to prohibit anyone (not merely the parties  in  the  case)
    from disclosing relevant  information.  Breach  of  the  order  may  be
    punishable as a contempt of court.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He claimed to have arrived in
    the United Kingdom as a student on September 25, 2010 and his leave was
    extended until November 25, 2013. In March 27, 2013 the  appellant  was
    given notice that his leave would be curtailed on June 22, 2013 and the
    appellant lodged an application to extend his stay  as  a  student  but
    this was refused by the respondent on December 11,  2013.  He  appealed
    that decision but that appeal was rejected by the Tribunal  on  May  9,
    2014.

 3. The appellant claimed asylum on September 7, 2015  but  his  claim  was
    refused on May 4, 2016. He appealed that decision but  his  appeal  was
    dismissed and his appeal rights were deemed exhausted on March 1, 2017.



 4. The appellant submitted further grounds of appeal on October  25,  2017
    but the respondent rejected those grounds in a decision  dated  January
    15, 2018 under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on under Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on February 2, 2018.   His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Aziz  (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on March 5, 2018 and in a decision  promulgated  on
    March 14, 2018 the Judge dismissed his appeal.

 6. The appellant appealed this decision on March 22, 2018.  Permission  to
    appeal was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro on April
    13, 2018. The appellant renewed his grounds of appeal on May  10,  2018
    and Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam found it arguable, on July 10, 2018,
    that the medical evidence was capable  of  supporting  the  appellant's
    asylum claim and whilst the weight to be attached to that evidence  was
    ultimately a matter for the  Judge  it  is  arguable  that  whilst  she
    accepted the diagnosis she attached no weight to it and failed to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting it in paragraph 58 of her decision.

 7. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated September 12,  2018.  The
    respondent argued the Judge had clearly considered the medical evidence
    at paragraph 58 of her decision and the fact  the  appellant  had  been
    diagnosed with PTSD did not mean the Judge had to accept that the  only
    cause for this was his alleged mistreatment in Pakistan. The Judge also
    made findings that the appellant had given inconsistent  evidence  both
    before the original Tribunal and before her.

    SUBMISSIONS


 8.  Mr Brown adopted the grounds of appeal and invited the Tribunal to
    consider two specific issues. Firstly, he submitted that the Judge had
    failed to attach sufficient weight to the evidence of one of the
    witnesses who was an LGBT activist who had given evidence on four other
    occasions. Mr Brown submitted that he should have been treated akin to
    a Dorodian witness because he was in a position to give an opinion on
    the genuineness of the appellant's sexual behaviour. The Judge had
    accepted that the witness had given inconsistent evidence but gave no
    reasons for rejecting his evidence at paragraph 60 of the decision.
    Secondly, he submitted that the Judge should have revisited the medical
    evidence which had previously been rejected by another Tribunal. There
    was fresh medical evidence which should have led the Judge to revisit
    the protection claim issue. He conceded that counsel who represented
    the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal appeared to concede the issue
    but he nevertheless raised this as a second ground especially as
    permission to appeal had been given on this.


 9. Mr Tan adopted the Rule 24 response dated September 12, 2018. The Judge
    was entitled to find that the witness had given consistent evidence but
    when considering his evidence the Judge had to look at it alongside
    other evidence that had previously been given or had been given to the
    First-tier Tribunal. He disputed that the witness should be treated
    like a Dorodian witness and submitted that the Judge was entitled to
    consider all the evidence and make a finding which he did in paragraph
    60 of his decision. With regard to the second issue Mr Tan submitted
    that the Judge did consider the medical evidence. The refusal letter
    clearly had regard to the medical evidence and the Judge referred to
    the previous Tribunal decision. The previous Judge concluded that the
    medical evidence had been based on the appellant's account and the
    fresh medical evidence was provided by the same doctor and was merely
    an update. At paragraph 58 of the decision the Judge accepted the
    appellant suffered from PTSD but rejected the claim that it was caused
    through problems in Pakistan.


10. Mr Brown responded to these submissions and reiterated his view as to
    how the witness should have been treated and argued that if it was felt
    the appellant had been feigning his claim and this should have been put
    to the witness. With regard to the medical issue he submitted that the
    appellant had been to numerous sessions since the last letter and the
    Judge should have dealt with this in his decision.

    FINDINGS

11. This was the second appeal that  had  been  brought  by  the  appellant
    against the two decisions that refused him asylum/protection.

12. When the matter initially came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Boylan-Kemp on October 3, 2016 that Judge had  a  number  of  documents
    before him including medical evidence from Dr Young and Dr Addis  dated
    September 2016. At that hearing the appellant  claimed  that  he  faced
    persecution in Pakistan because of his sexuality and in  assessing  his
    claim the Judge had regard to evidence given of events in Pakistan  and
    also about his activities in the United Kingdom. The Judge  had  regard
    to documentary evidence that the  appellant  claimed  demonstrated  his
    engagement with the LGBT community and he also had  regard  to  medical
    evidence that stated the appellant had been engaging  with  the  mental
    health services since the beginning of 2015 as he  was  suffering  from
    PTSD. The Judge noted that the medical history was based  on  what  the
    appellant had reported to the medical professionals.

13. The Judge rejected his claim, giving  detailed  reasons  and  following
    that hearing the appellant submitted  further  grounds  of  appeal  and
    further evidence which was  considered  by  the  respondent  and  those
    representations led to the refusal letter dated January 15, 2018. It is
    this decision that brought the appellant  back  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

14. Mr Brown submits that the appellant addressed the  concerns  raised  by
    the Judge at the previous hearing by calling a witness  from  the  LGBT
    community to give evidence. Details of this evidence  is  contained  in
    the Judge's decision as were his credentials and the fact that  he  had
    attended four other appeal hearings.

15. The Judge considered his evidence at paragraph 54 of the  decision  and
    accepted that the witness gave consistent evidence. The Judge  recorded
    the following, "such findings go in the appellant's favour and  I  take
    them into account in my overall assessment of credibility".

16. The  appellant  had  submitted  further  documentary  evidence  of  him
    attending various clubs and LGBT events and at paragraph 57  the  Judge
    accepted this  was  evidence  of  him  being  engaged  within  the  gay
    community but quite properly noted  that  the  issue  was  whether  the
    engagement was because he was genuinely gay or was it  because  he  had
    fabricated an asylum claim and his attendance at  such  events  was  to
    bolster his  claim.  The  Judge  reminded  himself  that  the  previous
    Tribunal had concluded his behaviour was the latter.

17. At paragraph 59 the Judge went  on  to  consider  all  the  documentary
    evidence but dismissed his claim because he did not find the  appellant
    to be a credible witness. The Judge made  it  clear  that  he  had  had
    considered the witness evidence but concluded that whilst the  evidence
    from the witness was consistent the Judge nevertheless  concluded  that
    this was the only factor which went in the appellant's favour. In other
    words, the Judge accepted what the witness said but concluded  that  he
    had been hoodwinked.

18. Mr Brown submitted that the witness should have  been  afforded  higher
    status but he is, for all intent  and  purposes,  a  witness  of  fact.
    Dorodian witnesses  are  members  of  the  church  who  have  undergone
    training. He was someone  who  knew  the  appellant  and  believed  the
    appellant was gay. He gave that evidence but ultimately the Judge found
    there were too many adverse findings and that those findings outweighed
    this evidence. As  for  not  asking  the  witness  if  he  thought  the
    appellant was pretending to be  gay  I  am  satisfied  that  given  the
    witness  evidence  the  witness  would  have  not  have  said  anything
    different to what he had already said in evidence.

19. Mr Brown also argued  the  Judge  should  have  revisited  the  medical
    evidence but the latest evidence says little more to what was  set  out
    in the original letters. The Judge looked at the medical  evidence  and
    made reference to it in paragraphs 58  and  59  of  the  decision.  The
    medical  evidence  was  something  that  the  original   Tribunal   had
    considered and unless this  new  evidence  exhibited  information  that
    would potentially alter the position then the  Judge  was  entitled  to
    treated as he did. The appellant  had  been  a  regular  attender  both
    before and since his first appeal. Mr Brown confirmed the medical issue
    only went to the protection claim. The Judge's conclusions are set  out
    in paragraph 60 of the decision and were open to him

20. Neither of the issues advanced by Mr Brown amount to an error in law.

    DECISION

21. There is no error in law I uphold the original decision.


Signed                              Date     01/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     01/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
