
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01891/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On April 16, 2018                            |On April 24, 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MR SMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Warren, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter   Mr Ali


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend the anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and direct that unless and until a Tribunal
    or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  her
    or any member of  her  family.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national. On January 9, 2017 he  applied  for
    asylum but his application was refused on May 11, 2017.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on February 22, 2017.  His
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Hodkinson
    (hereinafter called "the  Judge")  on  September  14,  2017  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on September 22, 2017 the Judge refused his appeal
    on all grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision on September 24,  2017.  Permission
    to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingsworth
    on November 8, 2017 as he found it arguable the Judge may have erred in
    his approach to credibility and the standard of proof applied.

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Miss Warren relied on the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission
    which identified possible errors in law  in  relation  to  the  Judge's
    credibility findings and his application of the standard of proof.

 7. In relation to credibility she submitted that the Judge had placed  too
    much weight on section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc) Act 2004 and had failed to properly take account of the
    appellant's evidence when considering the credibility of his claim.

 8. The Judge had made positive credibility findings at paragraphs  30  and
    31. The  negative  credibility  findings  made  by  the  Judge  between
    paragraphs 33 and 39 of  his  decision  failed  to  take  into  account
    answers he had provided in his substantive interview. The Judge  viewed
    his evidence  as  a  material  inconsistency  whereas  his  answers  in
    interview suggested this was not the case.

 9. The Judge considered section 8 of the 2004 Act in some detail but  Miss
    Warren submitted that the Judge applied to high a standard of proof and
    allowed that issue to over shadow the issue of risk.

10. Mr Bates relied on the Rule  24  letter  dated  December  8,  2017.  He
    submitted the Judge had  applied  the  correct  standard  of  proof  as
    evidenced in paragraph 28 of his decision.

11. The Judge concluded at paragraph 34 of his decision that the  appellant
    had been inconsistent with his answers.  He  pointed  to  a  number  of
    answers given by the appellant in his interview and pointed out that it
    was only later in his interview that  he  stated  he  had  told  anyone
    whereas previously he had insisted that he could not  talk  to  anybody
    because the risk was too great.

12. During the appeal hearing Mr Bates submitted the appellant changed  his
    answers  regarding  the  beatings  he  received   and   it   was   this
    inconsistency the Judge concluded went to the core of his claim and the
    Judge was entitled to find the appellant had been inconsistent and this
    undermined his claim. In his asylum interview the appellant had claimed
    that his father began beating him when he was 19 years of  age  whereas
    in his oral evidence he claimed these beatings began when he was  15/16
    years of age this was a material difference in his account.

13. With regard to section 8 of the 2004 Act the Judge made  findings  open
    to him.

    FINDINGS

14. Permission to appeal  had  been  granted  because  Judge  Hollingsworth
    concluded there was some merit in the grounds of appeal being advanced.
    Two grounds were advanced by Miss Warren.

15. In essence, they were (a) the Judge incorrectly considered the evidence
    relating to beatings and (b) the Judge attached  too  much  weight  and
    applied to high test when considering section 8 of the 2004 Act.

16. With regard to the appellant's evidence over when  he  was  beaten  the
    Judge considered this in paragraphs 38 and  39  of  his  decision.  The
    Judge noted that in his witness statement the appellant stated that the
    beatings began when he stopped practising Islam at  the  age  of  15/16
    years of age whereas in his interview he stated he was 19 years of  age
    when the beatings began. The Judge concluded that this discrepancy  was
    material and damaged his credibility.

17. At Q48 of his substantive interview the  appellant  described  when  he
    first disagreed with Islam and stated that it was when  he  was  around
    15/16 years of age. At Q53 he was asked what would happen if he refused
    to go to the mosque and he replied "my family they would start  beating
    me up and force me to do it". He further stated at  Q56  that  at  this
    time he could not talk to anyone about how he felt about Islam  because
    he was scared although there were occasions  when  he  had  refused  to
    attend mosque and it was on those occasions  that  he  claimed  he  was
    beaten and forced to go.

18. Mr Bates argues that the  Judge's  findings  at  paragraph  39  of  his
    decision was open to  him  but  I  agree  with  Miss  Warren  that  the
    appellant was not inconsistent in his evidence about when the  beatings
    began but was merely stating, for example at Q73, that  he  was  beaten
    for drinking alcohol from the age of 19. He  had  stated  the  beatings
    began when he was 15/16 years of age and it  seems  the  Judge  latched
    onto his alter answers as evidence that he had been inconsistent. I  do
    not find that to be the case.

19. As the Judge viewed this as a material discrepancy in his evidence then
    there must be an error.

20. As to the submission the Judge erred in his approach to  Section  8  of
    the 2004 Act I disagree  with  Miss  Warren's  submissions.  The  Judge
    considered this in some detail and his findings appear open to him.

21. In considering whether the above error is  material  I  have  concluded
    that it must be material because:

      a) The Judge used this finding in assessing whether the appellant  was
         an atheist and having concluded he was not he found  there  was  no
         risk to the appellant.

      b) The Judge did not consider Dr Fatah's report because he had already
         rejected his claim to be an atheist.

      c) The Judge concluded he could return back to Sulaymaniyah which  was
         where his family lived and  there  has  been  no  consideration  of
         whether he could safely reside elsewhere in the IKR. There has been
         no detailed assessment of the factors in AA (Iraq)  v  SSHD  [2017]
         EWCA Civ 944 and AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).

22. I have further considered whether this is a matter that  could  be  re-
    made in the Upper Tribunal. I am satisfied that further  oral  evidence
    is likely to be required as the Judge will  have  to  consider  overall
    credibility in light of my above findings.

23. Both representatives indicated that if there was an error  in  law  the
    matter should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
    hearing.

24. I have considered whether this is an appropriate case to  preserve  any
    findings but take the view that the Judge, hearing the  appeal,  should
    be unfettered and should be entitled to make his or her own findings on
    the evidence presented and in the event that his  account  is  accepted
    then findings on internal relocation will be required having regard  to
    AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and AA  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).

    DECISION

25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  I  set  aside  the  decision.  I
    remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  a  Judge
    other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hodgkinson.


Signed                              Date     23/04/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
