
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
PA/01731/2016

                                                    PA/01839/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 22 June 2017                       |         On 28 June 2017             |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                   MR & ZA
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr K Lawson, instructed by Cohesion Legal Services
Centre
For the respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ransley promulgated 21.11.16,  dismissing  their  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 2.2.16, to refuse
    their protection claims.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 7.11.16.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Dineen  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    13.1.17. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission on 8.3.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 22.6.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made adverse credibility findings and did
    not accept the appellants' claim to be gay men and thus did not  accept
    that there was any real risk of persecution or serious harm  on  return
    to Pakistan.

 7. The grounds of application for  permission  challenge  the  credibility
    finding.

 8. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Grubb found no  basis  for  the
    claim that the judge applied the wrong standard of proof, or failed  to
    properly deal with the deception issue, and thus refused permission  on
    those grounds.

 9. However, Judge Grubb found it arguable that the judge's  assessment  of
    the supporting witnesses' evidence was flawed, stating "It is  arguably
    not a good reason to  disbelieve  them  simply  because  their  refugee
    status (as gay men) was  granted  by  the  Home  Office  without  their
    veracity being tested in court."

10. Judge Grubb also found it arguable that the judge wrongly rejected  the
    evidence of  RB, in part, on a series of inconsistencies [50] which did
    not go to the substance of that witness' evidence.

11. At the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Lawson  sought  leave  to  pursue  an
    additional ground of appeal, outside those permitted by Judge Grubb. In
    essence, this was to challenge the finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at [62] that the second appellant gave contradictory evidence about  an
    English language test. I refused permission to add this ground at  this
    late stage as it was not pleaded in the application for  permission.  I
    note that the judge may have confused the issue of an English  language
    certificate obtained by  deception,  which  he  said  in  evidence  was
    'genuine and not fake,' with what he said  in  interview  about  having
    been given a fake letter, which was not the test certificate but a  CAS
    letter. He was not referring to the test certificate in interview.  The
    appellant was thus not giving contradictory  evidence,  but  the  point
    carries little weight  as  it  was  clear  that  the  judge  found  the
    appellants had practised deception in other ways in relation  to  their
    student applications.

12. However, in relation to the first ground granted permission to  appeal,
    it appears from a reading of the decision between [54]  and  [58]  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge may have discounted the evidence  of  the
    appellant's three supporting  witnesses  primarily  because  they  were
    granted refugee status without having to go through the appeal  process
    and their claims of their own sexuality tested, as noted at [54].

13. At [55] the judge took into account that Mr RA's claim  for  asylum  on
    the basis of his sexuality as a gay man has  never  been  tested  in  a
    court. A similar point is made at [56] and again at [57] in relation to
    the other two witnesses.

14. A judge is entitled to reject or disbelieve such evidence, even if  the
    witnesses are themselves  genuinely  gay,  but  cogent  and  defensible
    reasons for doing so must be provided in the decision. Further, a judge
    is also entitled to conclude that when  the  rest  of  the  appellants'
    evidence was so lacking in credibility, taken in context of the  whole,
    the evidence of the three  witnesses  did  not  outweigh  the  negative
    credibility findings. In effect, that is how the judge  dealt  in  part
    with the evidence of the witness RA at [55] of the decision. Similarly,
    at [58] the judge gave cogent reasons for concluding that  the  witness
    NUD's evidence that  he  knew  the  appellant  to  be  gay  because  of
    stereotypically gay mannerisms and  gestures.   However,  at  [57]  the
    judge stated that Mr RB's evidence was "that because he is  a  gay  man
    from  Pakistan  he  recognised  that  Mr  [MR]  is  gay.  However,  the
    credibility of Mr [RB]'s claim to be a gay man has not been tested in a
    court." No other reason has been  given  for  rejecting  this  witness'
    evidence.

15. All three witnesses were present at court  and  adopted  their  witness
    statements as their respective evidence in chief. They were not  cross-
    examined by the Home Office Presenting Officer, as stated at  [8]  that
    Mr Khan had no questions to ask them. It may have  been  difficult  for
    the presenting officer to challenge their sexuality,  given  that  they
    had each been accepted by the Secretary of State to  be  gay,  but  one
    might  ask  what  more  each  witness  could  have  done  than  present
    themselves as witnesses open to challenge in court. That their  claimed
    sexuality had not previously been tested in court, is not  an  adequate
    reason, either in whole or part, to reject their evidence altogether.

16. Even if the fact that their respective claimed sexuality had never been
    tested in a court might  have  been  a  relevant  factor  in  assessing
    credibility, it would  have  been  insufficient  alone  to  reject  the
    evidence. The point has even less  relevance  when  it  is  clear  that
    evidence of these witnesses was open to  challenge  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing as they  presented  themselves  and  gave  oral
    evidence, adopting their witness statements.  However,  the  presenting
    officer chose not to  challenge  their  evidence,  stating  he  had  no
    questions to ask.

17. Whilst the judge stated at [53] that  the  credibility  of  the  asylum
    claims had to be assessed by  looking  at  all  the  evidence  "in  the
    round," and has set out details of their written statement accounts, it
    does appear that their evidence was accorded  little  weight  primarily
    because their claims to be gay had not been tested  in  court.  In  the
    circumstances, this amounts to an error of law undermining the  overall
    credibility assessment.

18. There is less merit in the criticism of the judge's  treatment  of  RB,
    the final ground on which permission has been granted.  The  judge  was
    entitled at [50] to point  out  a  series  of  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence as to when the appellant MR first met the  minister.  He  gave
    different months and a peculiarly wide range of months, but  under  the
    pressure of  cross-examination  eventually  plumped  for  August  2015.
    However, that was not  possible  since  the  minister  was  away  on  a
    sabbatical between May and September 2015.

19. Whilst the appellant's poor evidence on this point was  highlighted  by
    the judge, it was not an inconsistency of the minister, whose  evidence
    was not challenged by any cross-examination by the presenting officer.

20. The judge discounted the weight to be given  to  the  evidence  of  the
    minister, in the light of the appellant MR's inconstancies as  to  when
    he met the minister. However, this was not a criticism of the  witness,
    but an assessment of the appellant's interaction with the minister.  It
    is clear that the appellant Mr's account was not  credible.  The  judge
    accepted that RB gave evidence in good faith, but was entitled to point
    out that the minister's believe that the appellants  are  gay  men  was
    largely due to what they had told him. In the circumstances,  there  is
    no merit in this ground of appeal.

21. It follows, for the reasons stated, that I have found such error of law
    in the making of the decision as to require the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be set aside and remade.

Remittal

22. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal vitiate the credibility  findings  and  the  conclusions  from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues in the appeal.

23. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.



Conclusions:



24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Consequential Directions

 1.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester;

 2. The appeal is to be relisted at the first available date;

 3. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

 4. The ELH is 3 hours;

 5. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Ransley;

 6. An interpreter in Urdu will be required.

 7. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

Anonymity
I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order. Given the circumstances,  I  continue  anonymity
order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons:      No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup




