
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01625/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 24th August 2017                 |On 13th September 2017                  |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   MR AAD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Palestinian Authority  born  on  [  ]
    1988.  The Appellant left Lebanon by plane using his Palestinian travel
    document and entered the UK via Libya,  thereafter  by  ship  and  then
    concealed in a lorry on 30th April 2015 claiming  asylum  on  the  same
    day.  The Appellant's claim for asylum was refused by the Secretary  of
    State by Notice of Refusal dated 25th September 2015.   Thereafter  the
    Appellant has been involved in a substantial  number  of  appeals.   He
    initially appealed to Immigration Judge Walker sitting at Hatton  Cross
    on 25th December 2016.  That appeal was  dismissed  in  a  promulgation
    dated 4th February 2016.  Thereafter Grounds of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal were lodged on 12th February  2016.   Permission  was  refused
    initially by Immigration Judge Parkes but was latterly granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Finch on 12th April 2016.

 2. That appeal came before  (then)  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara
    sitting at Field House on 27th May 2016.  Judge Kamara found a material
    error of law and remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
    reheard.  That hearing came before Immigration Judge O'Garro sitting at
    Hatton Cross  on  22nd  November  2016.   In  a  Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated  on  12th  January  2017  Judge   O'Garro   dismissed   the
    Appellant's appeal again on asylum and human rights grounds  and  found
    that the Appellant was not entitled  to  humanitarian  protection.   On
    30th January 2016 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    In an undated permission to appeal Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Osborne refused permission to appeal.  Indeed, Judge Osborne considered
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  was  careful,  well-
    reasoned, nuanced and focused.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal  were  lodged
    on 16th May 2017.

 3. On 5th July 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Macleman's grant of permission is worth considering.  He
    noted that the Appellant is a Palestinian refugee born and  brought  up
    in Lebanon.  The principal reasons for rejecting the Appellant's claims
    were sufficiency of protection within camps in Lebanon, the possibility
    of relocation to another camp or outside a camp, exclusion from refugee
    protection for having voluntarily left the camp under Article  1D,  and
    no reasonable likelihood of serious harm on return.  In dismissing  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  Judge  O'Garro  found  that
    there was sufficiency of protection available, that the  Appellant  was
    not forced to leave the camp but did  so  for  other  reasons  and  the
    conditions in the camp, albeit that they had worsened, did not infringe
    Article 3 or justify humanitarian protection.

 4. Judge Macleman found the grounds of challenge less than clear and noted
    that they  asserted  that  the  judge  did  not  deal  adequately  with
    sufficiency of protection and that the claim was bound  to  succeed  on
    the background  evidence  on  that  issue.   He  considered  that  that
    appeared to overstate the Appellant's case and to overlook  that  there
    were other reasons for it to fail, and that the Appellant was in effect
    asking the First-tier Tribunal to go beyond the country guidance relied
    upon in the Respondent's decision without facing  up  to  the  need  to
    demonstrate how the nature of the evidence had changed.

 5. However, in the important paragraph in the grant of  permission,  Judge
    Macleman noted that the grounds did identify arguable  shortcomings  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's expression of its reasons at paragraph 50, an
    arguable lack of  consideration  of  the  case  for  the  Appellant  by
    reference to background evidence as set out in his  skeleton  argument,
    and an erroneous reliance on country  guidance  which  related  to  the
    occupied territories and not to Lebanon.

 6. The Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of Appeal on 25th  July
    2017.  It is on the basis of the above that the appeal comes before  me
    to determine whether or not there is  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Appellant  appears  by  his
    instructed Counsel, Mr Harding.   Mr  Harding  is  familiar  with  this
    matter.  He appeared before Judge O'Garro at Hatton Cross  in  November
    2016, he is the author of the Grounds of Appeal and also the author  of
    the renewed Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Clarke.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Harding acknowledges  that  there  has  been  a  certain  amount  of
    "grudgingness" by the judges granting or considering  applications  for
    permission to enable this matter to proceed, but he  submits  that  the
    grounds are valid grounds and that he stands by them.  In particular he
    starts by referring to the test that should have been applied, pointing
    out that in fact in the Rule  24  response  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative has made the same mistake as the judge as  the  question
    is not one of the risk on return, but that the question the  judge  had
    to answer, given that the Appellant was a refugee, was whether  Article
    1D of the Refugee Convention applied?  That section states:-

         "This Convention shall not apply to  persons  who  are  at  present
         receiving from organs or agencies of the United Nations other  than
         the United Nations High Commissioner  for  Refugees  protection  or
         assistance.

         When such protection or  assistance  has  ceased  for  any  reason,
         without the position of such persons being definitively settled  in
         accordance with the relevant resolutions  adopted  by  the  General
         Assembly of the United Nations, these persons shall ipso  facto  be
         entitled to the benefits of this Convention."

 8. Consequently, Mr Harding puts it to me  that  the  first  question  was
    "whether ... such protection or assistance has ceased for any  reason".
    It is the contention of Mr  Harding  that  the  test  therefore  to  be
    applied should not be construed restrictively and that the phrase  will
    include:-

      a) the termination of UNRWA as an agency;

      b) the discontinuance of UNRWA's activities; or

      c) any objective reason outside the control of the  person  concerned,
         such that the person is unable to  (re)  avail  themselves  of  the
         protection or assistance of UNRWA and that both protection  related
         as well as  practical  legal  or  safety  barriers  to  return  are
         relevant to this assessment.

 9. It is the submission of Mr Harding that at paragraph 49 of her decision
    Judge O'Garro has considered a sufficiency of protection  type  test  -
    from the "security committee" of the camp.  He submits that  the  wrong
    test has consequently been applied at paragraphs 48 and 49.  He  refers
    me to his initial skeleton  argument  and  the  bundle  that  was  made
    available before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He submits that I need
    to consider the UNHCR's  interpretation  of  Article  1D  of  the  1951
    Convention and that I also need to consider the  Australian  Government
    Refugee Review Tribunal document from 2011 with  regard  to  protection
    within the Lebanon.  He submits that these documents give views  as  to
    how the Appellant is likely to finish up  being  questioned  if  he  is
    returned and the persecution that he may thereafter  be  subjected  to.
    It is therefore his  submission  that  the  finding  by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 48 and 49 that although the Appellant has a subjective  fear
    of harm from terrorist  groups  that  he  had  the  option  of  getting
    protection from the security committee in the camp  which  he  did  not
    bother to access but which his  family  appeared  to  have  sought  and
    obtained was open to him.  He submits that  that  is  perverse  and  an
    error of law and refers me to paragraph 50 which finds therein that the
    judge was not satisfied that the Appellant's  personal  safety  was  at
    serious risk and that  it  was  impossible  for  the  UNRWA  agency  to
    guarantee  his  leaving  conditions  in  the  refugee  camps  would  be
    commensurate with the mission entrusted to  that  agency's  protection.
    He submits that that is contrary to the test that is set out above  and
    refers me to both paragraphs 51 and 52  of  the  decision  and  to  the
    finding that the Appellant left the refugee camp for  his  own  reasons
    and not because he was forced to do  so  as  he  could  not  avail  the
    protection of the UNRWA was perverse and flawed.

10. Further and briefly Mr Harding refers to  the  claim  relating  to  the
    breach of the Appellant's Article 3 rights and that  the  reference  to
    the case law therein is the wrong authority and further  the  reference
    at paragraph 56 that the groups  fighting  do  not  pose  a  threat  to
    civilians is unclear, particularly bearing in mind that for the purpose
    of this appeal it would not be appropriate to  consider  the  Appellant
    merely as a civilian.  On that basis he submits that there are material
    errors of law and he asked me to set aside the decision  and  to  remit
    the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. In response Mr Clarke says that there is  no  material  error  of  law,
    albeit that he accepts that if there is no protection from  UNRWA  then
    the Appellant would  be  entitled  to  succeed.   However,  it  is  his
    contention that the judge has directed herself correctly with regard to
    Article 1D, both at paragraphs 42 and 44 of her decision.  She has  set
    out the law in considerable detail therein and  the  approach  she  has
    adopted in noting that the national authorities must  verify  not  only
    that the applicant actually sought assistance from the UNRWA  and  that
    the assistance has ceased, and that the applicant is not caught by  any
    other grounds of exclusion laid down in Article 12 is exactly what  the
    judge has done.  He notes that Mr Harding on behalf  of  the  Appellant
    states that the UNRWA is not offering protection in the first place and
    that this is generic to people who live in the camps.  He  states  that
    the UNRWA were directly involved in the administration of the camps and
    to say not is perverse. Therefore, he submits they have a  say  on  how
    matters are policed in the camps and so it  is  necessary  to  look  at
    Article 1D and it is difficult to construe a policy that the camps  are
    not agencies of the United Nations and therefore the general principles
    submitted by Mr Harding are wrong.

12. He submits that the judge's findings from paragraph 48 onwards are well-
    reasoned and that the Appellant could seek  protection  on  return  and
    that it has not been demonstrated  that  he  cannot  avail  himself  of
    protection.  He further notes that the findings made  at  paragraph  52
    have not been challenged and that it is not  therefore  open  to  argue
    that the Appellant sought assistance or why he could not  go  back  and
    seek assistance, and therefore the ground is misconceived and does  not
    disclose a material error of law.

13. So far as the claim pursuant to Article 3 is concerned,  he  notes  the
    case law at paragraph 55 and he accepts that it is the wrong  authority
    that has been referred to.  However,  he  does  take  me  back  to  the
    original Grounds of Appeal, pointing out that the authority referred to
    therein  of  MM  and  FH  (Stateless  Palestinians  -  KK,  IH,  HE  CG
    reaffirmed) Lebanon v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    confirms that discrimination does not amount to a breach of Article  3.
    He submits that looking at the skeleton argument produced by Mr Harding
    it is difficult to  see  how  it  warrants  a  departure  from  country
    guidance and consequently there is no material error of law.  He  asked
    me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

14.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.





Findings on Error of Law

16. Mr Harding in his final submission to me conceded that there  was  some
    merit in the submissions made by Mr Clarke, but what Mr Clarke seeks to
    do (and I agree with the contentions made by Mr Harding), is to rewrite
    the decision and to rewrite it without the evidence being in  front  of
    him.  Had the judge adopted that approach  then  she  might  have  been
    entitled to come  to  the  decision  that  she  did.   Looking  at  the
    interpretation and the approach to be adopted under Article 1D,  it  is
    lacking in that the judge has failed to  grapple  with  the  fact  that
    security at the camps is run by Fattah and other agencies.  It seems to
    me that the judge has applied the wrong test  under  Article  1D.   The
    judge should have considered whether protection under 1D or  assistance
    has ceased for any reason and has  failed  to  consider  the  objective
    reasons why the Appellant is unable to return or avail himself  of  the
    protection or assistance of UNRWA.

17. What the judge does is, as Mr Harding suggests, consider a  sufficiency
    of protection test from the security committee of the camp rather  than
    the correct test under Article 1D of the Refugee Convention.   Had  the
    judge applied the test as to whether the  Appellant  could  objectively
    avail himself of the protection of  either  the  state  or  the  UNRWA,
    rather than when he can avail himself of  whichever  militants  control
    the refugee camp, it is quite possible that she would  have  reached  a
    different decision.  Mr Harding is correct in  his  argument  that  the
    Appellant is a refugee and the question of  sufficiency  of  protection
    has already been answered negatively in the  Appellant's  favour  as  a
    matter of law.  I do not go so far as to remake the decision.  There is
    a material error of law  for  all  the  above  reasons,  including  the
    failure to address the correct authority under Article 3.   It  is  the
    contention of Mr Harding that it is hard to see how the claim can  fail
    given the background material before the judge.  That is a  matter  for
    further consideration.  Mr Harding indicates that in the event  that  I
    find a material error of law (which I do), then there is new  evidence,
    including documentation from the UNRWA regarding the  ability  to  live
    outside the camp, as well as some background material, that it would be
    necessary for the Tribunal to consider.  Consequently, in finding there
    is a material error of law, and whilst noting the  lengthy  history  of
    this matter, I think in the interests of justice the  correct  approach
    is to set aside the decision and to remit the matter back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing with none of the findings of fact to stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law.  The decision is set aside and the following directions are to stand:-

 1. The matter is remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross to be heard de novo before any Tribunal Judge  other  than
    Immigration Judge O'Garro or Immigration Judge Walker.

 2. That there be leave to either party to file and serve  such  subjective
    and/or objective evidence upon which they seek to rely within  28  days
    of receipt of these directions.

 3. That so far as is practical within the administration the appeal herein
    be expedited, bearing in mind the number of times this matter has  been
    back and forth between the First-tier and Upper Tribunal.

 4. That in the event of the Appellant requiring an  interpreter  that  his
    instructing solicitors do advise as to the language requirement of that
    interpreter within seven days of receipt of these directions.

 5. That the estimated length of hearing is placed at three hours.

Anonymity

The anonymity direction  currently  in  place  is  not  challenged  and  the
direction do remain in place pending the remitted rehearing of  this  matter
before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

