
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01711/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Monday 18 May 2020                |On Thursday 21 May 2020              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     N A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is accepted to be a Kurdish citizen of Iraq, from Kirkuk.
     He sought asylum in the UK on or around 28 July 2016.  The  respondent
    rejected his claim by  a  decision  dated  7  February  2019.   It  was
    accepted at [39-40] that his village was destroyed  by  Daesh  but  not
    that he was otherwise credible or that he had any problems due  to  his
    father having been a Ba'athist.  The threat from Daesh was at  an  end.
    It was noted at [50] that he said that his only identification  was  an
    Iraqi nationality certificate which an agent had taken from him, but it
    was held that he could obtain documentation either  in  the  UK  or  in
    Iraq.

 2. FtT Judge Bircher  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 29 April 2019.  She did not find him generally credible.
      On documentation, she said at [13] that he  could  "either  secure  a
    passport / travel documents via the Iraqi Embassy in the UK or  have  a
    family member secure travel documents with the benefit  of  the  family
    book" and at [14] that  he  could  obtain  documentation,  because  she
    rejected his account of losing contact  with  his  uncle  and  extended
    family, and was satisfied that  he  had  maintained  contact  with  his
    relatives in Iraq.

 3. UTJ Dawson heard the appellant's appeal to the UT on  16  August  2019.
    In his decision dated 22 and promulgated on 27 August 2019 he  recorded
    at [8] that the appellant did  not  challenge  the  FtT's  findings  on
    Ba'ath risk or on ability to obtain a CSID and that the sole ground was
    failure to consider internal relocation in light of guidance on risk in
    Kirkuk.  The FtT's decision was set aside at [10] on a "limited basis".
     Directions were made for further resolution of  the  case  in  the  UT
    after further guidance was available on ability  to  return  to  Kirkuk
    and, if not, on availability of relocation within Iraq,  including  the
    IKR.

 4. On 17 January 2019 directions were issued to enable  the  determination
    of the appeal to be completed by a differently constituted tribunal.

 5. The UT  framed  directions,  dated  19  March  2020,  with  a  view  to
    determination without a further hearing, by submissions only, in  light
    of SMO and others [2019] UKUT 00400.  The  directions  appear  to  have
    been issued by email to both parties on 25 March 2020.

 6. The SSHD was to file a statement of her position by 2 April  2020.   To
    date, no statement is on the file.

 7. The  appellant  has  provided  written  submissions  (headed  "skeleton
    argument"), attached to an email dated 23 April 2020, sent  to  the  UT
    and to the SSHD.  He puts his case solely on lack of documentation.

 8. The appellant says at [1] that "it is accepted that he left  Iraq  with
    his ID documents and his case [was] determined on  the  basis  that  he
    could apply for replacement documentation".

 9. I do not find that to be quite accurate.  The appellant claimed to have
    parted with his nationality certificate, but he was found generally not
    credible.  He does not specify a positive acceptance by the SSHD  or  a
    positive finding by the FtT that he has no documentation, and I  cannot
    identify  any.   The  FtT's  consideration  of  obtaining   replacement
    documentation is in the  alternative,  and  is  not  the  crux  of  its
    decision.

10. The appellant at [3] repeats his "evidence", but  that  is  beside  the
    point.  The resolution of his case depends on  findings  made,  not  on
    evidence tendered.  At [4] he says there is "no evidence" that he has a
    nationality certificate, or access to colour copies of it; but  absence
    of evidence does not tend in his favour.  It is for  him  to  establish
    his case, not for the SSHD to achieve the near impossibility of proving
    the contrary.

11. At [5] the appellant says that it is not suggested within  the  [FtT's]
    determination that he knows any details from his CSID; that he has  not
    previously given evidence on this; and that "if relevant,  the  ability
    to give further evidence on this point is sought".  I do  not  find  it
    appropriate to pursue that possibility, for several reasons:

      i) no coherent application  for  admission  of  further  evidence,  by
         reference to rules, directions, or the law, is formulated;

     ii) the appellant fails to say what his evidence would be, if given the
         chance;

    iii) if evidence were to be admitted, it is difficult  to  see  that  it
         would consist of anything but a denial  of  recollection  of  these
         details, a rather pointless exercise; and

     iv) the general findings on lack of credibility and on ongoing  contact
         with relatives in Iraq are adequate to cover the issue.

12. From [7] - [27] the appellant formulates his case by reference  to  SMO
    on the basis of having no ID, no family member to assist  him,  and  no
    means of obtaining documentation either in the UK or in Iraq.  However,
    for the reasons given above, that case is based  partly  on  assertions
    which he failed to establish in the FtT, in whose relevant  conclusions
    no error has been shown, and partly on assertions which  are  expressly
    contrary to the retained findings of the FtT.  Further,  this  line  of
    argument is contrary to the case he put at the error  of  law  hearing,
    when he accepted that there was  no  error  in  the  FtT's  finding  on
    ability to obtain a CSID.

13. At [28] the appellant "advises that he has  made  an  approach  to  the
    Iraqi Embassy and they have been unable to assist".   This,  again,  is
    defective:

      i) the legal and procedural requirements for admission of new evidence
         are ignored;

     ii) the assertion is  vacuous,  with  no  details  of  any  information
         advanced to the Embassy; and

    iii) there is, in any event, no reason to accept  that  any  effort  was
         made in good faith.

14. The appellant concludes at [29] that "he could not obtain a replacement
    CSID in these circumstances".  However,  he  has  failed  to  establish
    circumstances by which such a finding should be made, or  by  which  he
    qualifies for protection.

15. The decision of the FtT has been set  aside.   The  decision  which  is
    substituted is that the appeal, as originally brought to  the  FtT,  is
    dismissed.

16. An anonymity  direction  is  in  place.   There  may  be  no  remaining
    justification for one,  but  the  matter  has  not  been  addressed  by
    parties, and anonymity is maintained at this stage.


  Hugh Macleman
  UT Judge Macleman
  18 May 2020

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.

