

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01982/2019

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 January 2020                      |On 4 February 2020                 |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between
                                     RU
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R Wilcox instructed by Thompson & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Ms Bassi Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Dunipace promulgated on the 31 October 2019 in which
        the Judge dismissed the appellants appeal on protection  and  human
        right grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who  was  born  on  the  7
        January 1990.
     3. The Judge records that the appellant's nationality and identity are
        not in dispute [11].
     4. The appellant claimed a real risk on return from the  Awami  League
        as a result of his political activities with Islami Chhatra  Shibir
        (ICS)  which  is  the  student  wing  of  the  Jamaat-e-Islami   in
        Bangladesh. The aim of this group is to change the existing  system
        of education on the basis of Islamic values, to inspire students to
        acquire Islamic knowledge and to prepare them to take part  in  the
        struggle for establishing an Islamic way of life. A significant aim
        of the outfit is to establish an Afghanistan-Taliban type  Islamist
        regime in Bangladesh. Consequently, the outfit is opposed to forces
        of modernization, secularism and democracy.  The  Bangladesh  Awami
        League, by contrast, styles itself  as  the  leader  of  the  "pro-
        liberation" forces in  Bangladesh,  promoting  secular  and  social
        democratic sections of the political establishment in  the  country
        with movement towards the middle of the political spectrum.
     5. The Judge records the appellants claim that he faced problems  with
        the Awami League from 1 August 2009 when he was attacked by 5 or  6
        people after a meeting and beaten with sticks, rods  and  a  hammer
        which left him unconscious and needing hospital  treatment  for  10
        days. The attack was reported to  the  police,  but  the  appellant
        claimed they did not accept his complaint.
     6. The appellant claims  he  left  for  the  UK  on  27  January  2010
        travelling via Dubai, arriving on 28 January 2010.  On  2  February
        2013, at a meeting at the Dasur Bazaar where  his  father  was  the
        chief guest, his father  was  attacked  by  the  Awami  League  who
        stabbed his father to death.
     7. The appellant states his mother and sister  remain  in  Bangladesh.
        His sister is married and lives in Dhaka.
     8. The appellant claims he was introduced to the party by  his  father
        who was a publicity secretary of the local unit of Jamaat-e-Islami.
        The appellant claimed to be motivated by  his  father's  activities
        and of others within the party. The appellant joined the  party  in
        2006 claimed to have been an active worker of his local branch.  He
        became Secretary of that  branch  towards  the  end  of  2006.  His
        duties/role was to look after his assigned area  by  visiting  each
        new member's house or educational institution find out if they were
        genuine students or not. The appellant claimed his responsibilities
        also included looking after social and  community  welfare  of  the
        people which included arranging food for the poor  during  Ramadan.
        The appellant claimed he and other members too quotes from  various
        verses of the Koran and its translations and explained those to the
        people and distributable booklets to other  students  in  order  to
        motivate them to have good character.
     9. The appellant claims the Awami league were jealous as a  result  of
        his party's popularity honesty and  sincerity  claiming  his  party
        believes in peace, human rights and  democracy  whereas  the  Awami
        League party only believe in democracy. The  appellant  claims  the
        Awami League are a corrupt party.
    10. On 1 August 2009 the appellant claimed he  first  started  to  face
        problems. He and others were gathered at an office  for  a  meeting
        after which he was walking towards his house when  around  5  or  6
        Awami League activists attacked him with sticks, rods and a hammer,
        started punching him, and beat him up. The  appellant  claims  they
        attacked him  with  the  intention  of  killing  him  resulting  in
        injuries to his left-hand finger  and  right  foot.  The  appellant
        claims he was left unconscious.  People in a local bazaar  saw  him
        and took him to a nearby hospital where he was treated for 10 days.
        After that incident other members of the party tried to complain to
        the police, but they chose not to accept  any  of  the  complaints.
        Following his release from hospital the appellant claims  he  could
        not go back to his home village and so went to another  village  to
        hide from the Awami League.
    11. The appellant claims that soon after going into hiding he left  the
        United Kingdom on 27 January 2010. His father paid for  his  ticket
        to come to the UK.
    12. The appellant claims that his  father  and  10  other  people  were
        injured on 2 February 2013 and that although his father  was  taken
        to hospital he was bleeding profusely and was pronounced dead  upon
        arrival.
    13. The appellant also claims his brother was kidnapped by  members  of
        the Awami League in 2016.  The  appellant  claims  his  mother  was
        forced to sign over the deeds to her property in the  name  of  the
        Awami League members to arrange for the money to be  paid  for  the
        ransoms they demanded. The appellant claims that as  a  result  his
        brother was released from captivity.  His mother was handed back  a
        relatively small proportion of the value of the house that had been
        signed over.
    14. The appellant claims that since arrival in the  United  Kingdom  he
        continues to promote the party  aims  and  objectives  even  though
        there is no party office  in  the  UK  and  speaks  to  members  in
        Bangladesh about the party and asks them if he can be of  any  help
        as he feels safe in the UK.
    15. The Judge, having considered the written evidence  and  having  had
        the benefit of seeing the appellant give his oral evidence  and  be
        cross-examined, sets out findings of fact from [38] of the decision
        under challenge. Those findings can be summarised in the  following
        terms:


                i. Credibility is a crucial issue in the appeal [41].
               ii. The appellant remained in the United Kingdom for 8  years
                   before an application for asylum was lodged which  was  a
                   matter that has some bearing on the question  of  whether
                   there remains a well-founded fear of  persecution;  given
                   that a reasonable inference might be that such risk might
                   diminish over time [42].
              iii. The first mention by the appellant of the  matters  which
                   found his present application for asylum and humanitarian
                   protection was only made after he had been in the  United
                   Kingdom for 8 years and have been served with a  RED.0001
                   by Immigration Officers. The appellant's explanation  for
                   the delay was not found credible  [44].  Alternative,  if
                   the Judge had accepted the  appellant's  explanation  for
                   the delay, it was not found credible to persist with  the
                   position that the appellant was completely unaware of the
                   concept of asylum whilst in the UK  for  this  length  of
                   time [44].
               iv. In relation to the substantive merits of the application,
                   the Judge found the appellant's account of the  structure
                   and organisation of the party he claims to have joined in
                   2006 to be somewhat vague and inconclusive [45].
                v. The Judge took account of  the  copy  letters  lodged  in
                   support the claim but noted they were simply copies, with
                   no reason being provided for why the  original  documents
                   could not have been lodged. The Judge was  not  satisfied
                   on  the  evidence  that  it  had  been  established   the
                   appellant was a member of the ICS at  the  relevant  time
                   [45].
               vi. In relation to the claimed assault  in  2009,  the  Judge
                   noted there was no corroborating evidence to support such
                   a claim and given observations regarding credibility  the
                   Judge felt unable to find this aspect  of  the  case  had
                   been established [46].
              vii. In the alternative, if it was  accepted  there  had  been
                   such an attack, the Judge noted this occurred  almost  10
                   years ago and that in light of there being no evidence of
                   the  appellant  having  participated  in  any   political
                   protests or demonstrations whilst in the UK, which  might
                   have demonstrated  his  commitment  with  this  political
                   cause, and the  fact  his  account  in  relation  to  his
                   political activity in the United Kingdom was "nebulous to
                   say the least", the Judge did not find the appellant  had
                   established a credible real risk on return [46].
             viii. The Judge did not  find  the  appellant  had  established
                   there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that he  will
                   be persecuted upon return to Bangladesh and did not  find
                   that he is entitled to be recognised as a refugee [47].
               ix. The Judge finds the  appellant  had  not  established  he
                   faced a real risk sufficient to  breach  article  3  ECHR
                   [48].
                x. In relation to the human rights aspects,  the  Judge  was
                   not satisfied the appellant had establish  the  existence
                   of very significant obstacles to his  reintegration  into
                   society  in  Bangladesh  or  any  basis  for   succeeding
                   pursuant to paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules
                   [50].
               xi. The Judge did not find that exceptional circumstances had
                   been made out sufficient to render the refusal  a  breach
                   of article 8 ECHR [51].
              xii. The Judge did  not  find  the  appellant  established  an
                   entitlement to leave outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on
                   under any provision of ECHR [52].
             xiii. The Judge found the  appellant  had  not  established  an
                   entitlement to a grant of Humanitarian Protection [54].


    16. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal,  the  operative  part  of
        which is in the following terms:


             2.   Although it is open for the Judge to consider what weight
                  he felt it appropriate  to  place  and  all  the  evidence
                  before him including the delay by the  Appellant  claiming
                  protection it is arguable that the Judge has erred in  law
                  in particular by (a) giving  inadequate  reasons  for  the
                  findings on the substantive merits of the appeal including
                  the Appellant's account of the structure and  organisation
                  of the party which the Judge finds to  be  somewhat  vague
                  and inconclusive without explaining in what respects;  (b)
                  by failing to give adequate or no findings in relation  to
                  the country expert  report  which  was  provided;  (c)  by
                  failing to take into account recent  events  indicating  a
                  continued adverse interest in the Appellant and his family
                  members; (d) by noting that  there  was  no  corroborative
                  evidence in relation to the  Appellant's  account  to  the
                  effect that he was assaulted by the Awami League  in  2009
                  when there is no such requirement  for  corroboration  and
                  (d) by failing to treat  the  Appellant  is  a  vulnerable
                  witness in terms of the appellant's current mental  health
                  symptoms.



Error of law


    17. Mr Wilcox on behalf of the  appellant  opened  his  submissions  by
        challenging the structure of the decision claiming that the section
        8 of the Treatment of Claimants Act 2004 issues had been dealt with
        at [42 - 44] in which it was found the delay in  making  the  claim
        affected the appellant's credibility and which then treated such  a
        finding as determinative.
    18. Section 8 was recently considered by the Court of Appeal in  In  KA
        (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 914  in  which  it  was  found
        there is nothing  in  principle  wrong  with  taking  account  when
        assessing credibility, the failure to make  an  earlier  claim  for
        asylum but there needs, in  reality,  to  have  been  a  reasonable
        opportunity to do so.  It cannot be inferred from mere presence  in
        a nominally safe country.  The appellant in the current appeal,  at
        the date he entered the United Kingdom, was  not  an  unaccompanied
        minor and it was not established  the  appellant  did  not  have  a
        reasonable opportunity to claim asylum, as found by the  Judge.  It
        is hard to believe that a person living in the United Kingdom for 8
        years would not have been aware of the considerable press  coverage
        of refugee issues through the national press, both printed,  visual
        (TV), and audio (Radio). This is a  finding  within  the  range  of
        those reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence. I find no legal
        error  has  been  established  in  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
        appellant remained in the United Kingdom for a  substantial  period
        of time in which he  failed  to  make  a  claim  for  international
        protection until threatened with removal following  his  arrest  by
        the Immigration Authorities. I do not find it made  out  the  Judge
        was not entitled to find the appellant's failure to claim asylum at
        the earliest opportunity warranted less weight  being  attached  to
        his claims.
    19. The assertion by  Mr  Wilcox  that  having  found  the  appellant's
        credibility damaged for this reason the  Judge  found  this  aspect
        determinative has no arguable  merit.  The  Judge  clearly  states,
        having set  out  findings  pursuant  to  section  8,  that  he  was
        thereafter going to consider  the  position  of  the  appellant  in
        relation to the substantive merits of the  application  from  [45].
        The Judge clearly did so. As Miss Bassi submitted it is  not  legal
        error for the Judge to have  considered  section  8  first  and  no
        authority was provided to support the claim issues had to be  taken
        in any particular order. The important point is that the Judge  was
        required to consider all the available evidence with  the  required
        degree of anxious scrutiny and only  having  done  so  to  set  out
        findings  upon  the  relevant  points  leading  to   whatever   the
        conclusion may be.
    20. Mr Wilcox also submitted insufficient reasons  had  been  given  in
        relation to a core aspect of the Judge's finding at [45]  in  which
        he found the appellant's account of the structure and  organisation
        of the party 'vague and inconclusive'. The finding of the Judge  in
        that paragraph was that the appellant had not established  that  he
        was a member of the ICS at the relevant time as he claimed. That is
        the finding. The  reasons  for  that  finding  include  the  Judges
        opinion,  having  had  the  benefit  of  seeing  and  hearing  oral
        evidence, that the appellant's evidence was vague and inconclusive.
         The Judge was  arguably  not  required  to  do  more.  Judges  are
        required to assess the evidence which is what this Judge  did.  The
        argument the Judge should have written  more  setting  out  why  he
        found that evidence  vague  and  inconclusive  does  not  establish
        arguable legal error. It is not made out that conclusion is outside
        the range of findings reasonably open to the Judge. The grounds  do
        not, arguably, establish that the Judges opinion is  irrational  or
        contrary to the evidence given.
    21. Mr Wilcox also asserts the Judge erred  in  failing  to  treat  the
        appellant as a vulnerable witness.
    22. In the Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010:  Child,
        vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance, it is said that,
        although some individuals are by definition vulnerable, others  are
        less easily identifiable. Factors to be taken into account  include
        mental health problems social or learning  difficulties,  religious
        beliefs  and  practices,  sexual  orientation,  ethnic  social  and
        cultural background domestic and employment circumstances  physical
        disability or impairment that may affect the  giving  of  evidence.
        The Guidance sets out factors to be taken into account at the  case
        management review hearings and during the hearing itself.
    23. In SB (vulnerable adult: credibility) Ghana [2019] UKUT 398 it  was
        found the fact that a judicial  fact-finder  decides  to  treat  an
        appellant or witness as a vulnerable adult does not mean  that  any
        adverse credibility finding in respect of that person is thereby to
        be regarded as inherently problematic and thus open to challenge on
        appeal; By applying the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No  2  of
        2010, two aims are achieved. First, the  judicial  factfinder  will
        ensure the best practicable conditions for the person concerned  to
        give their evidence. Secondly, the vulnerability will also be taken
        into account when assessing the credibility of that  evidence;  The
        Guidance makes it plain that it is for the judicial  factfinder  to
        determine  the  relationship  between  the  vulnerability  and  the
        evidence that is adduced.
    24. The Guidance states:


              "3.      The  consequences  of  such   vulnerability   differ
                  according  to  the  degree  to  which  an  individual   is
                  affected. It is a matter for you to determine  the  extent
                  of an identified vulnerability, the effect on the  quality
                  of the evidence and  the  weight  to  be  placed  on  such
                  vulnerability in assessing the evidence before you, taking
                  into account the evidence as a whole".


    25. The Judge was clearly aware  of  the  medical  evidence  which  was
        specifically referred to in submissions, as recorded by  the  Judge
        at  [34],  in  which  the  Judge  noted  the  appellant's  advocate
        submission that such evidence tended  to  support  the  appellant's
        account given that his presenting symptoms were consistent  with  a
        diagnosis of anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder. The  Judge
        specifically refers to the report from  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist
        who makes reference to the appellant suffering from  an  Adjustment
        Disorder as a result of the lack of certainty  in  his  immigration
        status and the threat of deportation, with the doctor being  unable
        to confirm the level of fear of persecution in Bangladesh.
    26.  The  Case  Management  Review  in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal   was
        undertaken  as  a  paper  exercised  following  completion  by  the
        appellant's representatives of a reply form dated  23  April  2019.
        Question 9 of that form asks:


             "Do you, your representative, or any of  your  witnesses  have
             any disabilities or vulnerabilities which might affect  you  or
             their ability to access the hearing centre or to take  part  in
             the hearing of the  appeal/give  evidence?  (A  person  may  be
             considered vulnerable  for  many  different  reasons  including
             childhood,  advanced  age,  physical  disability,   ill-health,
             cognitive  impairment,  learning  disability,   mental   health
             problems, communication difficulties, difficulty  in  accessing
             and/or  understanding  complex   information,   experience   of
             domestic violence, sexual abuse, trafficking or torture,  being
             in detention.)"


    27. The reply  given  to  the  above  question  was  "No".  It  is  not
        established any submissions were made to the  Judge  regarding  the
        appellant's vulnerability, in particular it is not  made  out  that
        any submissions were made detailing any adjustments that would need
        to be made to assist the  appellant  in  dealing  with  the  appeal
        process. It is not made out that any interventions were made by the
        appellant's representative at the hearing in relation to the manner
        in which the proceedings were conducted, to ask for any  reasonable
        adjustment at that point. It was not made out at any stage that the
        appellant's mental health conditions adversely  impacted  upon  his
        ability to give evidence, the manner in  which  such  evidence  was
        given, or the manner in which the Judge conducted the  proceedings.
        In relation to consideration of the evidence,  the  grounds  assert
        the Judge should have treated the appellant as a vulnerable witness
        but fails to establish how the issues identified by the Judge could
        rationally be ascribed to his condition as found by the  Consultant
        Psychiatrist. Even if the Judge's finding that certain  aspects  of
        the appellant's evidence were found to be vague  and  inconclusive,
        which can be a consequence of a person's  mental  health  or  other
        vulnerability,  the  evidence  as  a  whole  does  not  support   a
        contention that this is the case in this appeal. The appellant does
        not set out in the grounds of challenge any basis for  establishing
        that the  answers  given  by  the  appellant  were  not  vague  and
        inconclusive. I find the problems identified by the Judge with  the
        appellant's account cannot rationally be ascribed to his condition.


    28.  Mr  Wilcox  also  submitted  the  Judge  committed  a   procedural
        irregularity sufficient to amount to an error of law based upon  an
        alleged structural error in the determination  where  at  [36]  the
        Judge finds there  was  no  corroborating  evidence  regarding  the
        appellant's attack in 2009. This is not a finding by the Judge that
        unless corroborative evidence is provided the account will  not  be
        believed, as that would clearly amount to an error of law as  there
        is no requirement for corroboration before an appellant is able  to
        succeed in a protection claim. What this is, is a factual statement
        by the Judge that there is no corroborating evidence.  It  has  not
        been shown that statement is incorrect.
    29. The Judge gives adequate reasons for  why  the  appellant  had  not
        established he was a member of the ICS  which  he  claims  was  the
        reason he was attacked by members of the Awami League.
    30. It is also asserted the Judge committed an  error  by  allowing  an
        artificial separation in relation to the elements of the  case;  in
        finding the appellant lacked credibility and then using the same to
        undermine the merits of the appeal. The claim has no merit.  It  is
        clear the Judge considered the evidence with the required degree of
        anxious scrutiny from all sources making findings  in  relation  to
        the weight to be given to such evidence as the Judge  was  required
        to do.
    31.  The  Judge's  treatment  of  the  documentary  evidence  is   also
        challenged. It is not made out the Judge did not consider  all  the
        evidence provided.
    32.  The  Judge  applied  the  weight  considered  appropriate  to  the
        documents relied upon by  the  appellant  in  accordance  with  the
        decision of Tanvir  Ahmed  as  confirmed  at  [29].  The  Judge  is
        criticised for not considering the report of a  country  expert  Mr
        Saqeb Mahbub dated 24 July 2019 bit I do  not  find  this  specific
        allegation made out.
    33. Mr Mahbub has produced a Document Authentication Report in relation
        to the specific documents he was asked to consider. His opinion can
        be summarised in the following terms:


                i. Death certificate of RU's father issued by the  hospital
                   on 2 February 2013. The expert was not  able  to  verify
                   the actual existence of the document in the  records  of
                   the relevant hospital department as  only  relatives  of
                   the deceased will be able to access the records  of  the
                   death  certificate.  An  informal  review  by  a   named
                   individual of the death certificates states it is in the
                   format of those issued by the hospital  but  an  anomaly
                   came to the experts attention in that the Registrar  who
                   purportedly signed the death certificate at the hospital
                   did so on 2nd February 2018 whereas the date of issuance
                   of the death  certificate  is  dated  2  February  2013,
                   although stating it is possible the Registrar had signed
                   the certificate at a later date when the application was
                   made for a copy.
               ii.  Death  certificate  of  RU's  father  issued   by   the
                   Registered Office of births and  deaths,  No  8  Tilpara
                   Union dated 22 April 2014: The  Registered  Office  only
                   keeps a register of births and deaths for 5 years and no
                   longer had the records to verify the  death  certificate
                   which  could  not  be  verified  against  the   official
                   records. The expert  notes,  however,  that  the  person
                   issuing the  death  certificate  purporting  to  be  the
                   Chairman of the relevant  area  held  the  post  at  the
                   relevant time and that the signature and seal  resembled
                   the official seal and is  compliant  with  the  official
                   prescribed format for issuing death certificates.
              iii. Post-mortem report of RU's father dated 2 February 2013:
                   the expert was unable to verify the actual existence  of
                   the document in the hospital  records  at  the  relevant
                   department although confirmed the format and  appearance
                   of the report resembles that  of  a  post-mortem  report
                   genuinely issued by the hospital.
               iv. Copy letter from Bangladesh Islami Chhatrashibir dated 1
                   November 2018: The expert, having  reviewed  the  letter
                   and having taken steps to verify the authenticity of the
                   certificate by enquiring with the central office of  the
                   party  in  Bangladesh,  discovered  that  he   purported
                   signatory of the letter was not  holding  the  purported
                   post at the relevant time of issuance of the certificate
                   and that without  a  phone  number  or  address  on  the
                   certificate no further enquiries could be made.
                v. Copy letter from Bangladesh Islami  Chhatrashibir  dated
                   30 September 2018:  the  expert  when  taking  steps  to
                   verify the authenticity of the certificate to  enquiries
                   at the central office of the party found the party had a
                   branch at the stated place and  that  the  named  person
                   held the post of President at  the  relevant  time,  but
                   that without the telephone  number  or  address  on  the
                   certificate no further enquiries could be made.
               vi. Copy of letter from Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami dated  30
                   October 2018: the expert upon undertaking enquiries with
                   the central office found the name of the person  holding
                   position  as  President  was  as  named   although   the
                   certificate did not contain a name  meaning  the  expert
                   could not draw inference that the person  who  held  the
                   position  at  the   relevant   time   had   signed   the
                   certificate. Without the telephone number or address  on
                   the certificate no further enquiries could be made.
              vii. A copy of the Bangladeshi newspaper, the  Daily  Shyamal
                   Sylhet dated 3 February 2013: the expert  confirms  this
                   is a bone fide publication but that in the absence of an
                   online or physical archive could not  find  an  original
                   copy of the printed newspaper for 3  February  2013.  In
                   comparing a copy of an issue published  online  in  July
                   2019 with that of 2013 the expert finds  the  appearance
                   of the earlier document to be consistent with the  size,
                   font size, structure  of  articles,  and  price  of  the
                   publication leading  to  it  being  concluded  that  the
                   article is genuine.


    34. In relation to the latter element, the expert does not comment upon
        whether there had been any  changes  in  the  presentation  of  the
        newspaper between 2013 and 2019. It is also not clear on what basis
        the expert, even if it is found that the format  of  the  purported
        copy of the 2013 publication is the same as that appearing in 2019,
        can therefore conclude  that  the  content  of  the  2013  document
        produced is genuine.
    35. These concerns arise as a result of considerable  concern  recorded
        in the country information of the ease with which an individual  is
        able to obtain forged documents in Bangladesh. The Judge's  comment
        regarding the fact the documents are only copies and not  originals
        means it was not possible for the Judge to  be  able  to  ascertain
        whether what was being  produced,  whilst  having  the  format  and
        appearance of an original document, was completely false or by  the
        production of what were originally genuine documents which have had
        altered or other aspects inserted which are false.
    36. A further concern that arises from the alleged  post-mortem  report
        of RU's father is reference to their being enclosed with the report
        a high vaginal swab report  dated  3  February  2013  which  is  of
        concern as the post-mortem report is stated to be dated 2  February
        2013, prior to this, and because the person in relation to whom the
        report allegedly relates is described as male.
    37. I do not find the appellant has established the  Judges  conclusion
        that the appellant had failed to discharge the burden of proof upon
        him, even to  the  lower  standard,  to  establish  his  claim  for
        international protection is credible or that  he  was  entitled  to
        succeed on any other basis, is infected  by  arguable  legal  error
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.
    38. The Judge had ample reasons for doubting  the  credibility  of  the
        appellant and I do not accept Mr Wilcox' submission  that  although
        the determination appears detailed the Judge became  lazy  and  did
        not do enough. A reader of this decision clearly understand why the
        Judge found as he did

Decision

    39. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    40. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 31 January 2020





