
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01746/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Tuesday 4 May 2021                      |On Monday 17 May 2021           |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    B R M
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wilson, solicitor, Refugee and Migrant Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
initially involved a protection claim,  I  consider  it  is  appropriate  to
continue  that  order.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Sharma promulgated on 10 December 2020 ("the Decision"). By the Decision,
   the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's
   decision dated 7 February 2020, refusing his protection and human rights
   claims.


2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq.   He entered the UK clandestinely
   in August 2006 and claimed asylum on arrival.  His claim was refused and
   an appeal on that basis was dismissed by Immigration Judge Zucker in a
   decision dated 9 January 2007. The Appellant then made a series of
   further submissions in 2009 and 2010 which were all rejected by the
   Respondent.  However, the Appellant was granted three years'
   discretionary leave on 13 December 2011, therefore expiring on 13
   December 2014.  Ms Everett confirmed that this was as a result of a
   "legacy" review, in other words, a review within the Case Resolution
   Programme ("CRP") then in existence to deal with the cases of failed
   asylum seekers whose cases were incomplete as they had not been removed.
   I will need to say more about the way in which such reviews were
   conducted later in this decision.

3. The Appellant made an application for further discretionary leave on 8
   January 2015.  The Respondent refused that application on 25 July 2015.
   I will need to come to the detail of that refusal in due course as it
   forms the central core of the Appellant's grounds before me.  For now, it
   is sufficient to note that the Respondent relied on criminal offences
   committed between 2011 and 2013 which led to suspended prison sentences
   (as well as other factors).   The Appellant's appeal against the 2015
   decision was dismissed first on 20 July 2017 and then, following remittal
   after a finding of error of law in the first decision, on 17 June 2019 by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada.

4. The Appellant then made further submissions on 28 November 2019 which
   were refused by the Respondent by the decision under challenge but
   accepted as amounting to a fresh claim. He was therefore given a further
   right of appeal.

5. The Appellant challenges the Decision on two grounds which can be
   broadly summarised as follows:

   a) Judge Sharma failed to take into account the medical evidence on which
      the Appellant relied when considering whether to depart from the
      previous adverse credibility findings of Judge Zucker ("the Devaseelan
      issue") ([1] to [3] of the grounds).
   b) Judge Sharma erred when dealing with the previous refusal of further
      discretionary leave in the context of Article 8 ECHR.  It is asserted
      that the Respondent failed to follow her guidance in relation to the
      grant of further discretionary leave and that both she and the Judge
      have failed to exercise the discretion required by paragraph 322(5) of
      the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") ("the discretionary leave issue")
      ([4] and [5] of the grounds).

6. Permission to appeal was granted on the discretionary leave issue but
   not on the Devaseelan issue by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro on 22
   January 2021 in the following terms:


    "...3.   Contrary to what is submitted in the grounds, there was no
    misapplication of the Devaseelan guidelines by the judge.  Even though
    the judge took the decisions of the earlier judge as his starting point
    he carefully considered the evidence before him and reached findings
    properly open to him and gave adequate reasons for doing so.
    4.   However in relation to paragraph 322(5) which according to Court
    of Appeal in Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673 involves a two-stage
    analysis, requiring firstly a decision on whether the paragraph 322(5)
    applies and secondly whether discretion falls to be considered, it is
    arguable that the judge fell into error.  Permission to appeal is
    granted."


7. So it is that the matter comes before me to determine whether the
   Decision contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-
   make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do
   so.  The remote hearing was attended by representatives for both parties.
   The hearing proceeded with no major technical difficulties.


8. I have before me a small (unpaginated) bundle filed by the Appellant
   which was before Judge Sharma.  I also have the Respondent's bundle of
   core documents.  Mr Wilson also helpfully provided a skeleton argument
   for the hearing before me.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

9. Although Judge O'Garro did not expressly refuse permission to appeal on
   the Devaseelan issue, Mr Wilson indicated that he did not pursue that
   part of the grounds of appeal.  He was in my view right to do so for the
   following reasons.


10. Judge Sharma considered the previous decision not only of Judge Zucker
   but also of Judge Borsada.  As the Judge observed at [10] of the
   Decision, on that appeal the Appellant relied on his health conditions as
   obstacles to returning to Iraq.  The Judge went on to point out at [12]
   of the Decision that "[i]n refusing the appeal, Judge Borsada used the
   decision made by Judge Zucker as his starting point" but that "[i]n
   considering both that decision and the evidence before him, Judge Borsada
   made further adverse credibility findings on the appellant's
   credibility".  As Judge Sharma pointed out at [13] of the Decision, Judge
   Borsada had before him "copious medical notes" and that the Judge
   "accepted that there was enough evidence to satisfy him as to the fact
   that the appellant suffered from the chronic conditions relied upon".


11. In the section of the Decision containing Judge Sharma's findings, the
   following is said:


    "52. Dealing with Mr Wilson's submissions then.  He argues that the
    medical evidence before me undermines Judge Zucker's (and hence Judge
    Borsada's) conclusions about the appellant's credibility.  I do not
    agree.  Whilst arguably Judge Zucker found the lack of medical evidence
    to be a significant matter against the appellant, Judge Borsada plainly
    accepted that the appellant suffered from the chronic conditions that
    have been raised before me."


12. Judge Sharma properly directed himself on the Devaseelan guidelines at
   [49] to [51] of the Decision, recognising that they were a starting point
   and not binding.  Judge Sharma went on to consider the other new evidence
   in the form of threatening letters and rejected the protection claim
   based on those letters at [56] of the Decision.  Having rejected any
   claim to humanitarian protection, Judge Sharma rejected the protection
   claim as a whole at [58] of the Decision.


13. Since, as I have already noted, Mr Wilson did not pursue the grounds of
   appeal relating to the Devaseelan issue, there is no challenge to the
   Decision so far as the protection claim is concerned.


14. I turn then to the discretionary leave issue.  Before I deal with Mr
   Wilson's submissions, it is necessary to set out some of the background
   facts and evidence in this regard.


15. I deal first with the relevance of this case being part of the CRP.
   For ease, I refer to the judgment of Mr Justice King in the cases of
   Geraldo and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
   EWHC 2763 (Admin) ("Geraldo").  At [39] to [45] of the judgment in
   Geraldo, King J sets out the background to the CRP and the types of case
   which fell within it.  As I have already noted that included cases of
   failed asylum seekers (as this Appellant then was) who had not yet left
   the UK.  Paragraphs [48] to [56] explain the process followed in relation
   to the consideration whether to remove the failed asylum seeker applying
   paragraph 395C of the Rules (later paragraph 353B) and the guidance in
   Chapter 53 of the Enforcement Instructions and Guidance ("Chapter 53").
   In such cases, where removal was not considered to be appropriate, leave
   was granted.  Helpfully, given the issue in the cases of Geraldo, the
   Judge also sets out at [67] to [73] the changes in the Rules which led to
   the replacement of paragraph 395C with paragraph 353B (and setting out
   that paragraph at [68] of the judgment) and the change in the
   discretionary leave policy which led to the grant of indefinite leave
   being replaced first with a grant of discretionary leave of three years
   and later to a grant of thirty months leave.  In this case, since the
   original grant of discretionary leave was made after July 2011 but before
   July 2012, the Appellant was granted three years leave following the
   initial review under the CRP.


16. Next, I need to say something about the refusal of further
   discretionary leave on 25 January 2017.  That appears on the final pages
   of the Appellant's bundle.  Having set out the Appellant's immigration
   history, the Respondent's decision records the Appellant's criminal
   offences in the following way:


    "... It is considered that your circumstances do not prevail since that
    of your previous grant of Discretionary Leave. Security Checks have
    returned with a positive hit.  You were convicted on 10/07/2012 at
    Coventry District Magistrates for failing to surrender to custody on
    the 15/12/2011.  You were given a suspended imprisonment of 2 weeks,
    wholly suspended for 12 months.  A curfew requirement for 6 months.
    You were convicted on the 10/07/2010 at Coventry District for
    possessing a knife blade/sharp pointed article in a public place on
    01/11/2011.  You were given 10 weeks imprisonment wholly suspended 12
    months.  Curfew requirement 6 months.
    You were convicted on 08/01/2013 to fail to comply with the
    requirements of a community order on the 17/12/2012.  You were given
    curfew requirement 4 weeks starting on the 11/01/2013 ending
    07/02/2013.  Electronically monitored with a fine of �50."


17. I pause to observe that the PNC check does not appear in any of the
   bundles.  However, the above record is largely consistent with the
   Judge's findings at [11] of the Decision save that the conviction for
   possession of a knife blade/sharp pointed article is 10 July 2012 (not
   2010 as must be the case based on the date of the offence) and that the
   Appellant denied the latter offence of failing to comply with a community
   order so that Judge Borsada who had also considered this matter in the
   2019 appeal decision had not relied upon it (see [2] of Judge Borsada's
   decision in the Respondent's bundle).


18. The Respondent then considered paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules
   ("Paragraph 276ADE") but concluded that the Appellant could not meet that
   paragraph based either on his length of residence or obstacles to his
   integration in Iraq.  The Respondent also considered the Appellant's
   medical condition.  This is not relevant to the discretionary leave issue
   and I can therefore skip over this part of the decision.  The Respondent
   then went on to consider paragraph 353B of the Rules ("Paragraph 353B").
   As the heading to that section makes clear that consideration was guided
   in policy terms by Chapter 53. Having set out Paragraph 353B, the
   Respondent went through the various headings in that paragraph.  The
   following consideration was carried out:


    "The Secretary of State has considered all the relevant factors of your
    case.  And is content that your removal from the United Kingdom remains
    appropriate for the following reasons:
    Character, conduct and associations
    Consideration has been given to your character, conduct and
    associations whilst residing in the UK.  As noted above it has become
    apparent during mandatory security checks that you have spent criminal
    convictions.
    In light of the above, it is considered that you have cast doubt upon
    your character and therefore your character and conduct do not justify
    a grant of leave to remain in the UK.
    Compliance
    Regard has been given to your compliance during your time spent in the
    UK.  You arrived in the UK 19/08/2006, claiming Asylum the same day.
    Your asylum application was refused on 15/11/2006. You subsequently
    lodged an appeal against this decision on 1/12/2006.  Your appeal was
    dismissed on 10/01/2007.  Your appeal rights became exhausted on
    23/04/2007.  Following this, you failed to report on the following
    dates: 05/10/06, 21/12/06, 15/03/07, 12/04/07, 19/04/07, 26/04/07,
    25/03/10, 26/4/10, 26/5/10, 8/10/10, 7/10/11.  On 13/12/11 you were
    granted Discretionary Leave to remain in the UK until 12/12/14. It is
    noted that you submitted a out of time application for further leave to
    remain on the 08/1/15.
    It is clear from your immigration and reporting history your compliance
    is not a desirable fact when considering an exceptional grant of leave
    under paragraph 353B.
    Length of time in the United Kingdom accrued for reasons beyond the
    migrants control
    Consideration has been given to the length of time that you have spent
    in the UK that has been outside of your control.  It is considered that
    all of your applications submitted to the Home Office have been
    considered in a timely manner. In light of this, you have not been
    subject to any significant delays which have prolonged your residency
    within the UK.  You therefore fail to qualify for a grant of leave in
    the UK due to your length of residence which was outside of your
    control.
    Any representations received
    Consideration has been given to your medical conditions, however you
    have not provided any evidence to show your medical conditions are life
    threatening and would breach your human rights in line with caselaw N,
    it is therefore considered that it would not be unjustifiably harsh to
    return you to Iraq.
    Conclusion
    Regard has been given to your character, conduct and compliance whilst
    residing in the UK.  You have failed to comply throughout the length of
    your stay and this evidence weighs against your case.
    When assessing all aspects of your claim as a whole, it is not
    considered that there are any significant, compelling factors which
    would warrant a grant of leave.  Therefore, it is considered that your
    removal from the UK is appropriate."


19. Before moving on, I make two observations about that decision.  First,
   the Respondent considered whether there were any changes in circumstances
   since the previous grant of leave and concluded that there were due to
   the criminal convictions.  Second, having considered the Appellant's
   private life and medical conditions, the Respondent reconsidered whether
   there were exceptional circumstances which justified not removing the
   Appellant under Paragraph 353B applying the Chapter 53 guidance which
   required an evaluation of all the circumstances. In essence, that was a
   repeat of the review which had led to the grant of the initial period of
   discretionary leave but based on the changed circumstances.


20. That was the decision which was the subject of the appeal which
   ultimately came before Judge Borsada.  Judge Borsada dealt with the
   discretionary leave issue thus:


    "[8(vi)] With regard to the reasons for the failure to renew the grant
    of discretionary leave and his previous period of living in the UK
    prior to 2013: whilst the appellant disputed the commission of any of
    the offences he had accepted that he had previous convictions in
    respect of those matters (all except the failure to comply with the
    community service order which he did not remember).  Furthermore, the
    appellant accepted that he was 'out of time' when he applied for
    further discretionary [leave] such that the respondent exercised its
    discretion correctly"


21. It was argued on the Appellant's behalf at that time that the offences
   were not sufficiently serious to justify the refusal of further leave and
   that two of the convictions were prior to the initial grant of
   discretionary leave ([9a(i)]).  I pause to observe that the latter point
   is inaccurate.  As I have already noted, Judge Sharma in the Decision
   corrected what must be an inaccurate date regarding the conviction for
   having a knife in a public place.  The earliest conviction was therefore
   July 2012, about seven months after the initial grant of leave.  Judge
   Borsada dealt with these points at [11] of his decision as follows:


    "I note the appellant's representative's claim that the appellant's
    admission of a drunken episode in 2013 is an indication of his
    willingness to be truthful.  That one piece of oral evidence however
    stands in stark contrast with his continued denial that he carried a
    knife as an offensive weapon and failed to surrender to custody despite
    his being convicted of those very offences.  With regard to the
    previous offences, it was unfortunate that the respondent did not
    provide me with his previous convictions 'print out' (PNC).
    Nevertheless, I did note that the appellant, in a previous leave
    application, had accepted of two previous convictions.  I also noted
    that the failure to surrender to custody charge occurred during the
    appellant's period of discretionary leave and that this fact coupled
    with his failure to submit his further discretionary leave application
    'in time' would certainly have been sufficient reason for the
    respondent to refuse an application for further discretionary leave.
    In my view the appellant has not been unfairly treated in respect of
    the failure to renew his discretionary leave and certainly the failure
    to renew his leave is not a matter that I consider can now be used to
    weigh in the balance in the consideration of the article 8
    proportionality exercise in 2019."


22. The next point in the chronology is the further submissions made by the
   Appellant which led to the decision here under appeal.  Those appear in a
   form completed by hand, it appears by the Appellant himself.  That
   appears in the Respondent's bundle.   The Appellant there says that his
   further submissions are about "[t]hreats from Islamic fundamentalist
   militants". He refers to "4 documents left in [his] house threatening
   [his] life" which had been sent to him by his brother.  Those documents
   are appended to the form.  He said that those documents demonstrate a
   "risk of being killed by militants".


23. Unsurprisingly in light of the content of those further submissions,
   the Respondent's decision under appeal here focusses on the earlier
   findings regarding the protection claim in the context of the new
   documents and the updated country guidance.  In the context of Article 8
   ECHR, the Respondent considers the Appellant's private life, concluding
   that he could not meet Paragraph 276ADE on the basis of his length of
   residence or the situation he would face on return to Iraq. The human
   rights claim is not rejected on suitability grounds. The Appellant's
   medical condition is then considered under the headings of "Exceptional
   circumstances" and "Article 3 (medical)".  Finally, the decision maker
   returns to the Paragraph 353B issue and concludes that, having regard to
   the factors set out in that paragraph, removal remains appropriate.


24. That then is the context in which the appeal came before Judge Sharma.
   I make two observations before turning to the Decision.  First, the
   refusal of further discretionary leave was not the decision under appeal
   before Judge Sharma.  Second, Judge Sharma took as his starting point, as
   he was entitled (indeed bound) to do, the findings of Judge Borsada which
   include the paragraph which I have set out at [21] above.  No new
   evidence was produced in this regard.  Judge Sharma referred at  [11] of
   the Decision to the way in which Judge Borsada dealt with the earlier
   refusal to grant further discretionary leave.  I do not need to set that
   out as it largely replicates what Judge Borsada said in the passage I
   have cited.


25. Having dealt with the findings about the protection claim and concluded
   at [56] of the Decision that the Appellant was not "under any kind of
   threat upon return to his family home" and having rejected also the
   humanitarian protection claim based on the updated country guidance,
   Judge Sharma turned to deal with Article 8 ECHR.  He found that there
   were no very significant obstacles to the Appellant integrating in Iraq
   (where he still has family).  That finding is not challenged.  The Judge
   then said this about the discretionary leave point:


    "60. I agree with Mr Wilson that, when considering the article 8 claim
    outside of the Immigration Rules, I should take into consideration
    together the matters of long residence, health and the refusal of
    discretionary leave rather than take them one by one.
    61.  Considering the discretionary leave point, refusal due to the
    conduct of the appellant clearly falls within the discretionary grounds
    set out in paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.  However,
    regardless of whether or not the application was wrongly considered to
    be out of time, and even accepting that it was wrongly considered thus,
    it is nevertheless a justifiable refusal on the grounds of the criminal
    offending alone.
    62.  There is nothing amounting to exceptional circumstances in either
    the private life that has been further established by the appellant's
    time in the United Kingdom (at a time when his immigration status was
    precarious) or the fact of his medical conditions.  The consequences of
    removal to the appellant are not unjustifiably harsh."


26. The reference there to Paragraph 322(5) of the Rules ("Paragraph
   322(5)") is mystifying.  As Mr Wilson accepted, the Respondent has never
   relied on Paragraph 322(5) to refuse any application made by the
   Appellant.  As I have already observed, the Respondent did not even
   refuse the further submissions on this occasion on suitability grounds in
   spite of the previous convictions.


27. The submissions which Mr Wilson made to Judge Sharma as recorded at
   [37] and [38] of the Decision are therefore equally puzzling.  Those are
   as follows:


    "37. The refusal of extension of leave is significant and has not been
    properly addressed in the previous decision.  It should be reassessed.
    The decision that was actually appealed before Judge Borsada (and Judge
    Lawrence) is that decision.  It is dealt with at paragraph 11 of Judge
    Borsada's determination.  There are two problems with it.  The first is
    that the application was made in time (there was a 28 day grace period
    at the time within which to reapply).  The second is that Judge Borsada
    does not substantively consider the exercise of the discretion.  Rather
    than decide that it was within the range of responses open to the
    respondent, the tribunal should have exercised the discretion itself.
    38.  In reaching its view, the respondent had not followed its own
    guidance.  I was referred to paragraph 7 of the skeleton argument
    which, in summary, argues that the circumstances comprising of the long
    delay and residence were even more in the appellant's favour than at
    the time of the initial grant of leave.  As for the criminality
    threshold, that was not reached as the offence was not punished by a
    custodial sentence and nor was any harm caused as a result of it.  The
    relevant grounds were those at paragraphs 322(5) and (5A)."


28. It is entirely unclear why Mr Wilson submitted to Judge Sharma that
   Paragraph 322(5) had any purchase either in the instant appeal or in the
   appeal before Judge Borsada.  Paragraph 322(5) was not the basis for the
   refusal of further leave in the decision which Judge Borsada was
   considering.  As I pointed out to Mr Wilson, the refusal of further
   discretionary leave was based on a change in circumstances between the
   grant of initial leave and the application for further leave because the
   initial grant was on the basis of a review of the factors in Paragraph
   353B and one of those factors was character and conduct to which the
   Appellant's intervening criminal offending was of relevance.


29. The mistaken apprehension that Paragraph 322(5) is and was of relevance
   is developed in the grounds challenging the Decision as follows:


    "4.  The IJ also errs in dealing with the issue of refusal of
    discretionary leave to A.  A's criticism of two errors in IJ Borsada's
    approach is reported at paragraph 37.  The second is that the judge
    fails to exercise the discretion required by paragraph 322(5).  (The
    complexity of the discretion involved is indicated by the Home Office
    guidance to caseworkers on deciding to refuse under para 322(5) in the
    case of criminal behaviour, which requires reference to a senior
    caseworker).  In paragraph 61 the conclusion that the decision to
    refuse to extend discretionary leave was 'a justifiable refusal' falls
    into the same error.
    5.   The IJ accepts in para 60 the need to take the issues of long
    residence, health and refusal of an extension of discretionary leave
    together in considering the article 8 claim.  However, by disregarding
    the discretionary leave refusal in para 61 and stating that there is
    nothing amounting to exceptional circumstances in A's long residence or
    medical conditions he fails to take these factors together into account
    in conducting the balancing exercise to assess whether refusal of leave
    to remain in proportionate."


30. Unfortunately, it is the asserted failure of Judge Sharma properly to
   deal with Paragraph 322(5) which led to the grant of permission to appeal
   the Decision.  This was and is a red herring.  The case of Balajigari v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 673
   (Balajigari") relied upon by Judge O'Garro is of no relevance for that
   reason.  Neither is the case of R (oao Ngouh) v Secretary of State for
   the Home Department [2010] EWHC 2218 (Admin) (leaving aside also that Mr
   Wilson accepted that this was an extreme case on its facts, concerned the
   refusal of indefinite leave to remain and was a judicial review challenge
   and not an appeal).


31. Due to the inapplicability of Paragraph 322(5) in the Respondent's
   decision under appeal or indeed any of her previous decisions, I can
   ignore the submissions made by Mr Wilson in his skeleton argument and
   orally concerning the "two-stage process" to be adopted where Paragraph
   322(5) is relied upon.  Paragraph 322(5) is one of the discretionary
   general grounds of refusal where the exercise of discretion is obviously
   part of the consideration to be undertaken.  That is not relevant in this
   case.


32. I turn then to the other part of Mr Wilson's argument regarding the
   discretionary leave issue.  He relies on the Asylum Policy Instruction
   entitled "Discretionary Leave" ("the API").  Mr Wilson accepted that this
   document does not appear in the bundle before the Tribunal.  Nor, so far
   as I can see was it relied upon by the Appellant before Judge Sharma.  I
   have been unable to find Mr Wilson's skeleton argument before Judge
   Sharma but the Judge's record of proceedings makes no mention of any
   reliance placed on this policy.   Nor is there any mention of the API in
   the grounds of appeal challenging the Decision.


33. Notwithstanding that, I have considered Mr Wilson's submissions in this
   regard.  I should add that, due to his failure to produce that policy, I
   have only been able to find the version published on 18 August 2015 which
   post-dates the Respondent's refusal of further discretionary leave by a
   few weeks.  I will assume however for current purposes that the policy is
   in the same form so far as relied upon by the Appellant.  It does not
   appear from the "Document Control" reference at the end of the document
   that the change to the policy in August 2015 is relevant to the argument
   Mr Wilson seeks to make.


34. The sections of the API concerning consideration of further leave
   applications so far as relevant to this case are as follows:


    "7.1 Considering further DL applications
    All applications for further DL must be considered in line with this
    guidance, taking into account all information available at the date of
    decision, including the contents of the application form, country
    reports and any other relevant information, including that provided at
    the time of the original grant of DL...Out of time applications must
    still be considered on the basis of all the evidence put forward and
    the fact that the application was late should not, on its own be used
    as a reason to refuse further leave where the individual otherwise
    qualifies under the policy.  Those who apply out of time will be unable
    to accrue continuous leave towards settlement.
    ...
    7.4  Refusing further DL
    Where an application for further DL is considered and it is decided
    that the individual no longer qualifies for DL, the application should
    be refused.  There is no automatic right to further leave or settlement
    and those who apply for further leave must qualify under the policy in
    force at the time of the decision."


35. In short, therefore, the section of the API dealing with further
   applications guides caseworkers to consider the application against the
   policy in force at the time of the initial grant.  As I have already
   pointed out, the basis of the initial grant of discretionary leave was
   following a review under the CRP and the application of Paragraph 353B.
   The decision maker made clear that the review was conducted in accordance
   with Chapter 53.  I have already made reference to the sections of the
   judgment in Geraldo which explain the Chapter 53 guidance and the
   Paragraph 353B factors.   That is the exercise which was conducted in
   this case leading to the refusal of further leave on the basis that the
   application of the factors to the Appellant's case no longer justified a
   grant of discretionary leave.


36. Mr Wilson relies on the section of the API dealing with criminality.
   That reads as follows so far as relevant to this case:


    "3.6 Exclusion and criminality
    In all asylum and non-asylum cases caseworkers must consider the impact
    of an individual's criminal history before granting any leave.
    ...
    Where an individual does not fall within the restricted leave policy
    (for example, where they are not excluded under Article 1F or the
    criminal sentence was less than 2 years' imprisonment), caseworkers
    must consider the impact of any criminal history before granting DL,
    having regard as appropriate to Part 9 (General Grounds for Refusal)
    and, where an individual is not liable to deportation, paragraph
    353B(i) of the Immigration Rules.  Criminals or extremists should not
    normally benefit from leave on a discretionary basis under this policy
    because it is a Home Office priority to remove them from the UK."


37. For the sake of completeness, I also set out the paragraph from Chapter
   53 dealing with character and conduct which includes reference to
   criminality.  Chapter 53 was archived in October 2017 but remains
   available electronically via the archive:


    "(i) Character, conduct and associations including any previous
    criminal record and the nature of any offence of which the applicant
    has been convicted
    When considering an individual's character and conduct, regard must be
    given to whether:
    ( there is evidence of criminality that meets the criminal casework
    (CC) threshold
    ( the individual has been convicted of a particularly serious crime
    (below the CC threshold) involving violence, a sexual offence, offences
    against children or a serious drug offence
    ( there are serious reasons for considering that the individual falls
    within the asylum exclusion clauses, or
    ( it is considered undesirable to permit the individual to remain in
    the UK in light of exceptional circumstances, or in light of their
    character, conduct or associations, or the fact that they represent a
    threat to national security.
    Evidence of criminality or conduct meeting the criteria above will
    normally mean that an individual cannot benefit from exceptional
    circumstances."


38. Whilst I would accept that the Appellant's offending does not bring him
   within the first two of those bullet points, the Respondent was entitled
   to take the view as was said in the 2015 decision that it remains
   relevant to character and conduct.  Further, the decision that it was
   appropriate to remove was based not only on the criminal offending but
   also on the Appellant's immigration history and there being an absence of
   factors weighing in his favour.  No arguments were addressed to either
   Judge Borsada or Judge Sharma concerning Chapter 53 and whether the 2015
   decision was lawful in that regard.  As I have pointed out, there was no
   new evidence before Judge Sharma in any event and his starting point was
   therefore rightly the findings of Judge Borsada.


39. Mr Wilson's point so far as I understood it is that there is a "two-
   stage process" when an application for further leave is made, first
   considering whether the circumstances have changed from those at the time
   of the initial grant of leave and then, even if they have, whether the
   criminal history is sufficient to warrant a refusal.  I would accept that
   the passage I have cited from the API refers to the guidance on the
   general grounds of refusal (the link to that page is no longer extant in
   the published API so I cannot refer to it).  However, that is only of
   relevance where it is appropriate.  It is not said to be relevant where
   the caseworker is refusing an application on the basis that the
   individual's circumstances have changed so that discretionary leave is no
   longer appropriate.  It would or might be relevant where, for example, a
   person continues to meet the policy which forms the basis for the initial
   grant of discretionary leave but where a refusal might be appropriate due
   to criminal conduct.  I observe in passing that the situation of this
   Appellant is very different from that of the appellants in Balajigari who
   were entitled to leave to remain under the Rules but for the application
   of Paragraph 322(5).

40. Moreover, the tenor of that part of the API is not that leave should be
   granted unless an individual's criminal history is sufficiently serious.
   As stated in the final sentence of the passage I have quoted, the policy
   is that criminals should not normally benefit from discretionary leave.

41. I have already set out and explained my view of the way in which
   criminality is relevant to Paragraph 353B.  In support of my view and for
   completeness in relation to the operation of Paragraph 353B, I make
   reference to the cases of Qongwane and others v Secretary of State for
   the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 957. Those were cases in which there
   was no criminal conduct.  At least one (Singh) was on similar facts to
   this case (ie a failed asylum seeker who had not been removed).  Although
   as Sir Stanley Burnton pointed out at [26] of the judgment, Paragraph
   353B is concerned with whether or not to remove an individual and not
   whether to grant leave and if so what form of leave, and therefore the
   Court of Appeal was not seized of that issue, the discretion in Paragraph
   353B is held to be "a safety valve, pursuant to which the Secretary of
   State may refrain from removing but only in [exceptional circumstances]
   which will necessarily be rare" ([24]).   Underhill LJ also made the
   following observations at [40] about the operation of Paragraph 353B
   which underline the way in which the review of the factors in that
   paragraph operates:

    "I only wish to add one point about para. 353B. Ms Anderson submitted
    that the factors listed at (i)-(iii) were (unlike the much more
    extensive list in the old para. 395C) all "negative" in character and
    thus that their intention is to constrain (or at least guide) the
    exercise of what would otherwise be a general discretion not to remove
    migrants who had no right to remain under the Rules or the general law.
    On a literal reading that submission seems wrong: taking the example of
    head (i), migrants can have good character as well as bad, and a very
    long period of time spent in the UK for reasons beyond the migrant's
    control (head (iii)) would surely in principle count in favour of non-
    removal. But I think that that is too literal. Para. 353B is not very
    well drafted, but it seems to me clear, reading it as a whole, that its
    essential purpose is indeed to identify specific points which will
    weigh in the balance against the exercise of the discretion not to
    remove a migrant, or to qualify the effect of factors that might
    otherwise weigh in its favour. Thus the point of heads (i) and (ii) is
    to make clear that (in short) bad character/conduct and non-compliance
    with conditions must always count against the exercise of the
    discretion. As for head (iii), the point surely being made is that time
    spent in the UK after the adverse immigration decision ought (at least
    generally) only to count in the migrant's favour if his or her reasons
    for not leaving were beyond their control. I think this point worth
    making because I have observed a tendency for migrants or their
    advisers to treat the facts that they have committed no criminal
    offences or have complied with all conditions as if that created some
    kind of presumption in favour of non-removal 'under para. 353B'. That
    is not the right approach. Para. 353B is not a kind of mandatory check-
    list of the same character as (albeit less comprehensive than) the old
    para. 395C. I do not say that good character or compliance with
    conditions are wholly irrelevant to an exercise of the discretion in
    question. But it is not the purpose of para. 353B to ensure that they
    are considered; and they are hardly likely to be significant factors by
    themselves given the exceptional nature of the discretion as explained
    by Sir Stanley Burnton at para. 24 of his judgment."
    [my emphasis]

42. Leaving aside the difficulties faced by the Appellant in making out a
   challenge relying on an argument which was not apparently made to the
   Judge below nor referred to in the grounds of appeal, I consider that Mr
   Wilson's submissions regarding the API are for those reasons misconceived
   and without merit.


43. It is perhaps slightly unfortunate that Judge Sharma was led down the
   path of considering Paragraph 322(5) where that was not and never had
   been relied upon by the Respondent.  It is equally unfortunate that the
   way in which the challenge to the Decision was pleaded on this issue (and
   therefore the reasons for the grant of permission) bore little
   resemblance to the way in which the case was argued before me.


44. Whilst Ms Everett very fairly accepted that [61] of the Decision is
   brief in its consideration of the discretionary leave issue, I do not
   consider that to amount to an error of law for three further reasons.
   First, the appeal was not against the refusal of further discretionary
   leave.  Second, and flowing from that, the Appellant already had an
   appeal against the refusal of further discretionary leave.  That appeal
   was dismissed by Judge Borsada and the Appellant did not challenge that
   decision.  Third, and again flowing from that, the starting point for
   Judge Sharma was the findings of Judge Borsada which stood unchallenged.
   I add that I do not agree with Judge Sharma's finding that the refusal of
   further discretionary leave might be unjustified insofar as based on the
   application being out of time (contrary to the view of Judge Borsada).
   The application for further discretionary leave was clearly made after
   the Appellant's discretionary leave had come to an end even if the period
   between that date and the application fell to be disregarded for the
   purposes of deciding the application.  However, if anything that finding
   is unduly generous to the Appellant and makes no difference to the
   Judge's conclusion.  Judge Sharma, as Judge Borsada, was clearly entitled
   to reach the conclusion that the refusal of discretionary leave was
   justified by the Appellant's criminal offending as well as the other
   matters relied upon following the Respondent's review of his case under
   Paragraph 353B/Chapter 53 in 2015.

CONCLUSION


45. For the foregoing reasons, there is no error of law in the Decision on
   the discretionary leave issue.  As I have already noted, Mr Wilson did
   not pursue a challenge to the Decision on the Devaseelan ground.  There
   is no other challenge to the Decision dismissing the appeal on protection
   and human rights grounds.  The Decision does not contain any error of
   law.  I therefore uphold the Decision with the result that the
   Appellant's appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

DECISION
The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sharma promulgated on 10 December
2020 does not involve  the making of an error on a point of law. I
therefore uphold the Decision.   The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  6 May 2021

