
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/01190/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 December 2017                       |  On 5 February 2018              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                                   MS N O
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U Dirie, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although both parties made an application for permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal and both  applications  were  granted  permission  I
    shall describe the parties as they were described before the First-tier
    Tribunal, that is Ms O as the appellant and the Secretary of  State  as
    the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 11 October 1995  and  she
    appealed against the respondent's decision of 16 January 2017  refusing
    her claim on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 November 2011  without
    valid documentation and was  refused  entry  but  claimed  asylum  upon
    refusal of entry. Her claim was refused on 12 March 2014.   Her  appeal
    against that refusal was dismissed in a  determination  promulgated  by
    Immigration Judge G J Napthine in May 2014.   In  the  decision,  Judge
    Napthine found that the appellant did not belong to a minority clan.

 4. On 23 January 2017 the appellant's solicitors wrote on her behalf  with
    further submissions which gave rise to the  decision  under  challenge.
    The refusal letter by the Secretary of State  relied  on  the  previous
    finding of Judge Napthine such that the appellant did not belong  to  a
    minority clan  and  further  the  decision  relied  on  the  background
    evidence indicating the absence of clan militias in Mogadishu  and  the
    absence of clan-based discriminatory treatment even for  minority  clan
    members.

 5. The respondent also referred to the existence of the appellant's uncle,
    identified by Judge Napthine's decision, and whom the appellant claimed
    had now relocated to Saudi Arabia.

 6. The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant was at risk of
    persecution  in  Somalia  based  on  her  gender  and  considered   the
    application by reference to the country guidance case of MOJ  &  Others
    (return to Mogadishu) Somalia CJ [2014] UKUT 00442.

 7. The appellant appealed and the matter came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Carroll who dismissed the claim on the Refugee Convention grounds
    but allowed the appeal on  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 8. Judge Carroll applied the principles of Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  00702
    and cited the  relevant  findings  of  Judge  Napthine  such  that  the
    appellant was over 18 when she arrived in the UK, had access  to  funds
    during her movements between Somalia, Kenya, Ethiopia and Uganda,  that
    she would be returned to Mogadishu as an adult member  and  as  someone
    who is not a member of a minority clan but who has family in Mogadishu.
     At paragraph 68 of Immigration Judge Napthine's decision he found:

         "I do not accept that she has no family in Mogadishu.  She  claimed
         she went there hoping to find her  grandmother  and  brother.   She
         found her uncle who helped her.  She stated in her A1 that she  had
         no other family there".

    In sum Immigration Judge Napthine's conclusion was that her  uncle  was
    in Somalia and that she could turn to him for support  and  assistance.
    The further submissions made and which gave rise to the decision  under
    challenge by the Secretary of State was that the uncle had relocated to
    Saudi Arabia.

Appellant's grounds for Permission to Appeal

 9. The grounds from the appellant in relation to  the  decision  of  Judge
    Carroll were based solely on the assertion  that  the  judge  erred  in
    failing to properly consider and  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    under the Refugee Convention.

10. At paragraph 30 of  the  decision  the  judge  made  the  material  and
    essential finding:

         "I am satisfied that the appellant would be at risk  by  virtue  of
         her  particular  vulnerabilities,  including  being  a  lone  woman
         returnee, the length of time that she has been  away  from  Somalia
         and her relative inexperience of living there, her lack  of  family
         connections in Somalia and her age"

12.   The judge surmised that in the light of all the evidence there was  no
    sufficiency of protection available for her and that she had

         "shown substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  if  returned  to
         Somalia she would face a real risk of suffering serious harm."

  13. In view of the undisputed fact that women in Somalia form a particular
      social group for the purposes of the Convention (as  accepted  by  the
      respondent) and the findings made by the judge  that  the  appellant's
      circumstances would render her at real risk of gender-based  violence,
      it was submitted that the appellant's claim for asylum  was  made  out
      and should have been considered and allowed as the starting point.

The Secretary of State's Grounds for Permission to Appeal

  14. The Secretary of State's grounds for permission to  appeal  were  that
      there was  a  material  misdirection  in  law  and  an  inadequacy  of
      reasoning.  The judge's findings were confined to one short paragraph,
      that is paragraph 30.   Although the judge  accepted  the  appellant's
      uncle had left Somalia and that there was no evidence to displace  the
      previous judge's finding (i.e. Judge Napthine) that the appellant  was
      not from a minority clan and therefore at risk on  return  as  a  lone
      woman.  Nowhere had the judge made findings on the  support  that  the
      appellant would receive from her majority clan.

15.   The judge also selectively quoted from the country  guidance.   AMM  &
    Others (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 445 at paragraph 631 stated:

         "As a single woman with children, appellant MW would clearly be  in
         a heightened risk  category  from  the  point  of  view  of  sexual
         violence, which is prevalent in southern and central  Somalia.   We
         do not, however, find that she is at real risk of Article 15(b) ill-
         treatment or persecutory ill-treatment by reason of having to  wear
         oppressively heavy clothing in  an  Al-Shabab  area.   As  we  have
         found, the evidence that Al-Shabab imposes such requirements is too
         sporadic to give rise to a generalised real risk."

16.   It was clear from the  evidence  that  this  appellant  did  not  have
    children and would not need to  travel  onwards  from  Mogadishu.   The
    Secretary of State cited from NM & Others (lone women; Ashraf)  Somalia
    CG [2005] UKIAT 00076:

         "96.     Whilst there are significant  dangers  for  returnees  and
             lone women returnees in particular these can be  significantly
             reduced in certain cases: those who, as majority clan members,
             can avail themselves of the protection of the  majority  clan,
             or as a minority, the protection of a clan  patron,  and  also
             those who will be accepted back into Somaliland and  Puntland.
             The former two groups may be able to arrange  in  advance  for
             militia protection from the  airport  onwards,  through  close
             relatives or fellow clan members.  The latter  group  may  not
             need to do so if returned directly to Somaliland or Puntland.

         97.      He was asked numerous direct questions  on  the  issue  of
             overall risk to returnees, lone women returnees in  particular
             and was quite adamant in reply that majority  clan  protection
             of this type made a significant and material difference to the
             level of risk."

17.   Given the above it was asserted that the judge had  completely  failed
    to give reasons regarding why the appellant would not be  protected  by
    her clan membership on return to Mogadishu and why on the basis of  her
    age alone she would be at risk.

18.   The judge failed to  note  a  key  finding  in  MOJ  at  the  headnote
    paragraph (viii):

         "The significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
         Clans now provide, potentially social support  and  mechanisms  and
         assist with access to livelihoods performing less of  a  protection
         function than previously.  There are no clan militias in Mogadishu,
         no clan violence and no clan-based  discriminatory  treatment  even
         from minority members."

19.   No findings were made on whether or not the  appellant's  uncle  would
    be able to provide the appellant with  remittances  until  she  settled
    herself and she would have the availability of  return  packages.   The
    judge  failed  to  indicate  whether  or  not   there   were   specific
    vulnerabilities relating to this appellant which  would  place  her  at
    risk of sexual harassment or violence and why sufficiency of protection
    would not be available to her in Mogadishu.

20.   It is clear from MOJ & Others that many returnees  to  Mogadishu  have
    been returned after many years of absence but were still able  to  take
    advantage of the economic boom over those  who  had  not  left  Somalia
    which had not been taken into account.

Submissions

21.   At the hearing before me Mr Duffy conceded that  should  the  findings
    of the judge be upheld it  was  likely  that  the  appellant  would  be
    entitled to succeed on the Refugee Convention ground.

22.   However Mr Duffy maintained that if the appellant was a  member  of  a
    majority clan she could call for assistance from her clan and he relied
    on the submissions made in the application for permission to appeal.

23.   Ms Dirie submitted that the previous decision of  Judge  Napthine  was
    based on the premise that the appellant's uncle was in Somalia which he
    was no longer.  The appellant would be returning alone and that was the
    key.  In AMM there were no female applicants and I was referred to  the
    case of FY [2017] EWCA Civ 1853 and specifically referred to  paragraph
    14 such that merely finding someone not from a minority  clan  did  not
    mean that the country guidance precludes a finding that the  length  of
    absence and lack of family  ties  prevents  return  to  Somalia.   With
    reference to access to assistance from a majority  clan  in  Mogadishu,
    now family ties were more important than clan ties.

24. Mr Duffy submitted that in this case there was no  expert  evidence  to
    the effect that an individual  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a  long
    period of absence could not expect any  support  from  his  clan.   The
    expert in FY maintained that "the principal social mechanism in Somalia
    now is the family rather than the clan".  This was consistent with  the
    findings in MOJ.

25. Conclusions

26. Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC)

       (1) Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the
       conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal  is  determined,
       those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a whole  makes
       sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

       (2) Although a decision  may  contain  an  error  of  law  where  the
       requirements to give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper Tribunal
       would not normally set aside a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       where there has been no misdirection of law, the fact-finding process
       cannot be criticised and the relevant Country Guidance has been taken
       into account, unless the conclusions the judge draws from the primary
       data were not reasonably open to him or her.

27. It was the respondent's position that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    consider whether there would be clan support and that, irrespective  of
    whether there was family support, there was  support  available  for  a
    majority clan member.  I am not persuaded that the judge failed to  pay
    proper regard to the country guidance such that the appellant would  be
    able to safely relocate.  The current country  guidance  MOJ  &  Others
    (return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442  makes  clear  at
    paragraph 341 that

         "there was evidence from a number of sources that the importance of
         what has been termed the nuclear family has become more significant
         than membership of a clan.  This  was  recognised  by  UNHCR  in  a
         report dated 20 September 2013"

          and further

         "It is plain that the significance of clan membership  has  changed
         and, increasingly residents of  Mogadishu  look  to  their  nuclear
         family for support, protection and access to a livelihood.  But, of
         course the  close  relatives  involved  would  invariably  also  be
         members of the same clan that it is the family relationship  rather
         than the clan membership that is of significance."

28. Although it was stated that the respondent did not  seek  to  challenge
    the finding that the appellant would be returning as a  lone  woman  it
    was the appellant's position that  she  had  left  Mogadishu  with  her
    family when she was only 5 years old and only returned in  2011  for  a
    matter of weeks.  As the judge states at paragraph 23 of  her  decision
    "In MOJ there was no consideration, per se, of risk on return  to  lone
    women" and the only consideration given to the situation of women is at
    paragraph 406 in the context of internal relocation.

29. As set out at 406

           "for the following categories of Somalis, UNHCR  would  consider
           that an IFA/IRA will not be reasonably available in the  absence
           of  meaningful  nuclear  and/or  extended  family  support   and
           functioning clan protection."

30. The judge cites at paragraph 24 of her decision  the  respondent's  own
    guidance on 'Somalia: women fearing gender-based harm/violence  (August
    2006)'(in fact it is 2016) which refers specifically to

           "women without family or clan  support  and  IDP  women  are  in
           general likely to be at real risk of  gender-based  violence  or
           serious harm on return".

31. Having considered the judge's decision as a whole,  the  judge  clearly
    calls upon the relevant country guidance and specifically at  paragraph
    28 cites paragraph 407  of  MOJ  which  sets  out  the  factors  to  be
    considered together with any individual circumstances.   In  particular
    the judge sets out the submissions of Counsel  which  the  judge,  with
    some qualification, implicitly accepts:

         "29.     The appellant's Counsel has carefully considered  each  of
             the factors set out in the preceding paragraph by reference to
             MOJ in paragraph 24 of the skeleton argument as follows:-

             (i) The appellant lived in Mogadishu  only  as  a  very  young
                  child before fleeing with her  family  in  2000  when  her
                  father went missing.  She returned to Mogadishu to  search
                  for the missing members of her family in  2011.   She  was
                  only able to find her uncle with whom she stayed for  only
                  a few weeks.

             (ii)      The appellant left Somalia in 2000 as a  very  young
                  child and returned in 2011 for only  a  matter  of  weeks.
                  She has not been in Somalia since then.

             (iii)     The appellant has no family or clan associations  in
                  Mogadishu or wider Somalia to call upon.  The only  family
                  member she found now resides in Saudi Arabia.

             (iv)      The appellant has no financial resources of her own,
                  she is unable to work in the UK and lives with her family.

             (v) As a young woman from a minority  clan,  [but  see  below]
                  with no experience of working in Somalia or contacts  that
                  would be able to assist her, the prospect of her  security
                  employment and a livelihood  is  slim  to  virtually  non-
                  existent.  Her prospects of finding employment are further
                  compounded by the impending humanitarian crisis and influx
                  of IDPs to the capital city.

             (vi)       Neither  the  appellant's  mother,  stepfather  nor
                  distant relative... would be in a  financial  position  to
                  support the appellant.  The appellant's  mother  does  not
                  work and her stepfather does not earn enough such that the
                  family is reliant on additional financial support from the
                  state...

             (vii)     The  appellant's  travel  to  the  UK  in  2011  was
                  arranged by her uncle who sold land in order to facilitate
                  travel for her to reach safety.  It was a one-off.

32. What is of key significance is the judge accepts that the appellant had
    only been in Mogadishu as a very young child before  fleeing  with  her
    family seventeen years ago,  her  father  went  missing  and  she  only
    returned to Mogadishu for a matter of weeks and "she was only  able  to
    find her uncle with whom she stayed for only a  few  weeks".   Although
    the reference was made in counsel's submissions to the appellant having
    no family or clan association, which was not accepted, it was  accepted
    by the judge at [21] of the decision, that the only family members  the
    appellant had found now resided in Saudi Arabia and  further  that  she
    had no financial resources of her own.  It was submitted that  she  had
    no experience of working in Somalia and that she had travelled  to  the
    UK in 2011 arranged by her uncle who sold land in order  to  facilitate
    travel for a one-off purpose, that is travel to reach safety.   As  the
    judge explained

         30.      The appellant has, of course, not been found to belong  to
             a minority clan and there is no further evidence before me  to
             displace  that  finding.   Irrespective  of  her   true   clan
             membership, however, I am satisfied that the  appellant  would
             be at  risk  by  virtue  of  her  particular  vulnerabilities,
             including being a lone woman returnee, the length of time that
             she has been away from Somalia and her  relative  inexperience
             of living there, her lack of family connections in Somalia and
             her age.  Accordingly, in the light of all of the evidence  to
             which I have referred above, I find  that  the  appellant  has
             shown substantial grounds for believing that, if  returned  to
             Somalia, she would face a real risk of suffering serious  harm
             and that she is unable or, owing to such  risk,  unwilling  to
             avail herself of the protection of that country, in accordance
             with paragraph 339C of HC395."

33. It is apparent from paragraph 30 of the decision that the judge did not
    accept that she was from a minority clan but, irrespective of her clan,
    bearing in mind that the key issue is whether she has  family,  it  was
    specifically found by the judge that the appellant  would  be  at  risk
    because she was being returned as a lone woman, having been absent from
    Somalia for a considerable time with  the  consequent  inexperience  of
    that country.  Those findings were adequately reasoned and open to  the
    judge having directed herself appropriately on the law.

34. It is clear from the jurisprudence that the issue of the nuclear family
    has taken precedence over the clan membership  and  that  is  evidenced
    from paragraph 341 of MOJ which I have cited above. I repeat

           'The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu  has  changed.
           Clans now provide, potentially social support and mechanisms and
           assist  with  access  to  livelihoods  performing  less   of   a
           protection function than previously'.

    Further, it is clear that a finding of real risk where there is a  lack
    of family ties, albeit that the appellant is not from a minority  clan,
    is not precluded by the country guidance.

35. FY accepts the changing pattern of support in Mogadishu  and  sets  out
    from paragraph 13 onwards, the key parts of MOJ  in relation to risk on
    return to Somalia, and specifically rejects a direction that being from
    a majority clan precludes a findings that  it  would  be  difficult  to
    return to Somalia. Lady Justice Thirlwall reasons as follows
           "13. The essence of the relevant country guidance is to be found
           at paragraph 407 at sub paragraphs (f)-(h) and at paragraph 408.


                 "407.
                 ...
                 (f) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of
                 absence will look to his nuclear family, if he has one
                 living in the city, for assistance in re-establishing
                 himself and securing a livelihood. Although a returnee may
                 also seek assistance from his clan members who are not
                 close relatives, such help is only likely to be forthcoming
                 for majority clan members, as minority clans may have
                 little to offer.
                 (g) The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has
                 changed. Clans now provide, potentially, social support
                 mechanisms and assistance with access to livelihoods,
                 performing less of a protection function than previously.
                 There are no clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence,
                 and no clan based discriminatory treatment, even for
                 minority clan members.
                 (h) If it is accepted that a person facing a return to
                 Mogadishu after a period of absence has no nuclear family
                 or close relatives in the city to assist him in re-
                 establishing himself on return, there will need to be a
                 careful assessment of all of the circumstances. These
                 considerations will include, but are not limited to:
                     o Circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
                     o Length of absence from Mogadishu;
                     o Family or clan associations to call upon in
                       Mogadishu;
                     o Access to financial resources;
                     o Prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be
                       employment or self employment;
                     o Availability of remittances from abroad;
                     o Means of support during the time spent in the United
                       Kingdom;
                     o Why his ability to fund the journey to the West no
                       longer enables an appellant to secure financial
                       support on return.
                 408. Put another way, it will be for the person facing
                 return to explain why he would not be able to access the
                 economic opportunities that have been produced by the
                 economic boom, especially as there is evidence to the
                 effect that returnees are taking jobs at the expense of
                 those who have never been away."
           14. Mr Najib submits that having set out the guidance the FtT
           judge failed to apply it. He began with the written submission
           that having determined that FY was a member of a majority clan
           the FtT judge was "precluded from finding (and therefore erred
           in finding) that the Respondent would not be able to access help
           and support from his clan upon return to Mogadishu merely by
           reason of his lengthy absence from the same, such an argument
           having been rejected in ...MOJ".
           15. What the FtT judge found, as part of her overall
           consideration of the circumstances is set out at paragraph 44
           "I have not accepted that he has established he is from a
           minority clan. However I accept that his length of absence and
           lack of family ties will make it difficult for him to access
           help from his clan in Mogadishu and that family ties are now
           more important than clan ties."
           Mr Najib accepted, on reflection that nothing in the Country
           Guidance precluded those findings."

36. Indeed FY guards against over emphasis on the clan  membership  and  as
    stated at paragraph 16 with reference to clan membership
          'But this source of assistance must not be overstated. As
          explained by Ms Harper, in her oral evidence, in response to a
          question concerning what help a returnee might expect from his
          clan:
                       "None at present. If you arrive in Mogadishu and do
                       not know anyone at all, you might start asking for
                       fellow clan members in the hope that they might do
                       more for you than others. But you could not expect
                       anything from them.
          We understand that to mean that while there was no guarantee that
          help would be available from clan members outside the close
          family network of a returnee, at least there is more likelihood
          of such a request being accommodated than if made to those
          unconnected by the bond of clan membership'.

37. The  judge  indeed  considered  the  individual  circumstances  of  the
    appellant and accepted that the she as a young  woman  had  no  nuclear
    family or close relatives in the city to assist her in  re-establishing
    herself on return and that she would be at risk therefore,  as  a  lone
    woman from gender based violence [24]. The judge found that her age was
    a risk factor.  Despite a fleeting visit in 2011 for a matter of  weeks
    she had last lived in Somalia as a very young child in 2000.  The judge
    at [21] had already accepted, on the relevant standard of proof,  which
    is highly relevant in this instance, that the uncle had  departed  from
    Somalia. The judge also accepted that the appellant  had  no  financial
    resources of her own, was unable to work in the UK and lived  with  her
    family here.  There was little prospect of her securing employment  and
    her prospect of finding employment on the basis of her  experience  was
    'slim' and  'further compounded by the  impending  humanitarian  crisis
    and influx of IDPs to  the  capital  city'.   That,  in  my  view,  was
    realistically accepted by the judge.  Despite  the  economic  boom  the
    Judge  was  clearly  of  the  opinion  that  the  appellant  would   be
    economically left behind because of her inexperience of not  only  work
    but also the country itself.

38. As confirmed in Shizad there is no  need  for  expansive  or  extensive
    reasoning in a decision as long as the central  issues  are  addressed.
    Where the decision as a whole  makes  sense,  the  judge  has  properly
    directed themselves on the law, and has made findings open  to  him/her
    on the evidence there will be no error of law.  For the  reasons  given
    above I find that is the case here.  On balance I find the  application
    for permission to appeal and the grounds are essentially attack on  and
    disagreement with the findings of a specialist tribunal and the  weight
    given by the  judge  to  the  evidence.   The  findings  were  rational
    findings and the conclusions will stand save for the caveat below.

Notice of Decision

39. As such I allow the appeal only in terms that  the  judge  should  have
    allowed the appellant's (Ms O's) appeal on the  basis  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  I accept the appellant is clearly a member of a particular
    social group as she is a woman at risk  of  serious  harm.   I  however
    dismiss the challenge by the Secretary of State for the reasons given.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 1st February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


