


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01409/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 2nd  August 2016                      |On: 2nd August 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                                     VP
                          (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mr Murphy, Counsel instructed by Raffles Haig
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Armenia born in 1992.






    Anonymity Order

 2. The Respondent is subject to a deportation order.  He  would  therefore
    not ordinarily have his identity protected. This appeal  however  turns
    in on his claim for international protection.   Having  had  regard  to
    Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2007 with  valid
    leave to enter as a dependent child. He  was  then  aged  14.   He  was
    subsequently granted Discretionary Leave in line with  his  mother.  He
    has resided in the United Kingdom  ever since.


 4. On the 22nd April 2014 the Appellant was convicted  at  Woolwich  Crown
    Court of robbery. The sentencing remarks of the Judge make  clear  that
    it was an extremely serious offence. The Appellant and  two  other  men
    preyed upon a house in  their  neighbourhood  which  they  knew  to  be
    occupied by at least one young woman  who  was  known  to  one  of  the
    perpetrators as a family  friend.  The  Appellant  and  one  other  man
    violently beat down the front door so that  the  young  woman  who  was
    cowering behind it was injured. Once they had gained entry they bullied
    and intimidated the woman and her sister into giving up where money  or
    jewellery might be hidden. The Appellant was sentenced to  four  years'
    imprisonment for his part in the attack, a sentence  reduced  from  the
    expected six for a plea of guilty.

 5. The Appellant therefore fell to be deported as a  foreign  criminal.  A
    decision to that effect was taken  on  the  10th  December  2014.   The
    Deportation Order was signed on the 11th February 2015. The  Respondent
    made arrangements for the Appellant to be removed from the  country.  A
    week before the scheduled removal, on the 15th June 2015 the  Appellant
    made a protection claim.   He  stated  that  he  would  be  liable  for
    military service in Armenia and that conditions that he would  face  in
    the army would breach Article 3 ECHR. He claimed that there was a  real
    risk that he would be imprisoned upon  return  to  Armenia  for  having
    avoided call-up at 18.

 6. The Secretary of State accepts that the Appellant will  be  liable  for
    call-up but not that he would  face  any  risk  of  serious  harm.  The
    evidence showed that young men were liable to call-up between the  ages
    of 18 and 27 so it was not likely that he would face punishment for not
    having reported previously. He could  simply  present  himself  to  the
    military commissariat on return.  There were  also  provisions  whereby
    individuals could apply  for  exemptions,  for  instance  on  religious
    grounds.  Armenians living abroad who had missed call up  could  simply
    attend the consulate and volunteer to report.


 7. The Appellant appealed  and  the  matter  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (First-tier Tribunal  Judge Grimmett and NLM Mr GF Sandall).


 8. The First-tier Tribunal was not entirely  satisfied  that  the  call-up
    papers had been provided to the Respondent, and in any event  the  HOPO
    had not seen them. The case  was  therefore  adjourned  to  enable  the
    Respondent to  consider  this  material.  It  is  not  clear  from  the
    determination what view was taken by  the  Respondent  at  the  resumed
    hearing, but the Tribunal, in its  determination  dated  29th  February
    2016, attached no weight to the documents at all.   The reasons are set
    out at paragraphs 22-24. In essence they were:

           i) That neither the Appellant  nor  his  mother  nor  uncle  had
              previously  said  that  call-up  papers  had  been  received,
              despite the fact these documents had purportedly been sent to
              the Appellant's mother on the 7th July  2015.  This  included
              silence on the matter in a letter from her  dated  10th  July
              2015;


          ii) The Appellant had sought further leave to remain in May  2013
              when he was twenty years old, yet had not  mentioned  to  the
              Home  Office  at  that  time  that  he  was   worried   about
              conscription.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal did not therefore accept that the Appellant had
    been called up as claimed. Nor did it accept his evidence that he had a
    conscientious objection to violence; in light of  his  conviction  that
    claim was unsustainable. The determination  goes  on  to  consider  the
    country  background  material.  This  was  confined  to  some  internet
    research reproduced in the refusal letter.   There was found to  be  no
    evidence to support the claim that the  Appellant  would  face  harsher
    treatment than any other recruit, either because of his  draft  evasion
    or criminal conviction.  Paragraph 37 reads:


         "According to the Respondent Armenian citizens  living  abroad  are
         able to register at a consulate in  order  to  apply  for  military
         service despite not being present in Armenia when originally called
         to do so and that individuals within the  country  should  approach
         the military  commissariat  if  they  have  not  been  served  with
         mandatory call-up papers. That suggests that even  if  the  call-up
         papers were reliable documents, which we have  not  found,  as  the
         Appellant is not in Armenia he can simply contact the consulate and
         register there for call-up  and  will  not  be  penalised  for  not
         serving when he was 18..."

10. At 42 the Tribunal goes on:


         "We also note  that  the  background  evidence  suggests  that  the
         Armenian authorities maintain a strict monitoring of draft  evasion
         and those who do not respond  to  a  call-up  usually  receive  two
         written warnings first and  then  they  may  be  arrested  and  the
         military commission visits the home addresses of  men  who  do  not
         respond to a written warning. The Appellant does not say  that  his
         grandparent's house received any written warnings, none  have  been
         produced and there was no evidence of any visits  to  them  by  the
         police since the claimed call-up nearly two years ago".

11. On the basis of these findings the appeal is dismissed,  the  Appellant
    having failed to establish a real risk of Article 3 ill treatment.


    The Appeal

12. The grounds of appeal are:

           a) The findings on the call-up papers were irrational  and  fail
              to take into account the clear evidence (in the  form  of  an
              email chain) that the Appellant 's mother had  sent  them  to
              her previous solicitors;


           b) The determination ignores the objective material cited in the
              refusal letter;

           c) The Respondent's  refusal  letter  confirms  that  those  who
              undertake  military   service   face   appalling   conditions
              amounting to inhuman and degrading treatment;

           d) If Article 3 was not made out the Judge  failed  to  consider
              whether  the  circumstances   faced   by   conscripts   would
              nevertheless amount to "very compelling circumstances"  under
              paragraphs 398-399A.



    My Findings


13. I  have  some  sympathy  with  the  Appellant's  complaints  about  the
    treatment  of  call-up  papers,  as  did  Judge  Shimmin,  who  granted
    permission. There was an e-mail showing that the Appellant's mother had
    forwarded these documents to her then lawyer some time  ago,  and  that
    this lawyer had assured her that they had been passed on  to  the  Home
    Office. The fact that  none  of  the  statements  expressly  said  "the
    Appellant has received call up papers"  had  to  be  assessed  in  that
    context: the Appellant presumed that fact to be at the forefront of the
    decision makers mind, since he  believed  the  Home  Office  to  be  in
    possession of said documents. Paragraph  23  notes  that  the  mother's
    statement of the 10th July 2015 makes no  mention  of  papers  she  now
    purports to have received only three days before, but again  this  must
    be read in the context that the same week she had emailed the documents
    to the same solicitor to whom she now wrote. Her letter  of  that  date
    was the text to be used in her witness statement attesting to her son's
    upbringing and the obstacles that he has faced. There was no place  for
    her to have mentioned the papers - the letter was related to  something
    else entirely.  Similarly  there  would  have  been  no  need  for  the
    Appellant to mention his concerns to the  Home  Office  in  2013  since
    there was at that stage no prospect of him going back to Armenia.


14. I am not however satisfied that this error can be said to be  material.
    That is because the Tribunal make it perfectly plain  at  paragraph  37
    that they have considered the position in the alternative, that call-up
    papers have been received. They find no risk, even on that  alternative
    basis, for two very clear reasons:

           i) The country background material cited in the refusal letter -
              and expressly adopted by the Appellant -  is  that  Armenians
              who find themselves out of the country and so to have  missed
              their call up can simply report to the consulate  to  arrange
              their military service [at 37-38];


          ii)  The  Appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  conditions  for
              conscripts reach  the  threshold  of  inhuman  and  degrading
              treatment [at 45].

15. In respect of the  'consulate'  point  Mr  Murphy  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal had failed to have regard to the objective evidence that  "men
    who do not respond to a call up usually receive  two  written  warnings
    first. If they fail to respond to these warnings the police may  arrest
    them". He submitted that the evidence to do with foreign consulates had
    to be read alongside that evidence and that this showed  the  Appellant
    to be at risk of arrest.   First  of  all  I  would  observe  that  the
    Tribunal did not "ignore" that evidence; it is expressly  addressed  at
    paragraph 42 where the determination makes the point  that  no  written
    warnings appear to have been issued in this case. Secondly the  tension
    between reporting at a consulate and being arrested for  draft  evasion
    in-country is dealt with head-on at paragraph 38:


         "The Appellant says the Armenian authorities will  know  on  return
         that he has not served and will send him to prison for  two  years.
         We are not satisfied that this is  the  position.  We  accept  that
         those who avoid the call-up may be liable to two years imprisonment
         but we are not satisfied that this Appellant has shown that he  has
         yet been called up and he can avoid prison simply by registering at
         the local consulate to indicate where he  is  so  that  he  can  be
         called up formally".


16. As to grounds (c)  and  (d)  above  these  are  premised  on  a  wholly
    inaccurate reading of the refusal letter. The Respondent of course made
    no concession to the  effect  that  conditions  in  the  army  breached
    Article 3 - had she done so then the Appellant's case would never  have
    got to appeal, since it was accepted that as a healthy young man he  is
    liable for call-up.  What the letter does is acknowledge that abuses do
    take place, but that the Armenian authorities  are  making  efforts  to
    combat them  and  are  providing  human  rights  training  to  military
    personnel.



      Decisions


17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law such that is should be set aside and the decision is upheld.


18. There is an order for anonymity.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    2nd
                                 August 2016
