
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01829/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2018                          |On 07 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                             Mohammad Abu Bakor
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma of Counsel instructed by Reymond
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chowdhury promulgated on 19 April  2018  in  which  she  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  24
    January 2018, refusing asylum in the United Kingdom.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed on protection and human rights grounds.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 22  August  1991.   He
    has previously visited the United Kingdom pursuant to  entry  clearance
    as a visitor.  He made trips to the United Kingdom in the  latter  half
    of 2011, during 2012, during the latter half of 2013, and  also  during
    the latter half of 2014.  He was last  granted  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor on 9 June 2015 valid until 9 December 2015.   He  last  entered
    the UK pursuant to such entry clearance on 7 August  2015;  however  he
    overstayed his period of leave.  On 2 May 2017 he was  encountered  and
    served with immigration papers as an overstayer.  On  3  May  2017  the
    Appellant claimed asylum.


3.   In his application  for  asylum  the  Appellant  claimed  that  he  was
    involved in politics in Bangladesh.  He said that he was  a  member  of
    the student wing of the Jamaat-e-Islami and that he had  been  attacked
    by political opponents in consequence.   He  also  claimed  that  First
    Information Reports ('FIRs') had been filed against him  for  incidents
    in April 2012 and March 2013 on false grounds.  He claimed that he  was
    appointed area president of the Islami Chhatra Shibir, the student wing
    of the Jamaat-e-Islami, in January 2015,  and  in  April  2015  he  was
    attacked and stabbed by members of the government party.  He  expressed
    a fear  on  return  from  the  police,  the  government  and  political
    opponents.


4.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused for reasons set  out
    in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 24 January 2018.


5.   The Appellant appealed to the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.


6.   The appeal was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  the  'Decision  and
    Reasons' of the First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated on 19 April 2018.


7.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   This
    was refused in the first instance by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pickup
    on 21 May 2018,  but  subsequently  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gleeson on 23 October 2018.


8.   The Appellant raises five  grounds  of  challenge  in  his  grounds  in
    support of the application for permission to appeal.  Mr Sharma in  his
    submissions before me took me through those grounds in relatively brief
    terms making observations on each of them.  In short, Mr Sharma did not
    seek to develop in detail any of the  grounds  and  in  fact  expressly
    indicated that he did not seek to rely upon some of  the  grounds.   He
    accordingly did not advance any further or more detailed  articulations
    of  the  Appellant's  case  than  those  contained  in   the   grounds.
    Nonetheless, he indicated that he did not expressly concede the appeal.




9.   The first ground of challenge makes for difficult reading.  The  second
    paragraph of it is incomplete: it commences "It is submitted if the  F-
    tTJ has directed it mind correctly to the facts  it  would  have  found
    these:". Nothing further is written.


10.  In any event, the remainder of the  first  ground  is  plainly  without
    substance.   Criticism  is  directed  at  the  Judge's  observation  at
    paragraph 58 that it was "wholly unbelievable" that if the  Appellant's
    activities were as claimed he was unable to identify the current leader
    of the party during his  interview  with  the  Respondent.   The  Judge
    rejected the Appellant's explanation for this inability. The ground  of
    challenge pleads that the Judge's reasoning "doesn't  make  sense".  Mr
    Sharma expressly indicated that he did not place any reliance  on  this
    ground.  He was right so to do.


11.  In the premises I note the following:

         (i) At question 28 of the asylum interview the Appellant was asked,
         further to questions  as  to  the  date  of  founding  of  'Chattra
         Shibbir' (question 26), and the name of the founder (question  27),
         "Who is their current leader?", To  which  he  responded  "I  can't
         remember exactly".

         (ii) The Appellant's apparent lack of knowledge in this regard  was
         raised as an adverse factor in the RFRL at paragraph 30: "You could
         not identify the current leader of  the  party  (AIRQ28)  which  is
         deemed inconsistent with somebody who claims to have been a  member
         of the party since 2011".

         (iii)  At  paragraph  30  of  the  Decision  the  Judge  noted  the
         Appellant's comments on this inability in these terms.

             "[The Home Office Presenting Officer] ... asked the  Appellant
             why he could not remember the leader of the student wing.  The
             Appellant stated that he did not know whether he was asked who
             was the leader of the student wing or the  Jamaat  Party.   He
             did not ask for  clarification.   He  decided  to  ignore  the
             question but he knew the leaders of each."


         (iv) This answer under cross-examination finds  its  way  into  the
         Judge's findings and conclusions at paragraph 58 in these terms:

             "I find it wholly unbelieve that the Appellant who  claims  to
             have been a member of the student wing of the  Jamaat-e-Islami
             could not identify the current leader of the party during  his
             substantive interview  with  the  Respondent.   I  reject  his
             evidence before me that he was confused about the question and
             chose to ignore it instead".




12.  It seems to me  that  the  Judge  was  fully  entitled  to  reject  the
    Appellant's explanation. The Appellant's answer at question 28 does not
    ignore the question, and does not demonstrate any confusion as  to  the
    question.


13.  Moreover, the rejection of  the  Appellant's  attempt  subsequently  to
    explain the apparent lack of knowledge seemingly  demonstrated  by  his
    answer at interview  must  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the  overall
    evaluation of the Appellant's credibility - which is adverse at  almost
    every turn.  Indeed, it is to be noted that the Appellant's performance
    under  cross-examination  was  so  poor  that  at  the  end  of  cross-
    examination his own representative sought a brief adjournment  to  take
    instructions  as  to  whether  the  appeal  should  be  withdrawn:  see
    paragraph 46.


14.  Ground 2 of the challenge before the Upper Tribunal is again  one  upon
    which Mr Sharma did not seek to place  any  particular  reliance.   The
    ground alleges that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to engage with
    the Appellant's "innocent explanation" for failing to claim  asylum  at
    an earlier point.  In this regard, the Appellant's explanation amounted
    to  little  more  than  that  he  had  always  intended  to  return  to
    Bangladesh.  Manifestly that does not offer any sort of explanation for
    failing to seek to regularise his immigration status once he became  an
    overstayer.


15.  In any event it is plain that the Judge  gives  adequate  consideration
    to such matters at paragraph 21 and 67, concluding that the Appellant's
    credibility is "also" damaged on 'section 8 grounds'.  Moreover, it  is
    also clear that the Judge had already  reached  a  significant  adverse
    assessment of the Appellant's  credibility  even  without  the  further
    consideration of section 8 at paragraph 67.  I can see nothing material
    in the section 8 issue that  could  add  positivity  to  the  otherwise
    lamentable presentation of the Appellant's oral  testimony  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


16.  Ground 3, which alleges that the Judge failed to  make  an  independent
    assessment of Article 3, is - as  Mr  Sharma  acknowledged  -  entirely
    contingent upon the Appellant being  able  to  make  good  the  factual
    premises of his claim. As  such  it  is  not  a  ground  that  had  any
    'independent life'. In the circumstances, and bearing in mind  what  is
    said elsewhere  herein,  it  is  unnecessary  to  address  this  ground
    further: it has no merit.


17.  Mr Sharma did not seek to develop either ground 4 or ground 5, but  did
    not expressly abandon them.


18.  Ground 4 is a challenge to the  Judge's  observation  at  paragraph  65
    that the Appellant appeared to be "disinterested" in his own appeal.


19.  Paragraph 65 is in these terms:

         "This appellant has shown a complete disinterest in his own appeal.
          He is incompetent in presenting his claim because I find it is not
         true.  Before me he claimed to be in touch with party activists  in
         Bangladesh but did not even know who wrote him a letter of  support
         from his local party... or who was even the  current  president  of
         the  local  branch.   His  lack  of  knowledge  of  his  own  party
         demonstrated at  his  substantive  interview  with  the  respondent
         showed how little he knew the political party he claims  to  be  an
         adherent of."


20.  It may be that the word "disinterest"  is  not  the  appropriate  word.
    However, what is clear in context is that the Judge was observing  that
    the Appellant seemed significantly unfamiliar with the contents of  the
    supporting evidence that had been submitted on his behalf, and did  not
    display any sort of up-to-date knowledge of the  political  scene  that
    was the milieu of his claim. In my judgement it was open to  the  Judge
    to conclude that such 'incompetence of presentation' arose because  the
    claim was made up.


21.  Indeed the Judge's evaluation of the Appellant's claim makes  it  clear
    that  the  Judge  considered  that  the  Appellant  had  little  actual
    knowledge of the matters being advanced on his behalf - notwithstanding
    that if there was any truth to his claim he would have  had  had  ready
    access to yet more documentation and corroborative documentation via  a
    lawyer based  in  Bangladesh  who  it  was  claimed  was  handling  the
    Appellant's situations  through  the  instruction  of  the  Appellant's
    father: e.g. see paragraphs 62, 63, and 64.


22.  In all the circumstances, I can see no substance to the  fourth  ground
    of challenge.


23.  The fifth ground of challenge is general in  nature  and  alleges  that
    the  Judge  failed  to  approach  the  Appellant's  case  through   the
    appropriate perspective, relied unduly on an inability of  recall,  and
    did not make an explicit finding that the Appellant's case was  "not  a
    coherent case".  It seems to me that this ground adds  nothing  at  all
    that might identify an error of law  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and Mr Sharma was wise not to seek to develop it.  It  is  no
    more than a further expression of  the  generalised  dispute  with  the
    outcome of the appeal.


24.  In short: the  Appellant's  credibility  was  significantly  undermined
    during the course of both his  interview,  and  more  particularly  his
    cross-examination  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has set out with cogency and  clarity  reasons  for  not
    accepting the Appellant's narrative account of  events.  Those  reasons
    are entirely sustainable and are not to be impugned on any of the bases
    alleged in the grounds of appeal.  Once  the  factual  premise  of  the
    Appellant's claim by  reference  to  his  narrative  account  had  been
    rejected there was nothing left  for  him  to  pursue  by  way  of  his
    protection claim.

Notice of Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    therefore stands.


26.  The Appellant appeal remains dismissed.


27.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:



                       Date: 4 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
