

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/01337/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre  |         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 12 December 2017                    |         On 19 December 2017        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     AAM
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Fountains Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In her decision and reasons statement  of  20  April  2017,  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Graham  directed  that  the  appellant's  identity  is
    protected by an anonymity direction.  Given the nature and  content  of
    this appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it is appropriate to  continue  that
    directions, which I do by the order at the end of this decision.

Background

 2. The appellant was born on 30 June 1994.  He says he is  a  national  of
    Iran.  In her decision of 20 April 2017, Judge Graham found he was not,
    and that it was more likely than not that he was in fact a national  of
    Iraq.  Judge Graham also found there were other reasons  to  disbelieve
    the appellant's account.  The appellant challenges  these  conclusions,
    and related matters.

The submissions

 3. Mr Howard amplified the grounds of application.  He first  argued  that
    Judge Graham appears to have used the  civil  standard  (a  balance  of
    probabilities) when  assessing  the  evidence  rather  than  the  lower
    standard of proof that applies in a protection  claim.   He  points  to
    Judge Graham's use of words such as  probable,  likely,  improbable  at
    paragraphs 26, 28. 34 and 37 to found his argument.

 4. Mr Mills reminded me that in the Court of Appeal ruled as follows in RM
    (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 541 regarding different standards
    of proof that can apply in a protection appeal.

    35.  What emerges from those cases - and would in truth be clear enough
    even in the absence of authority -  is  that  what  standard  of  proof
    applies to the question of an applicant's nationality  depends  on  the
    legal issue to which it is relevant. If it is relevant  to  whether  he
    will suffer persecution (whether by reference to the Refugee Convention
    or article 3), the lesser standard will apply. But if it is relevant to
    some other issue - such as whether it is in fact possible  in  practice
    for him to be returned, and any rights that may accrue if it is  not  -
    the standard is the balance of probabilities.

 5. Mr Mills submitted that Judge Graham had been right to  use  the  civil
    standard, therefore, when deciding the  evidence  provided  showed  the
    appellant to be an Iraqi national and not an Iranian one.   This  means
    that the correct standard of proof had been applied  in  paragraphs  26
    and 28 where the judge  was  examining  he  issue  of  the  appellant's
    nationality.

 6. Mr Mills suggested that the concerns regarding the use of the  language
    of the civil standard of proof in the remainder  of  the  decision  and
    reasons statement was immaterial.  The judge was experienced and  could
    be expected to know the law.  At  paragraph  34,  the  judge  used  the
    phrase, "completely improbable"  when  she  probably  meant  completely
    implausible.  But that  was  not  material,  being  merely  a  semantic
    argument.  Judge Graham had provided cogent reasons for  this  finding,
    being that if the appellant had been caught on CCTV when  entering  the
    hospital, then the  same  CCTV  would  have  exonerated  him  from  any
    accusations that might be made.

 7. At paragraph 37, Judge Graham concluded that she had,  "not  found  the
    Appellant's account plausible, likely or credible."   According  to  Mr
    Mills, this phrasing serves to show what was in her mind and  that  she
    was applying the lower  standard  of  proof,  which  she  described  at
    paragraph 10  as  being  "substantial  grounds  for  believing".   This
    phrasing did not sit  well  with  the  notion  that  Judge  Graham  was
    applying the civil standard of proof.

 8. The second ground pursued by Mr Howard questions whether  Judge  Graham
    imposed a burden on the appellant to  provide  corroborating  evidence.
    At paragraph 25,  Judge  Graham  indicated  the  appellant  could  have
    obtained his birth certificate.  At paragraph 32 and 33,  Judge  Graham
    appears to  ask  the  appellant  to  provide  the  CCTV  recording  and
    photographs.

 9. Mr Mills countered by pointing out  that  Judge  Graham  did  not  seek
    corroboration but gave weight  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    described evidence he could obtain but did not obtain it.  She rejected
    his  explanations  regarding  his  inability  to   obtain   his   birth
    certificate because the appellant had admitted to being in contact with
    relatives after he arrived in the UK.  Judge Graham did  not  seek  the
    CCTV recordings or photographs.  At  paragraphs  32  and  33,  she  was
    identifying a significant hole in the appellant's account.

10. Mr Howard's third ground related to whether Judge Graham had considered
    what risks the appellant faced on return to Iran  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker.  Mr Mills pointed out that this was  an  established  issue  in
    country  guideline  cases,  to  which  Judge  Graham  made   sufficient
    reference at paragraph 39.

11. The final ground raised a question about whether  sufficient  attention
    had been made to  the  appellant's  private  life  rights.   Mr  Howard
    acknowledged this was an extension of his first  ground  and  stood  or
    fell with it.

My findings

12. After listening to the arguments, I  reached  the  following  decision,
    which I gave at the end of the hearing.

13. I do not give any weight to the fact Mr Howard, Mr Mills and I all know
    that Judge Graham is an experienced judge.  Her  decision  and  reasons
    statement but stand as a record for an independent  observer  and  such
    factors cannot reasonably be taken into consideration.

14. I am satisfied that Judge Graham properly assessed that  the  appellant
    is an Iraqi national and not an  Iranian  national.   She  applied  the
    standard of proof required, as explained by the Court of Appeal  in  RM
    (Sierra Leone).  This finding is sufficient to undermine  the  entirety
    of the appellant's account because it can only mean that the events the
    appellant describes happening to him in Iran could not have occurred.

15. I am satisfied  the  argument  relating  to  the  use  of  the  phrase,
    "completely improbable", is semantic and not a legal error.  There  can
    be no logical difference between completely improbable  and  completely
    implausible.  Both express the absence of  any  reasonable  likelihood,
    which means the evidence falls below the lower standard  of  proof.   I
    also  take  note  of  Judge  Graham's  tripartite  description  of  the
    appellant's truthfulness at  paragraph  37.   The  use  of  the  words,
    plausible, likely or credible,  reassures  me  that  Judge  Graham  has
    applied the lower standard  of  proof  when  assessing  the  protection
    claim.

16. Turning to the second ground, I agree with Mr Mills's analysis  of  the
    text.  Judge Graham is careful not to say she  required  corroboration.
    She is entitled to take account of the absence of  corroboration  where
    the omission itself goes to the question of credibility, as here.   The
    third ground falls away given what Judge Graham says at  paragraph  29.
    There is no need for a judge to give a  detailed  account  of  what  is
    settled law.  There was no challenge in the First-tier Tribunal to  the
    established country guideline  cases.   The  final  ground  falls  away
    because of my other findings.

17. It follows that I am satisfied  there  is  no  legal  error  and  Judge
    Graham's decision stands.



Decision

There is no legal  error  in  Judge  Graham's  decision  and  I  uphold  her
decision.

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"AAM".








Signed                              Date         12 December 2017


Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
