
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/01068/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated:   |
|on 25 July 2019                      |on 2 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   M N [Z]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge   Fox,
    promulgated on 12 November 2018, in terms of grounds filed with the  UT
    on 18 February and permission granted on 13 March 2019.

 2. Mr Winter at the outset  withdrew  the  grounds  directed  against  the
    outcome on asylum or protection, and indicated that it  was  no  longer
    necessary to consider the typographical, grammatical and similar errors
    of  expression  in  the  decision.   That  concession  was  undoubtedly
    correct.

 3. Mr Winter submitted further to the grounds directed against the outcome
    on human rights.

 4. Those grounds are partly based on the appellant's husband's status as a
    refugee, and on the judge stating that as he has a travel document that
    would not  prevent  him  from  travelling  to  South  Africa  with  the
    appellant.  Developing that aspect, Mr Winter suggested that  he  might
    lose the possibility of accumulating 5 years' residence in the UK,  and
    so qualifying for indefinite leave to  remain.   On  reference  to  the
    underlying evidence, however, it emerged that in his witness  statement
    the appellant's husband narrates that he became a UK citizen in January
    2014.

 5. The judge appears to have been led into this slip  through  submissions
    made for the appellant (see paragraph 59).

 6. Whatever the source of the error, once it is corrected it tends to make
    the appellant's case worse, not better.

 7. Apart from that factual matter, the grounds and submissions focused  on
    the judge's formulations of the legal tests for an appellant to have  a
    right to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.

 8. The formulation at paragraph 54 on when to look  beyond  the  rules  is
    perhaps dubious.  The selection of a case to cite  is  surprising,  but
    not wrong.  The rest of that paragraph appears broadly correct.

 9. Mr Winter correctly identified that at paragraphs 59 and 62  the  judge
    muddles up tests which apply inside the  rules  (the  correct  starting
    point) and outside the rules.  At 62 he says that the appellant has not
    shown  that  her  return  would  be  "unduly  harsh   or   impossible".
    Impossibility is not a test.

10. Mr Winter submitted that the decision should be set aside and reversed.



11. That was based on the evidence which had been before the FtT,  and  the
    submissions made in the UT, no  application  being  made  to  introduce
    further evidence.

12. I did not call upon Mr Govan, and indicated that the outcome  would  be
    as follows.

13. In Muhammad Arslan Khan v SSHD [2016] CSIH 13 the Lord  President  said
    at [13]:

         "It is important not to  over-complicate  the  exercise  which  the
         immigration tribunals require  to  carry  out  in  this  relatively
         common situation. Elaborate re-statements of  multi-facetted  tests
         are seldom necessary at first instance level."

14. Similarly, in ETA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 10 at [27]:

         "Decisions of tribunals should  not  become  formulaic  and  rarely
         benefit from copious citation of authority. Arguments  that  reduce
         to the proposition that the FtT has failed to mention dicta from  a
         series of cases in the Court of Appeal  or  elsewhere  will  rarely
         prosper."

15. Mr Winter has done his best to show error in the  judge's  legal  self-
    directions, and has shown that the judge jumbled up and even mis-stated
    the relevant tests.  Misstatement takes the case a  little  beyond  the
    above citations.

16. If the matter had been finely balanced on the facts,  that  might  have
    been enough for the decision to be set aside.  This,  however,  was  no
    such case.  No feature could be identified by which it  might  sensibly
    have been held that the appellant has a right to remain in  the  UK  on
    human rights grounds, either within the terms of the rules (designed in
    this respect to reflect the UK's human rights obligations)  or  outside
    the rules.

17. The judge made errors, but not of such  a  nature  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

18. Alternatively, had the decision being set aside,  I  would  have  found
    without hesitation that on the evidence the appellant had no  right  on
    human rights grounds to remain in the UK.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

20. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      25 July 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




