
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/01651/2019 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2020                           |On 6 January 2021             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     KA

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: In person. Not legally represented

For the Respondent: Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


1. The appellant, who is a national of Nigeria with date of birth  given  as
   23.4.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   promulgated   21.5.20   (Judge
   Hollingworth-Tennant), dismissing on all grounds her appeal  against  the
   decision of the Secretary of State, dated 6.2.19, to refuse her claim for
   international protection.

2. The appellant  was  not  legally  represented  but  attended  the  remote
   hearing by video. An interpreter in Yoruba  translated  the  proceedings,
   the various submissions, and my questions to the appellant.

3. The relevant background can be summarised as follows. After a  number  of
   failed attempts, the appellant obtained a visit visa the UK  and  arrived
   in September 2013, claiming she intended to stay only a very short period
   of time. She failed to leave within the 6-month limited  and  was  served
   with notice of liability to be removed as an overstayer in August 2015. A
   human rights claim for leave to remain was refused and certified  in  May
   2016.

4. In July 2016 she applied for asylum with her partner and  their  children
   as dependents. The claim was based on assertions that she had been forced
   into prostitution by her stepmother using magical powers, but had managed
   to escape with the help of neighbours in 2012. Although there had been no
   specific threat, she also claimed to be frightened that her children  may
   be abducted and used for rituals. The human rights claim was based on her
   relationship with her partner and children, all citizens of Nigeria,  and
   various health issues for herself, her partner and her youngest child.

5. The claim was refused in February 2019. On 6.6.19, her subsequent  appeal
   before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Herbert  was  dismissed  on  protection
   grounds but allowed on article 8 grounds. The respondent appealed to  the
   Upper Tribunal but the appellant did not cross-appeal  the  dismissal  of
   her protection claim. In the decision promulgated on 29.10.19, the  Upper
   Tribunal (Judge King) set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
   remitting it to be remade afresh. In doing so, Judge King noted that  the
   rehearing would particularly focus on article 8 and  return  to  Nigeria,
   and suggested that  in  the  absence  of  challenge  to  the  asylum  and
   humanitarian protection decision it may be that such  matters  should  be
   preserved but I do not exclude argument to contrary if placed before  the
   Tribunal Judge for that Judge to determine that issue."

6. At [23] of the  impugned  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge
   Hollings-Tennant considered the scope of the appeal,  noting  that  Judge
   Herbert rejected as fabricated the appellant's claim to have been  forced
   into prostitution.  Once  again,  the  unrepresented  appellant  did  not
   challenge the previous findings or  present  "any  arguments  that  could
   reasonably  be  construed  as  calling  such  findings  into   question."
   However, the judge stated, "I have independently considered and  assessed
   the evidence in light of the issue as to whether the previous findings on
   protection stand."  Thereafter,  the  judge  set  out  the  findings  and
   reasoning to entirely reject the claim for international  protection  and
   conclude that it had been fabricated and that she had not told the  truth
   about her experiences in Nigeria. Specifically, there was no risk of harm
   from her stepmother and no real risk of her children being kidnapped,  as
   claimed.

7. In  relation  to  the  human  rights  claim,  the  judge  considered  the
   circumstances of the appellant and her  family  within  and  without  the
   Rules. The respondent had accepted that the appellant was  in  a  genuine
   and subsisting relationship with her partner and her children, twin  boys
   aged 5 and a baby boy. They could not meet Appendix FM as the partner has
   no lawful status in the UK. Neither were any of the  children  qualifying
   children, as they were not British citizens and had not resided in the UK
   for 7 years. The judge found that there  would  be  no  very  significant
   obstacles to the appellant's integration in Nigeria, where she had  lived
   for most of her life until the age of 28. Applying section  117B  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the judge  noted  that  she
   did not speak English and was not financially independent. Little  weight
   could be given to her relationship with her partner  as  it  was  entered
   into when she was unlawfully present in the UK.  Her  status  was  always
   precarious and she became an illegal overstayer when she failed to  leave
   at the end of her visit visa.

8. The judge considered the best interests of  the  appellant's  very  young
   children, which were to continue to be raised by both parents within  the
   context of the family unit. After considering  EV  (Philippines)  v  SSHD
   [2014] EWCA Civ 874, and the circumstances of  the  children,  the  judge
   concluded that their best interests would be to return  to  Nigeria  with
   their parents, neither of whom had any right or basis to  remain  in  the
   UK. The judge concluded that the respondent's decision was proportionate.



9. The judge  also  considered  the  health  issues,  despite  very  limited
   evidence, but including treatment for the appellant's  hepatitis  B,  her
   partner's  treatment  for  glaucoma,  and  inoculations  to  prevent  her
   youngest child contracting Hepatitis B from her. At [47] and [48] of  the
   decision, the judge concluded,  there  was  no  evidence  presented  that
   suggests any treatment necessary for herself, her partner or child  would
   not be available in Nigeria.

The Grounds & Grant of Permission

10. The appellant remains without legal representation. It appears that  her
   handwritten and somewhat difficult to read  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were  considered  somewhat
   generously. On 22.7.20, the First-tier Tribunal considered the grounds as
   largely a disagreement with the findings of the Tribunal and  noted  that
   the appellant did not adduce any evidence on which  it  could  be  argued
   that the Tribunal could or should have departed from the previous adverse
   findings in relation to the claim for international protection.  However,
   permission was granted on the basis of it being arguable that  the  judge
   failed to give adequate consideration to  whether  it  would  be  'unduly
   harsh' for members of the family to return to Nigeria, given their health
   difficulties, and whether it is contrary to the  best  interests  of  the
   children to  relocate  to  Nigeria  with  their  parents.  "Although  the
   Tribunal did consider the best interests  of  the  children  it  did  not
   consider the impact on the individual children of such a move."

Error of Law Considerations

11. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

12. The appellant had little to say that was relevant to the  error  of  law
   issue. I explained to her that I could only interfere with  the  decision
   of the First-tier Tribunal if I found an error of law in its making. Most
   of what she had to say was a "plea for mercy" for  herself,  her  husband
   and her children so that they could remain in  the  UK  and  continue  to
   receive free education for her children and medical treatment, which  she
   said they would not be able to do in Nigeria. She said that her  youngest
   child was still on observation following  Hepatitis  B  vaccination,  and
   that one of her twins was having speech therapy. Given that she does  not
   speak English, I found her claim  that  the  children  do  not  speak  or
   understand Yoruba not credible. She said she was able to speak  a  little
   English to them. The twins may well be taught in English  at  school  but
   given that she and her husband converse between themselves in the  family
   home in their native Yoruba, I am satisfied that  the  children  have  at
   least an understanding of that language. The  appellant  maintained  that
   they have no friend or family in  Nigeria  to  provide  them  with  food,
   shelter or clothing. She also  said  that  their  safety  could  only  be
   guaranteed in the UK. They have no means of financial income  in  the  UK
   and she explained that her husband could not  work  because  of  his  eye
   condition and also high blood pressure. She said that she was also  under
   medical observation for her Hepatitis B.

13.  Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had   adequately
   addressed the health issues between [44] and [49] of  the  decision,  and
   that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  adduce  sufficient  evidence  that
   appropriate treatment would not be available to the family in Nigeria. In
   relation to the best interests considerations, Mr  Bates  submitted  that
   the judge adequately dealt  with  this  between  [39]  and  [40]  of  the
   decision. In summary, due to their young age, the children have  no  real
   private life outside the family. Through  their  parents,  they  must  be
   familiar with Nigerian culture and  language.  He  submitted  that  there
   would be no interference with family life under article 8 as  the  family
   would all be returned to  Nigeria  together,  to  the  country  of  their
   nationality and heritage, where it will be open to their parents to  find
   employment to support the family. He  submitted  that  the  decision  was
   proportionate.

14. In response to my specific queries about the  grant  of  permission,  Mr
   Bates questioned the materiality of the alleged errors, pointing out that
   other than the medical issue evidence, and given their young  age,  there
   was nothing to  suggest  that  there  was  anything  to  distinguish  the
   individual best interest of the children  individually.  In  relation  to
   Judge Finch's reference to 'unduly harsh', Mr Bates submitted  that  this
   should be taken as a reference to 'unjustifiably harsh'  consequences  of
   removal sufficient to amount to compelling exceptional circumstances.  He
   submitted  that  there  was  nothing  to  demonstrate  such   exceptional
   circumstances on the facts of this case.

15. I am not satisfied that there is any error in the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal in respect of consideration of the s55  best  interests  of
   the children, even taken as a primary consideration. The two  twins  were
   only 5 years of age, now 6, and the youngest child only 2. It is  obvious
   that the focus of all three children would be within the immediate family
   unit, where their parents speak Yoruba. They are not qualifying  children
   and are, like their parents, citizens of Nigeria. Nothing in the evidence
   before the First-tier Tribunal suggested  any  basis  for  distinguishing
   between the best interests of the children.  They  are  young  enough  to
   return and settle in Nigeria with the support of their parents. They have
   no entitlement to remain in the UK and it would be difficult to justify a
   finding that their best interests are not to return to Nigeria with their
   parents.

16. It remains clear that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of  the
   Rules in respect of either family life under Appendix FM or private  life
   under paragraph 276ADE. On the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, there
   are no insurmountable obstacles to continuing family life in Nigeria  and
   no very significant obstacles to integration. Section 117B considerations
   are significantly adverse to the appellant and do not assist her at  all.
   The children are not qualifying children  and  little  weight  is  to  be
   accorded to family life with her partner. She is neither English-speaking
   nor  financially  independent.  In  reality,  there  is  nothing  in  the
   circumstances of the appellant and her family to even begin  to  outweigh
   the public interests in her removal to Nigeria.

17. Neither can I see any basis to find  such  compelling  circumstances  on
   the  facts  of  this  case  that  would,  exceptionally,  render  removal
   unjustifiably harsh. Mere hardship or difficulties on return to  Nigeria,
   as pleaded by the appellant in her oral submissions, is insufficient.  It
   is clear from [53] of the decision that the judge had this  consideration
   in mind, specifically finding no  exceptional  circumstances  to  justify
   allowing  the  appellant  to  remain.  The  medical  evidence  does   not
   demonstrate that adequate treatment would not be  available  in  Nigeria.
   Two of the children have minor issues for treatment,  the  appellant  has
   her  ongoing  Hepatitis  B  monitoring,  and  her  husband  has  his  own
   conditions. These do not reach the high threshold of N or Paposhvilli for
   article 3 and are insufficient to succeed on article 8 grounds.

18. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  applied  a  holistic
   approach and assessed all relevant factors before reaching the conclusion
   that the decision of the respondent was proportionate to  the  article  8
   rights of the appellant and her family members. There were no  compelling
   or exceptional circumstances for any of the family members.

19. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.

Decision

      The appeal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  stands  and  the  appellant's
      appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       17 December 2020




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       17 December 2020

