
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01232/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On:      18 November 2016                 |On: 22 November 2016             |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin, Counsel instructed by Migrant Law
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge I Malcolm  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant, a citizen of Ethiopia,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse asylum and set removal directions.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 May 2015 and  claimed
    asylum the same day. His application was refused by the Respondent on 1
    September 2015. The Appellant exercised his  right  of  appeal  against
    this decision and this is  the  appeal  that  was  heard  before  Judge
    Malcolm on 29 April 2016 and dismissed. The Appellant's application for
    permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    was granted on 28 July  2016  by  Designated  Judge  MacDonald  in  the
    following terms

         "... The grounds state that the appellant should not be expected to
         know the extent of his father's involvement in the OLF.  The  judge
         had engaged in speculation.  Some  of  the  judge's  findings  were
         perverse and it did not matter whether or  not  the  appellant  had
         shown good faith in carrying out the sur place activities.

         The judge noted in paragraph  91  that  photographs  were  provided
         showing the appellant participating in demonstrations and  meetings
         and she accepted that evidence relating to  the  OLF.  Her  finding
         that the appellant's evidence as to his involvement  with  the  OLF
         was "somewhat vague" is arguably unclear as to  what  evidence  the
         judge was accepting and it  might  be  said  that  what  the  judge
         concluded in paragraph 97 has not been fully reasoned."

 3. By a rule 24 response dated 8 August 2016 the  Respondent  opposed  the
    appeal.

 4. At the hearing before me Ms Aboni appeared for the Secretary  of  State
    and Mr  Martin  represented  the  Appellant  and  submitted  a  written
    skeleton argument.

Background

 5. The Appellant is a 23-year-old Ethiopian citizen  who  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom at the age of 22 having travelled through  a  number  of
    European and other  countries.   The  Appellant  claims  that  he  left
    Ethiopia fearing persecution due to his involvement with  the  OLF  and
    his father's involvement before him. The Appellant also claims to  have
    taken part in OLF activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  this
    increases the risk that he will face on return.

 6. In dismissing his appeal, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  the
    Appellant had not given a credible account of his journey to the United
    Kingdom, that his account of his involvement with the OLF was 'somewhat
    vague' and that his  account  of  his  father's  involvement  was  'not
    particularly persuasive'. The Judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    been involved in demonstrations and meetings in the United Kingdom  but
    found these activities were not sufficient to  establish  a  sur  place
    claim.

Submissions

 7. Mr Martin referred to his skeleton argument and said  that  there  were
    two  effective  strands  to  the  appeal.  The  first  related  to  the
    Appellant's father's activities and the second to the sur place  claim.
    As to the former his father died in 2011 when the Appellant was 18.  At
    that time the Appellant did not claim to be involved with the OLF,  his
    own activities started in 2013. The Judge gave too much weight  to  the
    fact that the Appellant could not give detailed information  about  his
    father's involvement. The conclusion that the Appellant's evidence  was
    'vague' as to his own activities and 'not particularly  persuasive'  as
    to his father activities did not show what was accepted  and  what  was
    not.

 8. So far as the sur place claim was concerned the Judge gave insufficient
    weight to the letter from Dr Berri but  more  importantly  having  seen
    photographs and having found that the Appellant took part in activities
    in the United Kingdom the Judge gives no reasons for the  finding  that
    this is insufficient to establish  a  sur  place  claim.  There  is  no
    analysis of the photographs and no reference to background material.

 9. For the Respondent Ms Aboni referred to the rule  24  notice  and  said
    that whilst there was sufficient reason given for the finding  relating
    to the Appellant's  father  it  had  to  be  accepted  that  there  was
    inadequate reasoning in respect of  the  dismissal  of  the  sur  place
    claim.

10. I said that the appeal would be allowed. I was satisfied that the Judge
    had erred in law in that both the finding that the  Appellant  was  not
    credible and the finding that his activities in the United Kingdom were
    insufficient to establish a sur place claim were inadequately reasoned.
    I reserved my written decision.

Error of law

11. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia of Oromo  ethnicity.  He  claims
    that his father was a member of the Oromo Liberation  Front  (OLF)  and
    that he was killed by the Ethiopian government in February 2011  having
    been in prison for 3 months before his death. The Appellant  said  that
    his mother told him of his  father's  OLF  involvement.  The  Appellant
    became involved with the OLF himself in late 2013 and attended meetings
    and  delivered  leaflets.  The  delivery  of  leaflets  caused  adverse
    interest from the Ethiopian authorities  and  having  seen  the  police
    coming to his home in April 2014 the Appellant went into  hiding  until
    he was able to leave the country. He travelled first to Sudan and  then
    on to Libya before entering Europe through Italy and travelling through
    other countries including France before arriving in the United Kingdom.
    Having arrived in the United Kingdom  and  having  claimed  asylum  the
    Appellant made contact with the OLF in London and attended meetings and
    demonstrations in which he took  a  role  enabling  him  to  be  easily
    photographed.

12. In dismissing the claim, it is clear that the Judge took adversely  the
    Appellant's account of his travel to the United Kingdom. Paragraphs  81
    to 85 of the statement of reasons deal with this. It is in my  judgment
    clear that the Judge's findings in this respect form at least  part  of
    the foundation of her reasons for not accepting the  substance  of  the
    Appellant's claim.  Thereafter  the  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant's mother had been arrested because there was  no  independent
    evidence  to  support  this  (paragraph  86).  In  dealing   with   the
    Appellants' claim that his father was involved with the OLF  the  Judge
    'found it difficult' to accept that the Appellant was  unable  to  give
    specific information given that the Appellant was  also  involved  with
    the OLF (paragraph 88). In making this finding the Judge fails to  note
    that the Appellant did not become involved with the OLF until more than
    2 years after his father's death. The Judge does not  accept  that  the
    Appellant's father was killed because there is no independent  evidence
    to support this. So far as the Appellant involvement with  the  OLF  is
    concerned the Judge rejects his evidence a 'somewhat vague'.

13. In my judgement  there  are  a  number  of  reasons  why  this  adverse
    credibility finding is unsafe. Firstly, the reliance on the  method  of
    travel rather than the substance of the claim,  secondly  the  apparent
    requirement for 'independent evidence' both in respect of his  mother's
    arrest and his father's death, thirdly failure to take into account the
    substantial gap between the Appellant's father's involvement and  death
    and the Appellant's own  involvement  with  the  OLF  and  finally  the
    overall summary of the Appellant's evidence of his own  involvement  as
    'somewhat vague.' Individually these are examples of reasoning that are
    perhaps  incomplete  but  taken  together  there  is  in  my   judgment
    inadequate reasoning sufficient to amount to an error of law making the
    credibility findings unsafe.

14. The refusal of the sur place claim is also in my judgment  inadequately
    reasoned. The Judge accepts that sur place activities took  place.  She
    criticises the evidence of Dr  Berri  as  being  based  on  information
    provided by the  Appellant  ignoring  the  fact  that  Dr  Berri  gives
    personal evidence of the Appellant's involvement and also  records  the
    fact that he did not accept the Appellant's account of his  involvement
    with the OLF in Ethiopia without question. It being accepted  that  the
    Appellant had taken part in sur place activities  the  conclusion  that
    these were  insufficient  to  establish  a  sur  place  claim  with  no
    reasoning given at all is, as Ms Aboni accepted, clearly inadequate.

15. The effect of these errors must be to render the  credibility  findings
    as a whole unsafe. Due to the  nature  of  the  error  of  law  and  in
    accordance with the President's direction it is  appropriate  for  this
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  hearing  de  novo
    with no findings preserved.



Conclusion

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law for the reasons set out above.

17. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  in  accordance
    with the President's direction this matter is suitable for  and  should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:  Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
