
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01012/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 September 2017                  |On 27 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    [d l]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated on 23 March 2017, dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 19 December  2016
    to refuse to grant her asylum and humanitarian protection.





The Appellant's Case

 2. The appellant is from a traditional, Muslim family from  the  north  of
    Albania.  She was, nonetheless, allowed to attend university  obtaining
    a Masters  degree  at  the  University  of  Tirana  in  July  2014  and
    qualifying as a nurse.  She began a relationship with  [IS]  which  she
    kept secret, fearing that her family would discover it and not approve.

 3. On completing her degree she was forced by her  parents  to  return  to
    live in [ ].

 4. In September 2014 she was told that an arrangement had  been  made  for
    her to marry [SN], the son of a friend of her father.  She  refused  to
    do  so  and  she  was  then  beaten  by  her  parents  until  she  fell
    unconscious.  Although she contacted  her  brother  who  lives  in  the
    United Kingdom who tried to intervene, this was  rejected,  the  father
    claiming that the failure to marry [SN] caused the family dishonour and
    that he would rather kill the appellant.  As a consequence, she  agreed
    to marry [SN].

 5. The appellant told her brother about the situation and he  advised  her
    to contact the police or to relocate within Albania with  [IS]  if  she
    were forced to marry [SN].  She was not permitted  to  leave  the  home
    however, and in December 2014 she told her mother of  the  relationship
    with [IS].  Her mother attacked her physically and  refused  to  accept
    her and she then left to travel to Tirani with [IS] and  then  to  [  ]
    where they worked.  The appellant became pregnant and told  her  mother
    which enraged her and her father.

 6. It is also the appellant's evidence, set out in her  witness  statement
    that she and her partner informed the police of the situation but  they
    were advised that they were unable to stop family feuds and warned them
    to be careful.

 7. On 30 August 2015 whilst shopping in [ ] the appellant saw her  father,
    her cousin and other men talking to a policeman  and  they  immediately
    left and went to another town in the south, [ ] and then fled Albania.

The Respondent's Case

 8. The respondent did not accept the appellant's  case,  considering  that
    there were numerous inconsistencies in the statements she had given and
    at what she had said in interview.  She also  considered  that  in  the
    event there was a sufficiency of protection available  for  her  and/or
    that she  could  relocate  within  Albania.   The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied either that she met the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    in particular paragraph 276ADE.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The judge heard evidence from the appellant as well as submissions from
    both representatives.  The appellant was on that  occasion  represented
    by Mr Collins, as she was before me.

10. The judge found that [38] although there were some tensions with regard
    to the details and dates put forward by the appellant in respect of her
    claim, they did not detract from her credibility;  that  the  appellant
    may well have the difficulties which she alleged  in  relation  to  the
    planned arranged marriage and that [40] her account is accepted.

11. The judge did not, however, accept that the  risk  on  return  was  not
    founded as she could find employment in Tirana and could  be  supported
    by her brother [41] and that her situation was not analogous to a woman
    who had been trafficked  [42].   The  judge  concluded  [43]  that  the
    problems were essentially local  and  confined  to  the  north  of  the
    country and did not accept that the father or the  family  would  "have
    the means and  capacity  to  track  her  down  in  more  urbanised  and
    cosmopolitan parts of Albania such as Tirana."  He did not  accept  the
    assertion the father could rely  on  the  complicity  of  the  Albanian
    police international as opposed to northern or local level.

12. The judge concluded that she could avail herself of state protection in
    another part of  Albania  particularly  from  the  University  City  of
    Tirana.  The judge concluded at [45]:-

         "In short, the Tribunal sees no reason to doubt the account of  the
         locally based problems with her father in the north of Albania.  To
         that extent her claim is accepted.  However, this included that she
         is at no risk upon return because she can relocate to another  part
         of Albania and rely upon state protection.  This being the case the
         Tribunal has concluded that there is no risk upon return for her or
         her young child."

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in that;

      i) having accepted the appellant's account in its entirety,  and  that
         [6] appellant would be at risk in the north of Albania,  he  failed
         to consider [1] whether internal relocation was unduly harsh and it
         ignored the accepted fact that her father had tracked her down to [
         ] further south than Tirana [7];

     ii) in concluding that the appellant could relocate on the  basis  that
         she is  university  educated  and  can  obtain  financial  support,
         ignoring the problem that she would face in particular as a  single
         mother with a child with no immediate family  support  in  Albania;
         and, in not having had regard to the guidance set out in TD and  AD
         (trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 which by analogy applied.

14. On 30 August 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson  granted  permission  to
    appeal stating:-

         "6.  The grounds of appeal argue that the appellant's  brother  had
             pursued her to [ ] which is in southern Albania and  that  the
             police there were unable and unwilling to assist her when  she
             approached them.  The appellant's accepted  evidence  is  that
             her father managed to track her there and was seen talking  to
             the police, with a group of men.  [ ] is five and a half hours
             south of the appellant's home town in [ ] and three and a half
             hours further  south  than  Tirana  where  the  appellant  has
             studied for her  degree.   It  is  arguable  that  the  judge,
             treating the risk as only in the north  of  Albania,  with  an
             error of fact capable of amounting to an error of law,  it  is
             also  argued  that  insufficient  weight  was  given  to   the
             appellant's status as the mother of an illegitimate child  and
             the risk on return (see TD and  AD  at  (h)  in  the  judicial
             headnote and [49])."

15. Permission was granted on all grounds.

Submissions

16. Mr Collins submitted that it was evident from  the  decision  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had accepted the appellant's account  and  thus  it
    accepted that she had been traced to [ ]  where  the  police  had  been
    unable to find her.  He submitted on that basis that the applicant  was
    at risk on return and that the judge had erred.

17. Mr Clarke submitted that it was not sufficiently clear that  the  judge
    had accepted that part of the applicant's account at which she had said
    that she had been traced to [ ].  He submitted however that, having had
    regard to the different accounts in the  interviews  that  it  was  not
    sufficiently clear that the judge had made a  finding  on  that  matter
    drawing  attention  to  what  was  said  in  the  refusal  letter   and
    differences in what the appellant had said  in  her  written  statement
    before the interview and subsequently.

18. I am satisfied from the judge's decision that he did accept  the  whole
    of the appellant's account.  That is the only  rational  interpretation
    of what he has said at [40].  It is also sufficiently clear  from  what
    the judge said at [38]  that  he  was  aware  of  difficulties  in  the
    evidence and he put these to one side as he was entitled to do and  for
    sufficient reasons, applying the lower standard of  proof.   I  do  not
    accept the submission from the Secretary  of  State  that  having  been
    traced to [ ] was not part of the appellant's case.  It is sufficiently
    clear that that is what she said from her witness statements which were
    adopted and therefore form part of the account accepted by  the  judge.
    Whilst there is, I accept, some support for the respondent's submission
    at [43], the judge here is confining issues to  whether  she  would  be
    tracked down in such urbanised or cosmopolitan parts of Albania such as
    Tirana.  I do not consider that this could be a finding  that  she  had
    not been traced to [ ],  a  smaller  town  towards  the  south  of  the
    country.

19. Whilst I accept that there are differences in what the  appellant  said
    during her interviews and subsequently, equally, I  conclude  that  the
    judge was not satisfied that  these  undermined  the  appellant's  case
    given that he repeatedly said that he accepted her evidence.  That  was
    a matter for him to accept and he has  given  adequate  and  sufficient
    reasons for his conclusion.  Further, the judge had the opportunity  to
    observe and hear  the  appellant  giving  evidence  and  has  given  no
    indication that he did not believe what she had said.  There is  in  my
    view no sufficient basis here which could  be  said  that  the  judge's
    conclusions as to the evidence of the  appellant  could  be  considered
    perverse or otherwise vitiated by error of law.

20. I am satisfied that in the circumstances the judge failed  properly  to
    consider whether there would be a sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
    appellant elsewhere in Albania and/or whether it would be reasonable to
    expect her to relocate within the country.  Further, it is  clear  that
    the judge fails to consider properly why he thought that  although,  as
    was accepted, the appellant's father had traced her to  [  ],  that  he
    would not be able to follow her to Tirana where there had been  contact
    with her from members of the family.

21. Having announced my  decision,  and  that  I  was  satisfied  that  the
    decision was to be remade, I heard further submissions.  There  was  no
    additional evidence adduced.

22. In submissions Mr Collins submitted that the applicant would be at risk
    as a single mother with an  illegitimate  child  who  having  relocated
    before had been found and whom the police had refused to assist in  the
    past.  He submitted also as the father and cousin had  previously  been
    able to track her down in Tirana, that she would be at risk on return.

23. Taking me to the Home Office's guidance he submitted  there  would  for
    this appellant be no  effective  protection  given  the  deeply  rooted
    antipathy towards those such as the appellant who  were  seen  to  have
    transgressed the traditional mores of Albanian  society  and  having  a
    child outside wedlock.  He  submitted  whether  there  was  significant
    evidence, having had  regards  to  TD  &  AD  as  well  as  AM  and  BM
    (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) that as  the  mother
    of  an  illegitimate  child  she  would  stand  out  and  would  suffer
    discrimination, putting her at greater risk, as a result.  He submitted
    further  that  she  would  as  a  result  have  further  difficulty  in
    reintegration to Albanian society this giving rise to  undue  harshness
    irrespective that she was likely to have financial support.

24. Mr Clarke submitted that, having had regard to what the  appellant  had
    said in interview particularly in response to questions 23 and  24  and
    also in her witness statement that there was  no  indication  that  her
    father had influence over the police or would  be  able  to  act  in  a
    specific way and thus, on the basis of  Horvath,  there  would  in  the
    facts of this case  be  a  sufficiency  of  protection.   He  submitted
    further that there was insufficient evidence to show that the appellant
    would be traced in Albania or that she had been traced in the past.  He
    did, however, candidly accept that if the Secretary of State  were  not
    to succeed on the issue of her being traced, that she would lose.

25. Mr Clarke submitted that there was on  the  facts  of  this  case  even
    taking it at its highest a sufficiency of protection for the  appellant
    but that it would not be unduly harsh to expect her to relocate despite
    the fact she has an illegitimate child and given that she was  educated
    and had the support of her brother in the United Kingdom who  would  be
    able to support her financially.

26. In response, Mr Collins submitted that it was inappropriate to seek  to
    reopen the findings of  fact  and  that  the  appellant  had  distanced
    herself from the interview upon which Mr Clarke had sought to rely.  He
    submitted that it was clear that she had been traced and whether or not
    the father had influence with the police was not the issue.

27. Mr Collins submitted further that as a victim of domestic  violence  as
    opposed to a victim of trafficking there will be little or  no  support
    in the forms of shelter for her as the government  shelters  were  only
    available to those who had a certificate showing  that  they  had  been
    subjected to domestic violence which the appellant would not be able to
    produce.

    Discussion

28. I am satisfied that it is reasonably likely that the appellant's family
    had travelled to [ ] to try to find her.  There appears to be no  other
    reason why they would have gone to the town and it is  consistent  with
    their animosity towards her and the violence already  carried  out.   I
    note also that they did check upon on her when she was in Tirana.

29. The question of why they were talking to  the  police  is  a  different
    matter.  It is understandable that the  appellant  believed  that  they
    were discussing her but there is no evidence that that is so and  there
    is no evidence as to the nature of the conversation between the  father
    and the cousin and the police.

30. Nonetheless, I am satisfied to the lower standard  of  proof  that  the
    appellant's father and cousin had traced her to the area in  which  she
    lived. There is no evidence as to how they were  able  to  do  so.   It
    would be speculative  to  consider  that  in  a  country  in  which  an
    individual must register a place of residence that someone  seeking  to
    trace a member of their family could do  so  using  official  registers
    either with or without the aid of bribery.

31. In the circumstances, on the particular facts of this  case  where  the
    appellant's family have shown a significant degree  of  persistence  in
    seeking to track her down but that that to her extends well beyond  her
    home area and I consider that there is  no  indication  that  there  is
    anywhere in Albania where she will be safe from them.

32. There has been a change of situation since she left  in  that  she  has
    given birth to an illegitimate child but I do not consider that that is
    likely to change the situation.   The  sense  of  shame  and  dishonour
    arising from such circumstances is identified.  In AM and BM at [69]:

         "Whilst this is in the context of women who are  trafficked,  there
         appears to be no reason why this would not apply to this  appellant
         given the attitude already shown by her family."

33. Further, it is evident from the  Home  Office  guidance  that  domestic
    violence is treated as a family  matter  by  the  police.   Whilst  the
    paradigm is of violence within a marriage, appears equally to apply  to
    the domestic violence as shown here it arises  out  of  the  shame  and
    dishonour shown on the family.  There  is,  looking  at  the  situation
    overall, at best a reluctance on the  part  of  the  police  to  become
    involved in domestic violence cases.

34. The  question  then  arises  is  whether  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for the appellant.  This was addressed in TD and AD at [113]
    and [114].

35. I note that in this case the police have expressed an unwillingness  to
    assist the appellant.

36.  Whilst as the Home Office guidance said entitled  Country  Information
    and Guidance - Albania: Women Fearing Domestic Violence (April 2016) it
    notes at 2.4.1 that the Tribunal had held in 2004 that the state offers
    a sufficiency of protection against domestic violence, it is noted also
    at 2.4.3 as follows:-

         "2.4.3      Significant     numbers     of     prosecutions     and
                protection/restraining orders have been made by  the  courts
                (see Domestic violence). However,  the  law  is  not  always
                effectively  applied.  Criminal  proceedings  are  slow  and
                courts violate procedural deadlines for reviewing protection
                orders and issuing decisions. Where  protection  orders  are
                issued they are not always enforced. Reports state that  the
                government is making greater efforts to address the  problem
                but noted that police often did not  have  the  training  or
                capacity to deal effectively with  domestic  violence  cases
                and the number of women victims who benefit from free  legal
                aid is  small  compared  with  the  need.  (see  Police  and
                judiciary attitudes and responses and Police training).

         2.4.5    There are  legal  remedies  available  for  women  fearing
                domestic violence,  although  perpetrators  are  not  always
                properly prosecuted and punished by the courts.  There  were
                reports of police  failing  to  respond  to  or  investigate
                complaints  of  domestic  violence  and  some   cases   were
                identified where police  officers  tried  to  reconcile  the
                victims with their perpetrators. However,  in  general,  the
                authorities  are  willing  and  able  to  provide  effective
                protection  for  women  fearing   sexual   or   gender-based
                violence."

37. I note that in this case the police  have  been  unable  to  offer  the
    appellant protection both within her home area  and  in  south  of  the
    country.  I note also on the particular facts of  this  case  that  the
    domestic violence is not the paradigm in which the violence  is  coming
    from a partner but it is from family.  These have continued outside the
    domestic setting and the appellant was traced  to  [  ]  a  significant
    distance from her home area.  I conclude that on the  particular  facts
    of this case that there would not be a sufficiency  of  protection  for
    this appellant given that the police do not appear  to  be  paying  any
    proper attention to the fact that her father and  cousin  have  carried
    out significant attacks on her and have also  pursued  her  across  the
    country.

38. Accordingly, I am satisfied that there is no sufficiency of  protection
    for this appellant in Albania and that accordingly she is  at  risk  of
    serious harm. In doing so, I note Mr Clarke's concession on the part of
    the respondent.

39. The question then arises as to whether the  harm  which  the  appellant
    fears engages one of the Convention reasons.  I am  satisfied  that  in
    this case the appellant is at risk in the sense that she cannot  obtain
    sufficiency of protection of the state.  It  is  difficult  to  see  if
    women who are at risk of domestic  violence  are  a  particular  social
    group they are not perceived  as  different  and  do  have  a  distinct
    identity in Albanian society.  Nonetheless in this case  the  animosity
    directed towards the appellant is  because  she  has  transgressed  the
    mores of traditional Albanian society.  There is a sufficient basis  to
    consider that she would be at risk on that reason on the basis that she
    was seen as a "kurva".  Certainly, the fact that she was pregnant  with
    a child outside of marriage was something which particularly  concerned
    her parents.  Having a  child  outside  of  marriage  is  an  immutable
    characteristic and there is sufficient evidence to show that  women  in
    that group are stigmatised see AM and BD and also TD and AD.  See K and
    Fornah [2006] UKHL 46 at [57] to [58].

40. Accordingly, I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

41. I concluded that the applicant as a refugee, she  is  not  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.

42. In the circumstances, having found that the applicant is a  refugee  it
    is unnecessary  for  me  also  to  consider  whether  she  fulfils  the
    requirements of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  I  am,
    however, satisfied that the appeal falls to be allowed on human  rights
    grounds, as  removal  would  be  in  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations pursuant to article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the appeal by allowing it  on  refugee  convention  and  human
    rights grounds.


Signed                                  Date:  9 October 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
