

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01171/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th March 2016                    |On 28th April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H H STOREY


                                   Between

                           MR MOHAMED RIZMY TAHIR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Tobin, Counsel, instructed by Rain & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a  national  of  Sri  Lanka.  He  has  permission  to
      challenge the decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge  L  K  Gibbs
      sent on 22 January 2016 dismissing his  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
      rights grounds.  The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that he
      had been implicated by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  in  helping  the
      person who caused the death of Brigadier Parami Kulatunge of  the  Sir
      Lankan army who had been killed in a bomb blast in 2006. The appellant
      claimed that when working at Upali  Newspapers  Ltd  where  he  placed
      adverts he had given a friend called Theepan (whom he  knew  to  be  a
      member of the LTTE) details of the Brigadier's address. The  appellant
      had been detained and ill  treated  but  released  without  charge  or
      reporting restrictions. He had then been sacked by  his  newspaper  in
      December 2006 because of this incident. In March 2007 the  police  had
      come to his house with an arrest warrant for him but he was not  there
      and he subsequently managed to leave e Sri Lanka and come to  the  UK.
      Since arrival in the UK he had learnt that the authorities had visited
      his family on several occasions looking for him  and  on  27  November
      2015 his sister had been arrested and detained.


   2.   I am not persuaded that the judge materially erred in law.


   3.   It is argued in the grounds that the judge was  procedurally  unfair
      in not putting to the appellant the discrepancy between the account he
      provided to Dr Lawrence for the purposes of the latter's February 2015
      report and the account he had provided earlier to the Home  Office  at
      the interview stage in early September 2015, but it is very clear that
      the appellant and  his  representatives  realised  the  importance  of
      addressing this matter because Dr Lawrence was  asked  to  provide  an
      addendum dated 24 December 2015, which he did. More generally I do not
      consider that there was any stage where the appellant could be said to
      have been denied an opportunity to explain his case or deal  with  the
      points identified by the respondent in her reasons for refusal  letter
      of September 2015.


   4.   It is argued in the grounds and orally before me by  Mr  Tobin  that
      the judge was not entitled to reject Dr Lawrence's correction  of  his
      original report. However, that amounts to no more than a  disagreement
      with the judge's assessment of the evidence and in relation to the two
      reports o of Dr  Lawrence  it  was  within  the  range  of  reasonable
      responses for the judge to conclude that Dr  Lawrence  had  not  given
      satisfactory explanation for the previous  omission  in  his  original
      report of the appellant's claim to him that the  Sri  Lankan  CID  had
      detained him in August 2006, held him for two  days,  ill-treated  him
      for two days and on 3 March 2007 come to  his  house  with  an  arrest
      warrant. I would further observe that although  at  the  time  of  the
      first report Dr Lawrence did not have  the  respondent's  reasons  for
      refusal letter and interview details before him, he did at the time of
      the addendum report yet he nowhere undertakes an analysis  of  whether
      this further material 9which  included  adverse  credibility  findings
      with reasons from  the  respondent)  altered  his  impression  of  the
      appellant  which  he  had  gained  in  his  original  examination  and
      interview.  The doctor notes that he had not interviewed the appellant
      again. This  demonstrated  a  failure  by  the  doctor  to  adhere  to
      established case law principles concerning the methodology of  medico-
      legal reports.


   5.    The grounds  take  issue  with  the  judge's  assessment  that  the
      appellant's account of the circumstances in which he claimed  to  have
      learnt of the Brigadier's home address and passed them on to a  friend
      in the LTTE was not credible. It was open to the judge in this  regard
      to count against the appellant that  'Brigadier' was not in  fact  the
      rank of this soldier; that he was in fact a General Commanding Officer
      or Director General; that it was unlikely a man of such  a  high  rank
      would personally attend a newspaper office to place  an  advertisement
      or drink tea with the appellant and disclose his home address; and  it
      was unlikely that such a high-ranking soldier  would  have  given  his
      home address details to  the  newspaper  in  the  context  of  lodging
      advertisements,  especially  given  that  there  was  a   "shadow-war"
      involving tit-for-tat killings going on at the time.


   6.   It is contended that the judge erred in attaching adverse weight  to
      the fact that a further psychiatric report from Dr Raj Persaud dated 4
      January 2016 indicated that he had communicated with the appellant  in
      English, a language that the doctor  acknowledged  the  appellant  had
      difficulties with (the judge wrote that "to proceed with his report in
      such circumstances casts doubt on Dr Persaud's professionalism and the
      consequent weight that I can attach to his  evidence.").  The  grounds
      point out that if given  the  opportunity  the  appellant  would  have
      clarified that there was a Sri Lankan interpreter present.  It is also
      contended that the judge was not entitled to attach adverse weight  to
      the fact that the appellant made no  mention  to  Dr  Persaud  of  his
      having been tortured and sexually abused whilst in detention  (despite
      having mentioned these claims to the respondent in his earlier ASC). I
      do not consider that these grounds  identify  any  significant  error.
      Whether an interpreter was present or not,  the  doctor  himself  used
      words indicating that the appellant communicated in  English  and  did
      say that the appellant had  difficulty  in  communicating  in  English
      ("...he doesn't communicate in spoken English as  well  at  times  and
      this  was  evident  in  my  consultation  with  him   today").   These
      observations afforded a rational basis for the judge  to  attach  less
      weight to the report than he may have otherwise. It was also  open  to
      the judge to regard as significant that Dr Persaud made no mention  of
      the appellant's claim to having been sexually abused by authorities in
      Sri Lanka. Whilst of course, it is well-established that when it comes
      to matters concerning sexual abuse allowance  must  be  made  for  the
      failure of an applicant to mention this at an  early  stage,  in  this
      case the appellant had had no difficulty in mentioning it at an  early
      stage in his ASC and there was even more reason why he would  want  to
      mention it to a psychiatrist to whom he had gone for assistance with a
      report about his mental well-being and past history.


   7.  In submissions Mr Tobin sought to argue  that  the  judge's  decision
      betrayed a failure to deal with the medical  evidence  in  a  holistic
      fashion. He highlighted the judge's words in [29] "[g]iven my concerns
      regarding the appellant's credibility..." I see nothing to show  error
      on the part of the judge in this regard. The  judge  clearly  saw  his
      task as requiring him to assess the evidence as a whole and to  assess
      the medical evidence in the context of the totality of  the  evidence.
      The reference in [29] concerned  the  judge's  assessment  of  whether
      there was a reasonable explanation for the failure of the appellant to
      refer to the correct rank of Parami Kulatunge and read as a whole does
      not indicate any compartmentalisation of the evidence. I note  further
      that  the  judge's  negative  findings  on  the  credibility  of   the
      appellant's account ranged further than the matters already identified
      and  relied  in  particular  on  the  lack  of  plausibility  in   the
      appellant's account that having been implicated in  the  murder  of  a
      high-ranking army officer the  authorities  would  have  released  the
      appellant  after  two  days  and  without   imposing   any   reporting
      conditions.  The  assessment  that  "it  lacks  credibility  that  the
      authorities would then lose interest in him him, only for this  to  be
      re-ignited (without apparent reason) in March 2007" was a  finding  of
      fact entirely open to the judge on the evidence.

   8.   It is argued that the judge erred in attaching  insufficient  weight
      to the appellant's evidence and the clinical  conclusions  reached  in
      the report of Dr Lawrence  that  the  appellant  was  in  poor  mental
      health. However, given the  judge's  rational  reasons  for  attaching
      reduced weight to the medical reports of Dr Lawrence and  Dr  Persaud,
      he was  quite  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  medical
      condition could be taken as that as diagnosed by his GP  who  said  he
      was suffering with anxiety and depression  for  which  he  was  taking
      medication and receiving counselling.


   9.   The grounds contend that had the judge recognised that the appellant
      had serious mental health problems he would also have regarded him  as
      being at real risk of suicide, but on any reading  the  evidence  fell
      well short of establishing that he was at such a risk.


  10. For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge did not materially
      err in law and his decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  must
      stand.






                               Signed   [pic]
                                   Date 25 April 2016




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
