
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01986/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th January 2019                           |On 14th February 2019         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                mansoureh [e]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Behbani (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Alis, promulgated on 20th August 2018, following a hearing of that date
    in Manchester.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of
    the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iran, is a female, and was born  on  1st
    September 1970.  She appealed against the decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 29th January 2018, refusing her claim to asylum and  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she is a Christian convert
    from Islam, having been baptised on  27th  September  2015,  and  could
    point to a certificate of baptism, both for herself and  for  her  son.
    She was now a regular attender at the Church of Nazarene, which  is  an
    evangelical church in Oldham (see paragraph 21 of  the  determination).
    Her claim is that she had originally discovered  Christianity  in  2000
    when she had been living in Iran and she had come to  this  country  on
    the pretext of medical treatment for her son, but had claimed asylum at
    the same time.  That application had been refused in 2002.   She  still
    retains an interest in the church.  She then  returned  back  to  Iran.
    She was placed in prison for a short period in Iran.  Her husband  then
    arranged for a member of the clergy to visit her.  She and her  husband
    then separated and eventually divorced.  She left  Iran  again  because
    she received a telephone call from one of her friends who informed  her
    that the authorities  had  raided  the  house  church  that  they  were
    attending and arrested everyone.   After  she  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom she joined a church and both she and her son were  baptised  on
    27th September 2015.

 4. The particular difficulty for the Appellant in her claim, however,  was
    the fact that she had then stopped attending regularly at  the  church.
    Her claim was that she was unwell.  She states that she continued to go
    around once a month to the church.  It was only after  she  received  a
    refusal decision at the end of January 2018, when she was shocked  that
    she contacted Reverend Robinson, who had then come to  visit  her.   He
    discussed the situation with her and she explained the reason that  she
    had disengaged with the church was because she was unwell.  She was now
    attending  services  on  a  weekly  basis  and  her  son   occasionally
    accompanied her (paragraph 27).

The Judge's Finding

 5. The judge observed that Reverend Robinson had actually written  to  the
    Home Office on 23rd October 2017 advising them that the  Appellant  had
    disengaged from the church for the best part  of  2017.   However,  his
    evidence before the Tribunal was that despite sending  that  letter  he
    was satisfied that the Appellant remained  a  committed  Christian  and
    that her disengagement was due to her suffering  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder and depression.  The judge had regard to other  evidence  from
    witnesses (see paragraphs 35 to 37).

The Judge's Decision

 6. A particular feature of this appeal was that there had been a  previous
    decision by Judge Page in October 2002.  On  that  occasion  also,  the
    claim to Christian conversion had been rejected.  However,  Judge  Alis
    on this occasion observed that applying the principles  of  Devaseelan,
    he was able to depart from that earlier decision because of the passage
    of some sixteen years since that first  decision,  and  the  fact  that
    there was more evidence in  relation  to  this  particular  claim  (see
    paragraph 50).

 7. The judge went on to reject the Appellant's claim on this  occasion  as
    well.  The reason was that, as the judge explained  the  Appellant  had
    not been found to be a witness of credibility in 2002  by  Judge  Page.
    The Appellant had remained in the United Kingdom for a period of almost
    seven years.  There was no evidence  adduced  that  she  continued  her
    religious beliefs or attended church.  If she was a  genuine  Christian
    in 2002, as she claimed, then it was not clear to Judge Alis,  why  she
    did not continue attending the church  up  until  that  time  that  she
    voluntarily returned  to  Iran  (paragraph  71).   Second,  even  after
    returning back to the United Kingdom, and making  a  claim  for  asylum
    once here, the Appellant stopped engaging  or  attending  church  (from
    around September 2015), and "there is also notice  that  she  may  only
    have attended church up to six times in the whole of 2017 or  that  she
    only contacted Reverend Robinson after she had been refused  asylum  at
    the end of January 2018" (paragraph 17(5)).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that Judge Alis had erred  by  failing
    to make findings on core aspects of the Appellant's claim.  That he had
    erred by failing to ask the Appellant to give  evidence  on  issues  of
    concern to him.  That the judge had erred in failing to  make  findings
    in relation to two witnesses.   Moreover,  the  judge  failed  to  make
    findings in relation to the  medical  evidence.   The  judge  had  also
    properly not considered the risks to the Appellant on return to Iran.

10. On 27th  September  2018  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Tribunal.  It was noted that most of the grounds amount to little  more
    than "mere disagreement".  However, there was a question of whether  it
    was open to Judge Alis to find that the Appellant  was  not  a  genuine
    Christian convert, because the judge rejected the testimony of a church
    minister, who had good knowledge of the Appellant, and who was able  to
    give independent evidence regarding her conversion and reasons for  not
    attending church.  If this was so, then it may be that  the  strictures
    of the Court of Session in TF and MA v SSHD [2018] Scot  CSIH  58,  had
    not been abided by.

11. On 14th November 2018 a Rule 24 response was submitted by the Secretary
    of State.  This made the  following  points.   First,  the  judge  took
    account of the reasons for the Appellant's non-attendance at the church
    and rejected them.  Second, the judge made allowance for the fact  that
    the Appellant may be a vulnerable witness.  The Appellant was  asked  a
    limited number of questions by the Appellant's representatives  and  by
    the judge.  Since there was no Presenting Officer at the  hearing,  the
    Appellant was not cross-examined at all.  Third,  the  judge  did  deal
    with the question of what happened in Iran between 2007  and  2015  and
    rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  as  a  result  of   inconsistencies.
    Finally, the judge gave weight to the evidence of Reverend Robinson who
    attended the hearing, but the judge had to consider the  overall  claim
    in the round, and gave clear reasons for finding the Appellant was  not
    a genuine convert to Christianity.  These findings were all open to the
    judge.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 7th January 2018, Mr Behbani, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the grounds  of  application.   He
    submitted that, as far as the decision in TF and MA  [2018]  Scot  CSIH
    58, was concerned, he would draw attention to paragraphs 59 and  60  of
    that decision.  It was made clear that paragraph 59 that  the  evidence
    of church ministers in a conversion case is "a certain type  of  expert
    evidence" and this is "extra evidence based on personal observation  or
    sensation"  (paragraph  59).   The  decisionmaker's  approach  to  such
    evidence

         "should not start with any predisposition to  reject  the  evidence
         because it does not fit in with some a priori view formed as to the
         credibility of the Appellant.  The evidence should be considered on
         its merits and without any preconception" (paragraph 15).

13. Second, where a Tribunal might have formed that the Appellant has  been
    dishonest in  certain  aspects  of  the  asylum  claim",  then  "it  is
    legitimate for the Tribunal to  regard  with  suspicion  evidence  from
    church witnesses which is based entirely upon what  the  Appellant  has
    told them".  However, this is not the case "when the evidence from  the
    church witnesses is based in substantial part on their observations  on
    the Appellant when he has been engaging  with  the  activities  of  the
    church" (paragraph 60).  Mr Behbani submitted that this  was  the  case
    here.  The Reverend Robinson had been able to personally  say  what  in
    his view was the quality of this Appellant's commitment to  the  church
    and the manner of her engagement with the  activities  of  the  church.
    Third, the judge in the determination focused solely on the Appellant's
    post-arrival Christian church affiliations, and failed to consider  the
    Appellant's activities in Iran, together with  her  induced  repentance
    upon arrival in Tehran, before she was released from custody, when  she
    went back following the treatment of her son  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Fourth, the judge ought to have put questions to the  Appellant,  which
    were of concern to the judge, in order to give her  an  opportunity  to
    deal with those areas of concern, and this  the  judge  failed  to  do.
    Fifth, the judge did not deal  with  the  evidence  of  two  witnesses,
    namely, of Ms [AS], and the Appellant's son.   Both  presented  witness
    statements (see pages 258 to 263 of the Appellant's  bundle)  and  both
    were in attendance at the hearing, and yet the  judge  did  not  engage
    with their evidence.  Finally, the judge did not consider  the  medical
    evidence in its proper  context.   The  Appellant  was  suffering  from
    mental health problems.  The judge had accepted that the Appellant  was
    a vulnerable witness.  He failed to attach due weight  to  this  factor
    when considering the evidence.

14. For his part, Mr Tan submitted that the judge had not erred in  law  at
    all because he makes it clear (at paragraph 22) that he has  considered
    the evidence in its  totality,  taking  a  holistic  view.   The  judge
    considered the core aspects of the claim.  Nothing was left  untouched.
    What this was, was a disagreement  with  the  decision  of  the  judge.
    Sufficient reasons had then been given at the end of the  determination
    and they could not be faulted.

15. In reply, Mr Behbani  submitted  that  if  what  had  happened  to  the
    Appellant in Iran was credible, then this would add weight to the  risk
    to the Appellant upon return.  It would also go some way in shoring  up
    the credibility of the Appellant in terms of  her  activities  in  this
    country.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

17. First, the Appellant was refused asylum in  2002.   Her  representative
    accepted that between 2002 and 2007 she not only remained in the United
    Kingdom but there was no evidence that she had been  attending  church.
    Second, she was not baptised during this period even though she claimed
    to be a genuine Christian convert.  Third, there was no  evidence  that
    she attended any church services or  evangelised  (see  paragraph  52).
    Fourth, although it is true that she voluntarily left the UK  in  2007,
    and claimed to have been detained at the airport  and  then  questioned
    until released through the intervention of her husband,  she  had  then
    repented her conversion and was released.  Fifth, by her own admission,
    the Appellant did not attend church services between 2007 and 2013, and
    she gave the explanation that she was prevented from doing  so  by  her
    husband.  However, she also added that "she did not know where  to  go"
    (paragraph  53).   As  the  judge  explained,  there  was  a  world  of
    difference between not knowing where to go, and being controlled by her
    husband (paragraph 55).  Sixth, the judge  explained  why  he  did  not
    accept the Appellant to have engaged with the church in Iran  as  being
    credible (paragraph 57).  Seventh, and more importantly,  the  evidence
    of Reverend Robinson, was that the Appellant had  disengaged  from  the
    church for much of 2017, had only re-engaged with the church after  she
    had been refused asylum on 29th January 2018, but  the  judge  accepted
    the statement that "he personally accepted Reverend  Robinson's  belief
    that the Appellant had disengaged due to medical problems".   This  she
    was unaware of.  Eighth, the judge made an allowance for the fact  that
    the Appellant in these  circumstances  was  a  vulnerable  witness  and
    applied the Joint Presidential Guidance  (paragraph  64).   Ninth,  the
    Appellant was introduced to a doctor after her application  for  asylum
    had been refused and the judge was entitled to take the view that  "her
    assessment of the Appellant is based purely on what she has seen  after
    her claim had been refused", and that although the Appellant  may  have
    appeared to be "disorientated and forgetful" Judge Alis took  the  view
    that "the Appellant may well be concerned about her immigration status"
    (paragraph 67).  That conclusion  was  open  to  the  judge  to  reach.
    Finally, and ultimately, in concluding that  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed on the basis  of  being  a  genuine  convert,  the  judge  gave
    extensive reasons (see paragraphs 71 to  77)  before  emphasising  that
    this was a case where, "this is  an  Appellant  who  stopped  attending
    church for five years after her appeal was refused in 2002"  (paragraph
    78).  Accordingly, if the Appellant was not a genuine  Christian,  then
    the judge's view was that  "she  would  have  no  reason  to  hide  her
    behaviour if she was returned" (paragraph 81).

18. The appeal in this case amounts to a disagreement with the findings  of
    the  judge's  very  comprehensive  and  detailed  findings  which   are
    unassailable.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th January 2019




