
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01534/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2018                             |                              |
|                                             |On 19 April 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                    [J F]
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Burrett of counsel, instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS



BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who was born on [ ] 1980, is a national of Pakistan.  He
    entered the United Kingdom, as a visitor, on 15 July 2016  and  applied
    for asylum on 10 August 2016. His application was refused on 30 January
    2017 and he appealed against this decision.

2.   His appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox  in  a
    decision, promulgated on 18 September  2017,  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chohan granted him permission to appeal on 24 October 2017.   The
    Respondent did not lodge a Rule 24 response.

3.   The case came before me for an error of  law  hearing  on  16  February
    2018 and in a decision, promulgated on 20 February 2018, I  found  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox had made an error of law and allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal  and  set  aside  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox's
    decision.

4.   However, I preserved the finding by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fox  in
    paragraph 48 of his decision that "the available evidence  demonstrates
    that the appellant is a high-profile performing artist" who is at "risk
    of persecution by the Taliban" in Pakistan.

THE SUBSTANTIVE REHEARING

5.   The Appellant did not  appear  but  was  represented  by  counsel,  who
    assured me that he had the necessary instructions to proceed.  I  heard
    oral submissions by counsel for  the  Appellant  and  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer  and  have  referred  to  these  submissions,  where
    appropriate, in my findings below.

SUBSTANTIVE DECISION

6.   Article 1 of the 1951 Convention Relating to the  Status  of  Refugees,
    as amended by the 1967 Protocol Relating to  the  Status  of  Refugees,
    states that:

         "A. For the purposes of the present Convention, the term  "refugee"
         shall apply to any person who:


         (2) ... owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for  reasons
         of race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
         group  or  political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of   his
         nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is  unwilling  to
         avail himself of the protection of that country".


7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox found in paragraph  48  of  his  decision
    that "the appellant [had] therefore established a well-founded fear  of
    persecution  on  the  basis  of  imputed  political  opinion".  At  the
    substantive hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer did not dispute
    that this was the case and his written submissions noted that  the  re-
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal had been set down "for  further  oral
    submissions in relation to the  issue  of  whether  there  would  be  a
    sufficiency of protection for the appellant in Pakistan".

8.   When considering whether the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  a
    sufficiency of protection from the Pakistani Authorities, I have  first
    considered the nature of the persecution which he fears.  Regulation  5
    of  Refugee   or   Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006, which  implements  the  Qualification
    Directive 2004/83/EC, defines an act of persecution as one which is:

         (a)  sufficiently  serious  by  its  nature  or  repetition  as  to
         constitute a severe violation of a basic human right, in particular
         a right from which derogation cannot be made under  Article  15  of
         the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights  and  Fundamental
         Freedoms; or


         (b) an accumulation of various measures, including a violation of a
         human  right,  which  is  sufficiently  severe  as  to  affect   an
         individual in a similar manner as specified in (a)'


9.   In addition, Regulation 5(2) states that:

         "An act of persecution may, for example, take the form of:


         (a)  an act of physical or mental violence..."


10.  In paragraph 43 of his decision First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox  found
    that the Appellant would be recognised as a refugee but for there being
    a sufficiency of protection in Pakistan. He also found in paragraph  45
    that the Appellant's subjective evidence was consistent with the object
    evidence. As a consequence, he implicitly accepted that  the  Appellant
    had been persecuted by the Taliban in the past for the purposes of  the
    Refugee Convention. In particular, it was  the  Appellant's  subjective
    account that the Taliban abducted his children in 2012  and  threatened
    to harm them unless he agreed to give up his singing career. They  also
    subsequently demanded a ransom for their return. In the Spring of  2014
    the Appellant was shot in his right leg and he was shot at on a  second
    occasion in 2015 when he was in his car.  This incident was followed up
    with threats over the telephone from the Taliban.

11.  The objective evidence in pages  75  to  80  and  100  to  149  of  the
    Appellant's Bundle confirmed that both  the  Appellant  and  his  wife,
    [NI], were very high profile popular singers in Pakistan. Many  of  the
    articles also referred to other singers who  had  been  killed  by  the
    Taliban and it was significant in my view that many of  them  had  been
    shot. Items 3, 6, 7 and 8 of the Appellant's Supplementary Bundle  also
    refer to killings of popular singers.

12.  It was not disputed that the Taliban  were  non-state  actors  for  the
    purposes of Regulation 3(c)  of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
    International  Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations   2006,   which
    implements  the  Qualification  Directive  2004/83/EC,  and  that   the
    Pakistani security services were potentially actors of  protection  for
    the purposes of Regulation 4(1)(s).:

13.  Regulation 4(2) mirrors the principles set out by the  House  of  Lords
    in Horvath  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2001]
    1 AC 489, and states that:

         "Protection shall be regarded as generally provided when the actors
         [of protection] take reasonable steps to prevent the persecution or
         suffering of serious harm by operating an  effective  legal  system
         for the detection, prosecution and punishment of acts  constituting
         persecution or serious harm, and [a refugee]  has  access  to  such
         protection".


14.  However, the number of  singers  killed  by  the  Taliban  in  Pakistan
    raises a question as to the ability of  the  Pakistani  authorities  to
    tale reasonable steps to prevent them being killed.

15.  The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on KU (Pakistan) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 107 where Lord Justice
    Sullivan held, in paragraph 23 that:

         "It is common ground that the standard to be  applied  is  not  one
         which  eliminates  all  risk  or  which  offers  a   guarantee   of
         protection, it is rather a practical standard which  takes  account
         of a state's duties to its citizens".


16.  However, in the case of AW (Sufficiency of Protection) Pakistan  [2011]
    UKUT 00031 (IAC), Lord Bannatyne stressed that:

         "1.  At paragraph 55 of Auld L.J.'s summary in Bagdanavicius [2005]
         EWCA Civ.1605 it is made clear that the test set  out  in  Horvath
         [2001] 1 AC 489 was intended to deal with the ability of a state to
         afford protection to the generality of its citizens.


         2.   Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of  state  protection,  a
         claimant may still have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  if
         authorities know or ought to know of  circumstances  particular  to
         his/her case giving rise to the fear, but are unlikely  to  provide
         the additional protection the particular  circumstances  reasonably
         require (per Auld LJ at paragraph 55(vi)).


         3.   In considering whether an appellant's particular circumstances
         give rise to a need for additional protection,  particular  account
         must be taken of past persecution (if any)  so  as  to  ensure  the
         question posed is whether there are good reasons to  consider  that
         such persecution (and past lack of sufficient protection) will  not
         be repeated".


17.  The objective evidence, referred to above, indicates that  the  Taliban
    viewed popular singers as easy targets, who would  generate  widespread
    publicity for the Taliban's views and that attacks on them would  serve
    to make others afraid to sing at or attend  concerts.  It  also  showed
    that, despite the authorities being aware of  the  numbers  of  singers
    being killed, no additional protection was being provided to them.

18.  This equates with the Appellant's own subjective  evidence,  which  was
    found to be credible by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox. For example,  in
    his asylum statement, the Appellant said at paragraph18 that, after his
    car had been shot at, he went to a police station in Peshawar and asked
    for some security to get home. However, he was told that they were  not
    his servants and that they could not give him any protection.  He  also
    said that he then had to rely on some friends to escort  him  home  and
    arranged for his wife and children to go into hiding with friends.

19.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that, as  the  Appellant's
    wife had done  in  the  past,  the  Appellant  could  provide  his  own
    security. However, this would not amount to a sufficiency of protection
    for the purposes  of  the  Refugee  Convention  as  each  state  has  a
    responsibility to provide a certain level of  protection  for  its  own
    nationals.

20.  I have also  taken  into  account  the  fact  that  Rule  339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules and also Article 4.4 of Council Directive  2004/83/EC
    on minimum standards for the qualification and status of  third-country
    nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who  otherwise
    need international protection and the content of the protection granted
    state that:

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats of  such  persecution  and  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated".

21.  The Home Office Presenting Officer and the  objective  evidence  relied
    upon by the Respondent did not indicate that there were good reasons to
    conclude that the situation for singers likely to be  targeted  by  the
    Taliban had improved in  any  way  since  the  Appellant  was  last  in
    Pakistan. In contrast, the Appellant relied on a further  article  from
    Freemuse, entitled "The  State  of  Artistic  Freedom  2018"  [Pakistan
    excerpt], dated 15 March 2018, which stated that:

         "The state's overt and covert support for  religious  and  militant
         groups as part of its  military  strategy  in  Afghanistan  and  to
         thwart Indian influence in Kashmir, has  created  ample  space  for
         religious groups to impose their own brands of Islam on the people.
         Most of these militant and religious  leaders  consider  music  and
         dancing as sinful and discourage them often through violence".


22.  The Appellant's wife was mentioned as one of the singers who  had  come
    under pressure from the Taliban "to  either  quit  music  or  shift  to
    devotional music".

23.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that the  Appellant  could
    avoid the attention of the Taliban by resuming his previous  employment
    as a property developer.  However,  this  ignores  the  fact  that  the
    Taliban did not merely target  the  Appellant  because  of  his  chosen
    profession but targeted him as his chosen profession identified him  as
    someone who was opposed to their religious and political  view  of  the
    world. Therefore, any assertion that  he  could  avoid  persecution  by
    moderating   his   purported   religious/political   views   would   be
    commensurate with requiring him to hide his true beliefs  in  order  to
    avoid persecution. It has been confirmed in HJ (Iran)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 and RT (Zimbabwe &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 38 that a person
    is a refugee if a return to a country of origin would lead  to  such  a
    situation.

24.  In SA (political activist - internal relocation) Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT
    30 (IAC) Lord Bannatyne also found that:

         "The pitfalls of requiring a person to act contrary of  his  normal
         behaviour to avoid persecution have been further emphasised by  the
         Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31".


24.  For all of the above  reasons,  I  find  that  there  would  not  be  a
    sufficiency of protection for the Applicant in Pakistan  and  that  for
    the reasons previously made he has a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    there.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal against the decision by Respondent to refuse  to
    grant him asylum is allowed.


Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 17 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

