
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01059/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 June 2019                      |On 28 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     BK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Hashmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as BK.



Introduction

      1. I have maintained the anonymity direction made  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') because this decision refers  to  the  appellant's
         international protection claim.   In  addition,  the  appellant  is
         vulnerable for reasons relating to being a victim of trafficking.

Background


      2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania and is 22 years  old.   In  a
         decision dated 22 January 2019, the respondent acknowledged that in
         a decision dated 8 August 2018,  the  National  Referral  Mechanism
         ('NRM') concluded that the appellant was a victim  of  trafficking.
         The respondent applied the low standard  of  proof  applicable  and
         accepted the entirety of the appellant's  account  of  having  been
         kidnapped and forced into prostitution in Belgium.


      3. In summary, the appellant left Albania in February  2016  with  her
         husband and travelled to France,  Spain  and  Belgium  looking  for
         work.  Her husband borrowed 8000 Euros in order to do  so.   Whilst
         in Belgium, the husband's debtors asked for their  money  back  and
         when he could not pay, kidnapped the appellant.  The appellant  was
         then forced into prostitution in Belgium from around march /  April
         to July 2016, when it became clear that she was pregnant.  She  was
         kept in a room after this and put on a lorry to the UK in September
         2016.  When the lorry stopped, the appellant escaped.  She  claimed
         asylum on 25 January 2017.


      4. The appellant has two children: the first was born in October  2016
         and is the child of the appellant's husband; the second was born in
         July 2018 and her father is unknown (but cannot be the  appellant's
         husband's child because she last saw him in April 2016).

      5. In his decision letter, the respondent considered  the  prospective
         risk of the appellant being re-trafficked, if returned to  Albania,
         by  reference  to  the  relevant  considerations  in  TD   and   AD
         (Trafficked women) CG [2016]  UKUT  00092  (IAC).   The  respondent
         concluded  that  redress  could  be  obtained  from  the   Albanian
         authorities, who would be able to  provide  sufficient  protection,
         and in any event the appellant could internally relocate to Tirana.
          It is convenient to set out the headnote in TD  in  full  at  this
         point.

             "Much of the guidance given in  AM  &  BM  (Trafficked  women)
             Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80  (IAC)  is  maintained.  Where  that
             guidance has been amended or supplemented by this decision  it
             has been highlighted in bold:


                  "a)  It is not possible to set out a  typical  profile  of
                  trafficked women from Albania: trafficked women come  from
                  all  areas  of  the  country  and   from   varied   social
                  backgrounds.


                  b)   Much of Albanian society is governed by a strict code
                  of honour which not only means that trafficked women would
                  have very considerable difficulty  in  reintegrating  into
                  their home areas on return  but  also  will  affect  their
                  ability to relocate internally. Those  who  have  children
                  outside marriage are particularly vulnerable.  In  extreme
                  cases the close relatives  of  the  trafficked  woman  may
                  refuse to have the trafficked woman's  child  return  with
                  her and could force her to abandon the child.


                  c)   Some women are lured  to  leave  Albania  with  false
                  promises of relationships or work.  Others  may  seek  out
                  traffickers in order to facilitate  their  departure  from
                  Albania and their establishment  in  prostitution  abroad.
                  Although such women cannot be said to  have  left  Albania
                  against their will,  where  they  have  fallen  under  the
                  control of traffickers for  the  purpose  of  exploitation
                  there is likely to be  considerable  violence  within  the
                  relationships and  a  lack  of  freedom:  such  women  are
                  victims of trafficking.


                  d)   In the past few years  the  Albanian  government  has
                  made  significant  efforts  to  improve  its  response  to
                  trafficking.  This  includes   widening   the   scope   of
                  legislation, publishing the Standard Operating Procedures,
                  implementing an  effective  National  Referral  Mechanism,
                  appointing  a  new  Anti-trafficking   Co-ordinator,   and
                  providing training to law enforcement officials. There  is
                  in general a Horvath-standard sufficiency  of  protection,
                  but  it  will  not  be  effective  in  every  case.   When
                  considering whether or  not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
                  protection for a  victim  of  trafficking  her  particular
                  circumstances must be considered.


                  e)   There is now in place a reception  and  reintegration
                  programme for victims of trafficking. Returning victims of
                  trafficking are able to stay in a shelter on arrival,  and
                  in 'heavy cases' may be able to stay there  for  up  to  2
                  years. During this initial period after return victims  of
                  trafficking  are  supported  and  protected.  Unless   the
                  individual has particular vulnerabilities such as physical
                  or mental health issues, this option cannot  generally  be
                  said to be unreasonable; whether it is must be  determined
                  on a case by case basis.


                  f)    Once  asked  to  leave  the  shelter  a  victim   of
                  trafficking can live on her own. In doing so she will face
                  significant challenges  including,  but  not  limited  to,
                  stigma, isolation, financial hardship and  uncertainty,  a
                  sense of physical insecurity and the  subjective  fear  of
                  being  found  either   by   their   families   or   former
                  traffickers.  Some  women  will  have  the   capacity   to
                  negotiate these challenges without undue  hardship.  There
                  will   however   be   victims    of    trafficking    with
                  characteristics, such as mental illness  or  psychological
                  scarring, for whom living  alone  in  these  circumstances
                  would not be reasonable. Whether  a  particular  appellant
                  falls  into  that  category  will  call  for   a   careful
                  assessment of all the circumstances.


                  g)   Re-trafficking is a reality. Whether that risk exists
                  for an individual  claimant  will  turn  in  part  on  the
                  factors that led to the initial trafficking,  and  on  her
                  personal circumstances, including her background, age, and
                  her  willingness  and  ability  to  seek  help  from   the
                  authorities. For a proportion of victims  of  trafficking,
                  their  situations  may  mean  that  they  are   especially
                  vulnerable to re-trafficking, or being forced  into  other
                  exploitative situations.


                  h)   Trafficked women from Albania may well be members  of
                  a particular social group on that account  alone.  Whether
                  they are  at  risk  of  persecution  on  account  of  such
                  membership  and  whether  they  will  be  able  to  access
                  sufficiency of protection from the authorities will depend
                  upon their  individual  circumstances  including  but  not
                  limited to the following:


                      1)    The social status and economic standing of  her
                           family


                      2)     The  level  of  education  of  the  victim  of
                           trafficking or her family


                      3)    The victim of trafficking's  state  of  health,
                           particularly her mental health


                      4)    The presence of an illegitimate child


                      5)    The area of origin


                      6)    Age


                      7)    What support network will be available."

      6. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the FTT
         and in a  decision  sent  on  25  March  2019,  FTT  Judge  Dearden
         dismissed her appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

Grounds of appeal

      7. The grounds of appeal are not enumerated but focus their  attention
         on two issues:


          1) The FTT applied the wrong standard of proof;


          2) The FTT failed to apply the country  guidance  in  TD  to  the
             relevant (accepted) factual matrix.

      8. In a decision dated 23 April  2019  FTT  Judge  JK  Swaney  granted
         permission, observing  in  particular  that  the  judge  failed  to
         address the relevant points contained in TD.

Hearing

      9. After hearing from Ms Hashmi briefly on the FTT's failure to  apply
         the TD country guidance, Mrs Pettersen conceded that  the  decision
         contains an error of law.

     10. Both representatives accepted that the decision needs to be  remade
         but on a single narrow issue of prospective risk on return  in  the
         light of the country guidance.  Both representatives  were  content
         to proceed by way of submissions only.  I had regard to para 7.2 of
         the relevant Senior President's Practice Statement and the  limited
         nature and extent of the factual findings required in remaking  the
         decision, and decided, with the agreement of both  representatives,
         that this is an appropriate case to re-make  the  decision  myself,
         after hearing submissions from both parties.

     11. Mrs Pettersen acknowledged that TG should be followed  and  in  all
         the particular circumstances  of  the  case,  the  appellant  could
         internally relocate to Tirana on the basis that she would be safely
         accommodated in a shelter.  Mrs Pettersen submitted  that  although
         this appellant has some mental health  difficulties  they  are  not
         serious and she would be able to cope together with  her  children,
         in a shelter.  She submitted that the risk of re-trafficking is low
         because her previous traffickers would have no incentive  to  track
         her down.

     12. Ms Hashmi submitted that a shelter would not be adequate  for  this
         appellant because  she  has  mental  health  difficulties  and  two
         children, one of whom is illegitimate.

     13. At the end of the submissions, I reserved my decision, which I  now
         provide in writing.

Error of law discussion

     14. Mrs Pettersen was  correct  to  concede  that  the  FTT's  decision
         contains an error of law and needs to be remade.  The FTT purported
         to apply TD to the accepted facts of the case at [27-28] and  [36].
         The FTT accepted that the appellant is a vulnerable individual  and
         has an illegitimate child, but found that she could "either  access
         the support of her family, or alternatively live in a hostel for  a
         relatively  short  period  before  living  independently  with  her
         children in Tirana".


     15. The FTT's first conclusion that  the  appellant  could  access  the
         support of her family entirely fails to provide any  reasoning  for
         rejecting the appellant's  submission  that  her  family  will  not
         provide her with any support because she has an illegitimate child.
          That submission is consistent with the country guidance that those
         who have children outside marriage are particularly vulnerable  and
         families may force the mother to abandon her child.

     16.  The  FTT's  second  conclusion  that  the  appellant  can   safely
         internally relocate away from her family, in Tirana,  is  based  on
         the finding that there will be a sufficiency of  protection.   This
         in turn is predicated on an assessment that Tirana will be safe for
         the appellant and her two children "to a practical standard" -  see
         [34].  The standard of proof to be applied to prospective  risk  is
         the same as the standard of proof to be applied to past events:  it
         is  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  or  'reasonable   degree   of
         likelihood' standard.  As AW (sufficiency of  protection)  Pakistan
         [2011] UKUT 31(IAC) makes clear, Auld LJ's summary in Bagdanavicius
         v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1605 at [55] clarifies that the test set out
         in Horvath v SSHD [2001] 1 AC 489 was intended to deal  with  the
         ability of a state to afford protection to the  generality  of  its
         citizens.  It follows that notwithstanding systemic sufficiency  of
         state protection, a claimant may still have a well-founded fear  of
         persecution  if  the  authorities  are  unlikely  to  provide   the
         additional  protection  the  particular  circumstances   reasonably
         require.  The FTT has limited its assessment to the availability of
         state protection in general and  has  not  provided  reasoning  for
         rejecting  the  submission   that   this   appellant's   particular
         circumstances  demand  additional  protection  that  the   Albanian
         authorities may not be able to provide, particularly given her past
         experiences of persecution.

     17. The FTT also concluded that the appellant would be assisted by  the
         police and various NGOs and that having an illegitimate child "is a
         difficulty which could be overcome".  This conclusion assumes  that
         in every case involving an illegitimate child, there is  sufficient
         state support that can be  overcome.   This  does  not  address  or
         engage with the following country  guidance:  the  strict  code  of
         honour that can lead to serious consequences for those believed  to
         have transgressed it applies to those who have children outside  of
         marriage and extends beyond their home area.


Re-making the decision


     18. In re-making the  decision  I  have  considered  all  the  evidence
         available to me including the appellant's statements and bundle  of
         country background evidence, as  well  as  the  CPIN  on  'Albania:
         people trafficking'  dated  March  2019  ('the  2019  CPIN').   The
         appellant's account has been accepted and I have therefore focussed
         upon the appellant's prospective risk in Albania.  In  doing  so  I
         have applied the lower standard of proof.

Risk in home area


     19. Mrs Pettersen implicitly accepted that there may be a risk  in  the
         appellant's home area because she focused her submissions  entirely
         on internal relocation.  For completeness I address the risk in the
         home  area.   Having  considered  and  evaluated  the   documentary
         evidence relied on by both parties and applying the Horvath (supra)
         test in respect of the availability of a sufficiency of protection,
         in the context of the country guidance, I find that, although there
         is  in  general  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for   victims   of
         trafficking, a sufficiency of protection is not available  to  this
         particular appellant in her home area.



     20. It is accepted that the appellant  has  been  subject  to  enforced
         prostitution having been  kidnapped  by  Albanians,  when  she  was
         living with her husband in Belgium.  It is reasonably  likely  that
         the circumstances in which she left her husband will  be  known  to
         her family and her husband's family, and they will assume that  she
         was subjected to prostitution.  It will also become obvious  within
         a short  space  of  time  that  the  appellant's  second  child  is
         illegitimate.  This is because it is  reasonably  likely  that  the
         husband will have told the various family members that he  has  not
         seen the appellant since she was kidnapped in  April  2016.   These
         circumstances are reasonably likely  to  lead  to  her  family  and
         community to reject her and subject her to repeated taunts and / or
         violence for reasons relating to a breach of perceived 'honour'.

     21. I am persuaded, on the lower standard of proof,  having  cumulative
         regard to these factors, that the authorities  in  the  appellant's
         home area would be unable  or  unwilling  to  provide  her  with  a
         sufficiency of protection against 'honour' based violence from  her
         family.


Internal relocation

     22. I must now consider whether it  would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
         harsh to expect this appellant to avail  herself  of  the  internal
         relocation alternative  in  Tirana.  Such  an  assessment  must  be
         holistic  and  take  into  account   the   appellant's   particular
         characteristics.  I acknowledge at the outset that it is clear from
         TD that as a victim of trafficking and  a  single  mother  with  an
         illegitimate child and no family  to  turn  to,  the  appellant  is
         vulnerable and will have difficulties in relocating to Tirana.

     23. I must first of all consider whether there will be a sufficiency of
         protection for this particular appellant in Tirana.  The  appellant
         has no family members in Tirana and they have no firm  contacts  or
         links to Tirana.  It is not reasonably likely that her  own  family
         members or husband will be intent on tracking her down  in  Tirana.
         Her own statement does not articulate any such  fear  -  quite  the
         opposite, it asserts that the family want nothing to do  with  her.
         The  situation  is  therefore  quite  different  to  the  appellant
         returning to her home area wherein the family's perceived shame  in
         having the appellant and her illegitimate child in  the  area,  may
         lead to  'honour'  based  violence.   I  do  not  accept  that  the
         appellant is reasonably likely to be at risk from family members in
         Tirana.  In any event, the appellant will be  able  to  access  the
         protection of a shelter at least initially for the  reasons  I  set
         out below.  This will provide her with the confidence and skills to
         live an independent life away from her family in Tirana.

     24. I acknowledge that re-trafficking is  a  reality  for  some  women,
         particularly those who are vulnerable.  However in this  case,  the
         appellant was trafficked in Belgium and not  Albania.   In  Belgium
         she was under the control of her husband and living  in  precarious
         circumstances.  Her circumstances in Tirana will be very different:
         she has two children, she has benefitted from  over  two  years  of
         support in the UK and will have the support of the shelter and  the
         associated state agencies and NGOs in Tirana, as set out in TD  and
         the 2019 CPIN.  Although the appellant has been subjected  to  past
         persecution,  there  are  good  reasons  to  consider   that   such
         persecution will not be repeated.  Ms Hashmi was unable to take  me
         to any evidence in support  of  the  claim  that  the  persons  who
         trafficked the appellant in the past in Belgium, would seek her out
         or find her in Tirana.  In addition, there is no real risk of being
         re-trafficked by different traffickers, if the appellant is able to
         access to support and protection provided within a shelter and from
         state agencies in Tirana.

     25. The country guidance in TD makes it clear that returning victims of
         trafficking are able to stay in a shelter on arrival and for up  to
         two years, unless the  individual  has  particular  vulnerabilities
         such as physical or mental health issues.  It is with this guidance
         in mind, that I invited Ms Hashmi to take me  to  the  evidence  to
         support  her  submission  that  the  appellant  cannot  safely   or
         reasonably relocate in Tirana.

     26. Ms Hashmi first took me to the evidence regarding this  appellant's
         mental health  as  contained  in  the  'Ashiana'  report  dated  21
         February 2019, as updated in a letter  dated  21  June  2019.   The
         appellant has been supported by Ashiana since March 2017,  and  for
         over two years.  I  note  that  although  the  appellant  was  very
         mistrustful she has developed relationships of trust  with  support
         workers.  She has felt anxious and nervous  but  her  children  are
         protective coping factors.  Although the Ashiana  report  concluded
         that it would not be emotionally or  psychological  beneficial  for
         the appellant to return to Albania, no medical  evidence  has  been
         submitted to support that proposition.   Ashiana's  updated  letter
         describes providing the appellant and her children  with  practical
         weekly support but also describes the  appellant  as  "sufficiently
         independent". In her own statement, the appellant described  having
         had depression (which  required  medication)  and  counselling  but
         described herself as being in a "better  place".   I  am  satisfied
         that the appellant has no significant ongoing  physical  or  mental
         health issues.



     27. This appellant has had over two  years  in  the  UK  to  build  her
         resilience in the aftermath of a  very  distressing  and  traumatic
         period of enforced prostitution.  She has  demonstrated  that  with
         support she  can  face  significant  challenges  including  stigma,
         isolation, financial hardship, linguistic barriers and uncertainty.
          I appreciate that she has not had to worry unduly about being  re-
         trafficked in the UK and this remains a real  concern  for  her  if
         returned to  Albania.   However,  once  returned  to  Albania,  the
         appellant can access a shelter as a  recognised  former  victim  of
         trafficking.  Although she has had mental health issues in the past
         and bears the psychological scars of her  past  experiences,  these
         are not sufficiently serious to  render  the  option  of  access  a
         shelter as unreasonable.  In reaching this finding,  I  have  taken
         into account and applied the guidance  in  TD  at  a)  to  h).   In
         particular:

          a) There is no typical profile of a trafficked  woman,  but  this
             appellant has been recognised formally by the UK government as
             a victim of trafficking.   This has involved an  extended  and
             disturbing period of enforced prostitution in Belgium.


          b) It is reasonably likely that because of the close-knit  nature
             of the appellant's home area in Tropoje  and  given  the  fact
             that her parents are not well-educated and likely to adhere to
             a strict code of honour, that she will be abandoned or face  a
             real risk of violence there.   Her family are likely  to  work
             out that her second child is  illegitimate  and  she  will  no
             longer have their support.   However,  it  is  not  reasonably
             likely that they will seek the appellant out, or find her,  in
             Tirana.  I note that the strict code of 'honour' that can lead
             to  serious  consequences   for   those   believed   to   have
             transgressed it applies to those who have children outside  of
             marriage and extends beyond their home  area.   Although  this
             appellant has an illegitimate child, her  own  family  members
             will not seek her out and it is difficult to see how this fact
             will necessarily become known to anyone else in Tirana.   When
             I asked Ms Hashmi to address me on this, she was unable  offer
             any  cogent  explanation  as  to  how   the   second   child's
             illegitimacy will become known.


          c) This appellant became a victim of trafficking in  particularly
             traumatic  circumstances  as  she  was  kidnapped  by  unknown
             individuals whilst in a foreign country she did not know.  She
             has been able to develop her confidence whilst in the  UK  and
             is devoted to her two children.  It is not  reasonably  likely
             that she will be lured to leave Tirana with false promises  of
             relationships or work.


          d) When considering the sufficiency of  protection  available  to
             the appellant in in Tirana I must consider all the appellant's
             particular circumstances.


          e) The appellant does not have any  obvious  ongoing  significant
             physical or mental health issues and her and her children will
             be able to stay in a shelter with her for an  initial  period,
             where according to  TD  (see  [101]  -  [104]),  she  will  be
             provided with basic security, board, lodging and health  care.
              I invited Ms Hashmi to take me to the evidence to support her
             submission that the available shelters would be inadequate  or
             unreasonable  for  this  appellant  and  her  children.    She
             referred me to a  CPIN  on  domestic  violence,  but  did  not
             provide me with a copy of this.  When  I  asked  her  why  the
             information available in the 2019 CPIN was not  more  relevant
             to this case, she submitted that they should be read together.
              I am satisfied  that  as  a  formally  recognised  victim  of
             trafficking, this appellant  will  be  entitled  to  access  a
             shelter specifically for victims  of  trafficking.   The  2019
             CPIN sets out in comprehensive  detail  the  availability  and
             services provided in "shelters for victims of THB [trafficking
             in human beings]" at section 9 and reintegration  packages  at
             section 10.  Ms Hashmi did not take me to any evidence calling
             into question the material summarised in the 2019 CPIN.


          f) This is an appellant who has faced but substantially  overcome
             significant challenges in the UK without any  family  support,
             albeit she has had the consistent support of Ashiana.  She has
             built sufficient resilience to  negotiate  further  challenges
             initially in the protective circumstances  of  a  shelter  and
             then when living independently with her  children  in  Tirana.
             Ms Hashmi  reminded  me  that  the  appellant  would  only  be
             entitled to the support of a shelter  for  a  maximum  of  two
             years, when she submitted, the appellant would be entirely  on
             her own.  Ms Hashmi failed to engage in any meaningful  manner
             with the evidence set out in section  10  of  the  2019  CPIN:
             although  challenges  persist,  many  victims  of  trafficking
             benefit  from   comprehensive   reintegration   services   and
             assistance including inter alia, housing, employment  /  other
             support, and education.


          g) Re-trafficking is a remote possibility for the  appellant  but
             not reasonably likely.  She now has  the  anchor  of  her  two
             children and will have the protection offered by the  shelter.
             This appellant has already received an extended  period  (over
             two years) of support  in  the  UK.   She  has  built  up  her
             resilience, and is relatively independent albeit  with  weekly
             practical support.  She  has  no  significant  ongoing  mental
             health issues.  Having considered the evidence (in  particular
             at [107] to [112]) and guidance in TD, and the information  in
             the 2019 CPIN, I am satisfied that the appellant will be  able
             to reside initially within a shelter and then independently in
             Tirana, without reaching a point that renders  her  reasonably
             likely to be re-trafficked.


          h) The appellant's age (22), social status, level  of  education,
             economic standing, lack of family support, illegitimate  child
             and home area are risk  factors  prima  facie  increasing  the
             likelihood that she will  be  the  victim  of  re-trafficking.
             However these need to be balanced against other  factors:  she
             has distanced herself from her family, husband and home  area;
             she has two children who have given her  hope  and  confidence
             for the future; it is not reasonably likely  that  the  second
             child's illegitimacy will be known in  Tirana;  she  has  been
             formally recognised by the UK as a victim of  trafficking  and
             the Albanian authorities will follow suit in order to give her
             access to protection and support in a shelter and beyond;  she
             has benefitted from an extended period of support  in  the  UK
             and has evidenced  an  increase  in  resilience;  she  has  no
             ongoing significant physical or mental health issues.

     28. Having considered all the relevant evidence holistically and having
         applied the country guidance in TD, I am satisfied for the  reasons
         set  out  above  that  the  appellant  can  safely  and  reasonably
         internally relocate to  Tirana.   Although  she  is  vulnerable  by
         reason of being a victim of  trafficking,  having  an  illegitimate
         child, and with no family support, she  would  be  able  to  access
         support in a shelter and beyond.  When all  the  circumstances  are
         considered together, the appellant's relocation will not be  unduly
         harsh.


     29. It follows that although I have found that the  appellant  will  be
         exposed to a real risk of persecution in her home area, she can can
         be reasonably expected to avail herself of the internal  relocation
         alternative, and as such I dismiss her protection claim.  Ms Hashmi
         did not articulate any  other  basis  upon  which  the  appellant's
         appeal could succeed.

Decision

     30. The FTT's decision contains an error of law such that the  decision
         is set aside.




     31. I remake the decision  by  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  on
         asylum grounds.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
26 June 2019

