
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/01857/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 January 2019                      |On 8 March 2019                     |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     NG
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Fountain, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born in 1991 claims to be a citizen of  Eritrea.  She
    arrived in the United Kingdom  on  30  January  2017  and  applied  for
    asylum. By a decision dated 26 January 2018, the respondent refused  to
    grant the appellant asylum. She appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which, in a decision  promulgated  on  27  March  2018,  dismissed  the
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The judge found that the appellant was not a  citizen  of  Eritrea  but
    rather citizen of Ethiopia. There are  four  grounds  of  appeal  which
    challenge than outcome. First, the appellant  asserts  that  the  judge
    failed to have proper regard to  the  appellant's  nationality  in  the
    context of the  Eritrea  Proclamation  on  Nationality.  Secondly,  the
    appellant asserts that the judge failed to apply the  correct  standard
    of proof to the determination of her nationality; that standard  should
    be the balance of probabilities not the lower  standard  of  reasonable
    likelihood (see Hamza  [2002]  UKIAT  05185).  Thirdly,  the  appellant
    claimed to have a partner and child living in Sudan.  She  claims  that
    her partner is Eritrean. The appellant asserts that the judge failed to
    identify whether  there  existed  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant returning to either Eritrea or Ethiopia.

 3. I find grounds of appeal have no merit. First, the  grounds  failed  to
    explain why considering the question of nationality in the  context  of
    the  Proclamation  was  either  necessary  or  would  have  produced  a
    different outcome. The judge carried out a  detailed  analysis  of  the
    evidence. By reaching the conclusion that the appellant  is  Ethiopian,
    the judge had regard  to  relevant  evidence  and  excluded  irrelevant
    matters.  In   particular,   the   judge   identified   a   number   of
    inconsistencies in the  appellant's  evidence.  Those  inconsistencies,
    combined with the fact that the appellant  claimed  to  have  spent  17
    years  living  in  Ethiopia  where  she  had  accessed  employment  and
    education and where she had spoken the national language fluently,  led
    the judge conclude that the appellant is Ethiopian. I find that  it  is
    not arguable that that outcome was unavailable  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence. As regards the standard of proof, it may  well  be  the  case
    that the judge has applied the lower standard rather than that  of  the
    balance of probabilities. The burden of proof was on the appellant;  it
    was for her to prove that she was Eritrean,  as  she  claimed.  If  the
    judge applied the standard of proof of  reasonable  likelihood  to  the
    appellant's  evidence  rather  than  a  standard  of  the  balance   of
    probabilities  then  that  can  only  have  been  to  the   appellant's
    advantage. Moreover, an examination of the reasons given by  the  judge
    for reaching the finding regarding nationality indicates that the  same
    outcome would have been achieved irrespective of the standard of proof.
    As regards the appellant's claimed partner and child, is not  clear  at
    all why the fact that they may be living in  Sudan  should  provide  an
    obstacle to the appellant returning  to  her  country  of  nationality,
    namely Ethiopia.

 4. Mr Hussain, who appeared for the appellant, accepted that the  question
    of nationality is critical in determining whether the  appellant  would
    be at risk on account of her claimed Pentecostal Christianity. Granting
    permission, Judge Haria had observed that the judge had failed to  make
    a clear finding as to whether or not the  appellant  is  a  Pentecostal
    Christian. Had the judge found that the appellant is in Eritrean,  such
    an error may well have been fatal to  the  decision.  However,  as  the
    judge observed, as the appellant has been found to be an Ethiopian, she
    would not be at risk on  return  to  that  country  whether  she  is  a
    Pentecostal Christian or not.

 5. I am satisfied that the judge's analysis is legally  sound.  I  do  not
    find that the judge has erred in law for the reasons  advanced  in  the
    grounds of appeal, the grant permission or at all.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 2 February 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
