
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/01266/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                       |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 21 November 2017                    |          On 4 December 2017         |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    KDML
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Caseley instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Grenada who was born on 7 July 1987.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 January 2015 and was granted  leave
    to enter as a visitor for a period of six months.  He  overstayed.   On
    18 January 2016, he was arrested by the police  in  relation  to  drugs
    offences.

 3. On 19 January 2016,  the  appellant  was  served  with  notice  of  his
    liability to be removed as an overstayer.

 4. On 22 February 2016, the appellant  made  a  human  rights  application
    relying on Art 8 of the ECHR.  This was, however, refused  on  21  July
    2016 and certified as clearly unfounded.

 5. On 11 August 2016, the appellant claimed  asylum.   The  basis  of  his
    claim was, and is, that he is bisexual and would be at risk  on  return
    to Grenada as a result.

 6. On 20 January 2017, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 16 May 2017, Judge Page dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.  The judge did not accept that the
    appellant was bisexual and consequently would be at risk on  return  to
    Grenada.  However, the judge allowed the appeal under Art  8  in  order
    that the appellant be granted a period of discretionary leave in  order
    for him to complete Family Court proceedings in relation to a child  in
    the UK of whom he was the father.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the  judge's
    decision to dismiss his appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 3 of the
    ECHR.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Saffer) on 12 September 2017.

10. On 28 September 2017, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

11. The Secretary of  State  has  not  sought  to  challenge  Judge  Page's
    decision to allow the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

The Submissions

12. Ms Caseley, who  represented  the  appellant,  relied  upon  the  three
    grounds of appeal upon which permission was granted.

13. First, she submitted that the judge had failed to explain  why  he  had
    disbelieved  the  appellant's  account  concerning  his  sexuality  and
    conduct in Grenada when, at para 40, the judge had  said  that  he  had
    reached the same conclusions as the respondent.

14. Secondly, Ms Caseley submitted that the judge had reached contradictory
    findings in relation to whether the appellant suffered from any  mental
    impairment and its impact  upon  the  cogency  of  his  evidence.   She
    submitted that the judge had accepted the expert's view (Dr  Battersby)
    that the appellant had a "significant cognitive impairment"  which  was
    "highly likely to reduce the cogency of his evidence" and  that  "dates
    are highly likely to be inaccurate" and it is unlikely that he would be
    able  to  "withstand  robust  cross-examination".   Yet,   Ms   Caseley
    submitted, the judge stated at para 40 that there was "no  evidence  of
    any impairment".

15. Thirdly, Ms Caseley submitted that the judge  had  been  wrong  to  ask
    questions, or allow them  to  be  asked,  of  the  appellant's  current
    partner about their sexual relationship, in particular how  many  times
    she and the appellant had had sex together.  Ms Caseley submitted  that
    this ran counter to the approach set out in the CJEU decision in A, B &
    C v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en  Justitie  (Cases  C-148/13,  C-
    149/13 and C-150/13) [2015] Imm AR 404 at [64] that it was a breach  of
    an individual's "right to respect for private and family life"  to  ask
    questions "concerning details of the sexual practices" of a claimant.

16. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards first submitted that the judge
    had not  simply  adopted  the  reasons  given  by  the  respondent  for
    disbelieving the appellant.  He submitted that the judge had considered
    the evidence, including the appellant's answers  in  cross-examination,
    and had made an adverse credibility finding.

17. Secondly,  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the  judge  had  accepted  Dr
    Battersby's evidence that  the  appellant  had  "significant  cognitive
    impairment" and had, at para 22, agreed that the  appellant  should  be
    treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness.   However,  he  had  found  -  not
    inconsistently with that - at both paras 22 and 40 that there  was  "no
    evidence of any impairment" when the appellant  gave  evidence  at  the
    hearing.  This was  not,  Mr  Richards  submitted,  a  case  where  the
    appellant's evidence was criticised due to him  making  mistakes  about
    dates and it was not a case where he had been subjected to particularly
    robust  cross-examination.   The  judge  had  done  no  more  than  was
    required,  namely  keeping  in  mind  Dr  Battersby's  evidence,   when
    assessing the appellant.

18. Finally, Mr Richard submitted that in relation to the  questions  asked
    of the appellant's witness, this did not fall within the prohibition on
    asking "details" of the appellant's sexual practices.  The witness  had
    been asked no more than how often she had had sex with  the  appellant.
    That was a necessary question given  that  an  important  part  of  the
    appellant's case, claiming to be bisexual, was that  he  only  had  sex
    with women in order to have children.  The questions went  no  further,
    Mr Richards submitted, than were necessary.

Discussion

19. I will deal with each of the grounds raised in the order grounds  2,  3
    and 1 respectively.

20. As regards ground 2, the judge said this  about  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's account which had been identified by the respondent at para
    40 of his determination:

         "40.  I  find  myself  reaching  the  same  conclusions  that   the
             respondent reached about the appellant's asylum  story  as  to
             what  happened  in  Grenada.   The  discrepancies   that   the
             appellant was taken to by Ms Bowden were all explained by  the
             appellant as having been caused by confusion.  I  accept  that
             he may have learning difficulties but it is only  where  there
             are discrepancies that  the  appellant  claims  to  have  been
             confused  by  questions  in  interview.   He  blamed  learning
             difficulties for any discrepancy damaging his case.   I  found
             him to be articulate and  alert  throughout  the  hearing  and
             there was no evidence of any impairment, though  I  accept  Dr
             Battersby's assessment in her report".

21. It is clear to me that the judge did not simply adopt the  respondent's
    reasoning without  taking  into  account  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant at the hearing why those discrepancies should not affect  his
    evidence.  Ms Caseley accepted that this ground was, in  effect,  based
    upon an argument that the judge had simply illegitimately  adopted  the
    respondent's reasons without considering that evidence.   That,  it  is
    plain from reading para 40 and the entirety of the  determination,  the
    judge did not do.  He set out at length the appellant's evidence  given
    largely in cross-examination about  his  relationships  in  Grenada  at
    paras 25-28 as follows:

         "25. He said his  first  same-sex  relationship  was  with  [M]  in
             Grenada.  They became friends and then had a relationship.  He
             described his relationship as on and off and  said  they  were
             together for almost two years.  In answer  to  questions  from
             Miss Bowden  the  appellant  said  that  he  realised  he  was
             bisexual when he was 19 years old.  It was 19  when  he  began
             having sexual interaction with men.  She asked him why he  had
             said in his asylum interview that he had been 16 years old, he
             replied that he had not understood the question  he  had  been
             asked in interview.  Miss Bowden also asked  him  why  he  had
             said in his evidence that he had been in a  relationship  with
             [M] for two years whereas in his asylum interview he had  said
             he had been in a relationship with [M]  for  two  months.   He
             said he did not remember saying in his asylum  interview  that
             it had been two months.  He could also not  name  any  men  in
             Grenada that he had been in a  relationship  with  because  he
             could not  remember  names.   Miss  Bowden  suggested  to  the
             appellant the reason he could not remember was because he  had
             invented his asylum story.  He replied 'I wouldn't make  stuff
             up like that'.

         26.  In his evidence, he said that he had  sexual  encounters  with
             men in Grenada occasionally.  The appellant had said in answer
             to question 60 of his asylum interview that between  2005  and
             2013 when he left Grenada he had often had bisexual encounters
             at St George's Beach.  He was pushed to explain what he  meant
             by often, every day,  every  week,  or  every  month,  and  he
             answered 'every day'.  As a result of this answer Miss  Bowden
             asked the appellant why he would risk having sex on a beach in
             a country where he would be at risk.  He said  that  he  could
             have friends that he met on the beach but had not had  sex  on
             the beach.  Miss Bowden reminded him of his answer to question
             60 where he had replied that he had sex on St  George's  Beach
             every day.  He replied  that  he  had  given  that  answer  to
             question 60 because he was confused and had not understood.

         27.  Miss Bowden asked the appellant about his answer  to  question
             72 of the asylum interview where he had said that  he  knew  a
             lot of people in Grenada who were bisexual and gay and he  had
             known what their sexuality was by talking to them and by  them
             talking to him and 'we exchanged stuff, that's how  I  get  to
             know'.  She asked him why he would risk telling people that he
             was bisexual in a country where he would be taking a  risk  of
             persecution.  He replied: 'I was confused.  I felt  I  had  to
             say certain things'.

         28.  Miss Bowden asked the appellant about his  relationships  with
             women in Grenada, and how he had  kept  his  bisexuality  from
             them.  He replied that he had had no relationships with  women
             in Grenada.  He went on to explain in answer to questions from
             Miss Bowden that when he came to the United Kingdom he was not
             really looking for a woman.  He had  met  [A]  online  but  he
             wanted to get away  from  Grenada  because  of  his  'bisexual
             situation there'.  Miss Bowden asked  the  appellant  about  a
             letter that the Home Office had received  from  his  wife  [A]
             dated 28 August 2016 in which she has complained that  he  had
             cheated on her with two women, one called  [P]  and  a  second
             woman called [C].  He replied that he did  not  know  anything
             about those people that his wife [A] had  said  untrue  things
             about his relationship with them.  He said he did not have sex
             with [P] or [C].  He confirmed in  answer  to  questions  from
             Miss Bowden that he had only gone with a woman for the purpose
             of procreation and nothing more.  He said:

                  'Yes it was just kids that caused me  to  go  with  women.
                  You can't get that from a man'.

             Miss Bowden put to the appellant that  the  only  evidence  of
             relationships the appellant had was with the women he has  had
             children with, or expecting a child with.  He replied:

                  'I'm not into woman, I'm into man.  I'm not interested  in
                  woman at all.  If I was I would be with my wife'".

22. With reference to that evidence, the judge in para 40  did  not  accept
    that  the  discrepancies  were  due   to   the   appellant's   learning
    difficulties and any cognitive impairment.

23. Consequently, I reject ground 2.  The judge  did  not  simply  'rubber-
    stamp'  the  respondent's   reasons.    Rather,   he   considered   the
    discrepancies  in  the  context  of  the   appellant's   evidence   and
    explanation of the discrepancies.  That then leads to ground  3  where,
    at least in part, the ground seeks to challenge the judge's approach to
    the evidence and, in particular, that of Dr Battersby.

24. The judge set out in some detail Dr Battersby's evidence at paras 19-22
    in the following terms:

         "19. Dr Battersby interviewed the appellant at [] in Plymouth on 11
             March 2017.  He was brought to that interview by  his  partner
             [S].  Dr Battersby records that it was a  difficult  interview
             and the appellant was irritable several times.   However,  she
             concluded that the appellant was capable of  conducting  legal
             proceedings and had the capacity.  At page 11 of her report Dr
             Battersby has responded to the specific instruction  that  she
             received from the appellant's representatives which I set  out
             here:

                  'The Home Office decision  maker  has  made  a  number  of
                  adverse credibility points in  relation  to  the  client's
                  claim to be bisexual.  Please address with the client  his
                  full psycho-sexual history with detailed assessment of his
                  psycho-sexual functioning e.g. sexual development etc'.

             At page 22 of her report she has repeated this instruction and
             referred the reader to the  heading  'Events  leading  to  the
             current situation' set out at page 11-12 of  her  report.   To
             take matters shortly Dr Battersby  was  unable  to  reach  any
             conclusions given the appellant's response  to  her  questions
             about his sexuality and gave up when  trying  to  comply  with
             this    specific    instruction    from    the     appellant's
             representatives.

         20.  The appellant had told Dr Battersby that he  had  always  been
             attracted to men and was bisexual, adding 'I'd never be  gay'.
             He had gone on to explain  to  Dr  Battersby  that  his  first
             relationship was with [M] and that they were  together  on  or
             off for two years until the  time  [M]  left.   He  said  that
             between the age of 21 and 23 he had casual male partners 'just
             for sex'.  Dr Battersby asked him when he first had sex with a
             woman and he told Dr Battersby that  he  could  not  remember.
             She asked him whether he had been drunk or  on  drugs  and  he
             became quite irritable with her and said that he had a problem
             with his memory.  He told Dr Battersby that given  his  oldest
             child was 9 years old he must have been about 20 or 21 when he
             fathered this child.  He told Dr Battersby that the woman  was
             a friend that they had had  sex  and  she  got  pregnant.   He
             became irritable with Dr Battersby and  said,  rather  loudly,
             'you got sex friends it's your friend  but  you'll  have  sex,
             don't you'.  He said that his other child in Grenada was  from
             sex with a friend and not a relationship and that he  has  not
             had any other significant relationships in Grenada.  The  next
             part of  her  report  concluded  her  investigation  into  the
             appellant's claimed bisexuality and I set that out here:

                  'He told me 'I always wanted kids, a  man  can't  give  me
                  kids, the only thing that attracts me to women  is  kids'.
                  He told me that he would always take care of his kids.   I
                  asked whether he ever had sex with a woman  only  for  the
                  experience and he told me that he only had sex with  women
                  for kids.  I asked about use of contraception and he  said
                  that he always protects himself when having sex  with  men
                  by using condoms but never uses  condoms  with  women.   I
                  asked him whether he was gay rather than  bisexual  as  he
                  describes only having sex with women for  producing  kids.
                  He became quite angry with me and reiterated that  he  was
                  bisexual.  He was angry enough that I did not explore this
                  further'.

         21.   It  is  apparent  from  Dr  Battersby's  report   given   the
             appellant's responses which I  have  set  out  above  that  Dr
             Battersby was unable to  opine  on  the  plausibility  of  the
             appellant's claim to be bisexual as instructed.  She  referred
             those instructing her to the above paragraph as  her  response
             to their request.

         22.  Dr Battersby did, however, diagnose the appellant with  having
             'significant cognitive impairment' and that this was likely to
             reduce the cogency of his  evidence  that  dates  were  highly
             likely to be inaccurate and that he was more suggestible  than
             most  appellants  and  unlikely  to  withstand  robust  cross-
             examination.  Because of this I  acceded  to  the  application
             made on the appellant's behalf by Counsel for the appellant Ms
             Caseley to treat the appellant as vulnerable witness, to which
             no objection was made on behalf of the  respondent.   However,
             throughout the hearing the appellant gave no  indication  that
             he was suffering from any impairment.  It was  plain  that  he
             understood the questions and points being  made;  particularly
             during submissions made on behalf of the  respondent  when  he
             expressed disagreement with the points that were made  against
             him when it was submitted that his claim to  be  bisexual  was
             fabricated".

25. In para 22, it is clear that the judge accepted Dr Battersby's evidence
    that the appellant suffered  from  "significant  cognitive  impairment"
    and, as she said in her report, this was:

         "highly likely to reduce the cogency of his evidence and e.g. dates
         are highly likely to be inaccurate.  He is also likely to  be  more
         suggestible than most appellants and unlikely to  withstand  robust
         cross-examination which in my opinion would reduce the  cogency  of
         his evidence".

26. Again, at para 40, the judge specifically stated that  he  accepted  Dr
    Battersby's assessment.  However, and I reject Ms Caseley's  submission
    on this issue, it is clear that the  judge  does  not  contradict  that
    evidence when he stated both in paras 22 and  40  that  there  was  "no
    indication that he was suffering from any impairment" and "no  evidence
    of any impairment".  There, the judge was clearly making an  assessment
    of the appellant when he had given evidence at the hearing.  I  do  not
    see any reason why the judge should not have done so.  It is plain that
    the judge was  well  aware  of  the  potential  issues  raised  by  the
    appellant's mental health.

27. It was undoubtedly incumbent upon the judge to approach the appellant's
    evidence with some caution  given  Dr  Battersby's  evidence  which  he
    accepted.  He treated the appellant as a "vulnerable witness" (see para
    22).   The  need  for  caution  in  the  assessment  of   evidence   in
    circumstances such as in this appeal were emphasised by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD and Lord Chancellor [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1123.  Unlike in that case (at paras [15] and  [16]),  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge took full account of the expert evidence concerning  the
    appellant's vulnerability and cognitive impairment.  The judge did  not
    ignore Dr Battersby's opinion and was entitled  to  take  into  account
    that the appellant's claimed "confusion" only arose when  dealing  with
    discrepancies in his evidence.  There is nothing in  the  determination
    to suggest that  the  appellant  was  subject  to  the  "robust  cross-
    examination" which Dr Battersby identified as  potentially  problematic
    in assessing the cogency of his evidence.  In my judgment,  Judge  Page
    was entitled for the reasons he gives to  doubt  the  veracity  of  the
    appellant's account and therefore of his claim.

28. Turning now to ground 1, Ms Caseley relied upon A, B & C at [64]  where
    the CJEU stated:

         "... while the national authorities  are  entitled  to  carry  out,
         where appropriate, interviews in order to determine the  facts  and
         circumstances as regards the  declared  sexual  orientation  of  an
         applicant for asylum, questions concerning details  of  the  sexual
         practices of that applicant are contrary to the fundamental  rights
         guaranteed by the Charter and,  in  particular,  to  the  right  to
         respect for private and  family  life  as  affirmed  in  Article  7
         thereof".

29. In the course of her submissions, I raised with Ms Caseley whether  the
    decision of the CJEU in A, B & C prohibited the asking of any questions
    whether by the respondent in  cross-examination  or  by  the  judge  in
    relation to an individual's sexual  life.   I  did  not  understand  Ms
    Caseley to contend that to be the case;  although  she  was  unable  to
    offer any 'bright' line or indeed 'fuzzy' line to de-mark the permitted
    from the not permitted.

30. The CJEU's decision offers no guidance on what is meant by "details  of
    the sexual practices" of an individual.  I do not understand  the  CJEU
    to suggest  that  any  question  relating  to  an  individual's  sexual
    practices is prohibited by Art 7 of the Charter (or by analogy Art 8 of
    the ECHR).  Each case must necessarily be fact-sensitive.  Art 7 of the
    Charter and Art 8 of the ECHR do not create absolute rights.  Both  Art
    7 and Art 8 are subject to interference on grounds of  proportionality.
    That, in itself, may suggest  that  not  every  question  concerning  a
    person's sexual life would infringe the  Charter  or  ECHR.   Questions
    which  seek  to  elicit  explicit,  intimate  details   of   a   sexual
    relationship may well fall within the prohibition.  The intrusion  into
    the individual's private life may well be too great to be justified and
    survive scrutiny on a human rights basis.

31. In this appeal, the  questions  directed  to  the  appellant's  current
    partner went no further than enquiring whether she  and  the  appellant
    had sex together, how often they did so, and whether her  understanding
    was that he was only having sex with  her  to  have  a  child.   In  my
    judgment, whilst those questions do involve enquiry  into  the  private
    life of both the witness and the appellant, the questions do  not  seek
    or require to be answered by disclosure of explicit  or,  it  could  be
    said, lurid detail which would unnecessarily interfere with  or  offend
    those individuals' human dignity.  Taken with  which,  of  course,  the
    questions were directly relevant to the appellant's claim that  he  was
    bisexual, with which he self-identified as a person who  did  not  have
    sex with women other than for  the  purposes  of  procreation.   In  my
    judgment, Judge Page did not err in law in permitting  these  questions
    to be asked, or himself asking them, of the appellant  or  his  current
    partner.

32. For the above reasons, therefore, I reject grounds 1, 2 and 3.

33. The judge did not err  in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse  credibility
    findings and in finding that the appellant had not established that  he
    was bisexual as he claimed and consequently that  he  was  at  risk  on
    return to Grenada.

Decision

34. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of  law.   That  decision
    stands.

35. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            1, December 2017





