
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01002/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 December 2018                      |On 16 January 2019                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                    [S T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Wood, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cohen in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a  citizen  of
    Albania, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum and
    issue removal directions.

 2. The application under  appeal  was  refused  on  4  January  2018.  The
    Appellant exercised her right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. The
    appeal came before Judge Cohen on 13 September 2018 and was  dismissed.
    The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The application was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Povey  on  5
    November 2018 in the following terms

         "The grounds of appeal allege variously that the Judge erred in his
         assessment of the Appellant's credibility and provided insufficient
         reasoning for a number of the adverse findings he reached.


         It was arguable that  the  Judge  fell  into  error  regarding  his
         treatment of the decision of the NRM, finding that the same damaged
         the Appellant's credibility (at [28]).  There  appeared  to  be  no
         consideration of the different applicable standards of proof or, if
         there was,  the  adverse  credibility  finding  was  insufficiently
         reasoned. It was also arguable  that  a  number  of  other  adverse
         credibility findings were not adequately reasoned,  such  that  the
         Appellant was unable to fully ascertain why her account  was  found
         lacking. Those arguable errors are material to the outcome  of  the
         appeal, which turned  significantly  on  the  plausibility  of  the
         Appellant's account of her treatment in Albania."




Background

 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Albania born on 24 August 1994. She claims to  have  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 28 October 2013 and she claimed  asylum  on  5
    February 2014. The basis of her claim was that she had been abused  and
    trafficked by a former partner and that she would face persecution from
    him or his associates upon return to Albania.

 4. The Respondent refused the application not accepting that she had  been
    abused or trafficked as claimed. In refusing the Appellant's claim  the
    Respondent had regard to an NRM decision  made  on  7  May  2014  which
    concluded that the Appellant was not a victim of human  trafficking  or
    slavery. At the appeal hearing the Appellant maintained  her  claim  to
    have been trafficked and added that she now had a  child  born  in  the
    United Kingdom and was pregnant with her second  child.  In  dismissing
    her appeal the Judge found that the negative NRM decision was  damaging
    to the credibility of the Appellant's claim and  having  done  so  made
    further and comprehensive adverse credibility findings.



Submissions

 5. For the Appellant Ms Wood said that the issue was  one  of  credibility
    and the grounds of appeal deal with the findings made by the First-tier
    Tribunal. She referred to the decision in ES (s82  NIA  2002;  negative
    NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335. The comments of the Judge do not  allow
    for any interference with the NRM decision. The  Judge  refers  to  the
    decision at paragraph 12 and 28 and finds the NRM decision damaging  to
    the credibility of the Appellant's claim.  The  language  used  by  the
    Judge shows that he  has  placed  reliance  on  this  decision  when  a
    negative NRM decision only means that the decision  falls  between  two
    standards. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  should  have  considered  the
    evidence afresh and applied the lower standard  of  proof.  This  is  a
    material error of law. So far as the second  ground  is  concerned  the
    Judge has misunderstood the TIMS document  concerning  the  Appellant's
    passage across Albanian borders. It is  clear  that,  contrary  to  the
    Judge's finding, the TIMS system  is  intended  to  record  entry  into
    Albania as well as exit. Finally, the Judge makes speculative  findings
    without any evidence to support  those  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellants relationship with the father of her child and her  continued
    relationship with her husband.

 6. For the Respondent  Ms  Holmes  said  that  the  Judge  had  made  some
    reasonable findings that it was open to him to make but  it  was  clear
    that many of his findings were speculative.  It  was  also  clear  that
    complete reliance had been placed upon the NRM decision.

 7. I gave an oral decision allowing the appeal and remitting to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.




Decision

 8. This is  a  trafficking  case.   The  Appellant  claims  to  have  been
    trafficked from Albania to the United Kingdom and to be in danger  from
    her traffickers on a return to Albania.

 9. Ms Wood rightly says the issue is one of credibility, or at  least  the
    primary issue is one  of  credibility,  and  that  this  is  where  the
    decision falls into error.   The  Judge's  starting  point  as  far  as
    credibility is concerned at paragraph 28 of his decision, which  really
    is the opening of his consideration, is that as the  Appellant's  claim
    to have been  trafficked  has  been  investigated  by  the  appropriate
    authorities, and they found that she had not been trafficked  and  that
    this is damaging to the credibility of the Appellant's claim.  This  is
    an error of law.  ES (s82 NIA 2002; negative NRM) Albania  [2018]  UKUT
    00335 makes it clear that the correct approach is to  consider  all  of
    the evidence in  the  round  and  the  date  of  the  hearing.  It  was
    appropriate for the Judge to look at the Appellant's claim  afresh  and
    take into account the different standard of proof, the  lower  standard
    of proof, that applies in protection appeals.  The Judge  does  not  do
    that.  Whereas he goes on to consider the Appellant's story he does  so
    having already found that she is a person whose  credibility  has  been
    damaged.

10. The Judge goes on to make further errors of law.  The prime error,  and
    one which is, reluctantly perhaps, accepted by Mrs Holmes on behalf  of
    the Home  Office,  is  the  speculation  in  his  findings  as  to  the
    Appellant's pregnancy, the father of her  child  and  her  relationship
    with the child's  father.   The  Judge's  conclusions  have  been  made
    without any evidential basis.

11. Further errors are complained of in the grounds of appeal and there  is
    perhaps some misunderstanding of the Appellant's evidence.  Bearing  in
    mind what I have already said about errors of law this is not something
    that I need to specifically make a finding on.

12. The overall conclusion must be that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is unsafe and therefore the Appellant's appeal is allowed, and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of
    the error of law is fundamental to the credibility of the Appellant and
    in those circumstances Ms Wood suggests that  this  is  a  matter  that
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh and on
    behalf of the Home Office Mrs Holmes does not object to that course.



Summary of Decision

13. Appeal allowed.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the matter  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.


Signed                                  Date 04 January 2019

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

