
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01503/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2020                  |On 3 June 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    j z x
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel instructed by L & L Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the appellant is an asylum seeker and is entitled to privacy.

2. This  is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State on 20 January 2020 refusing him asylum or any other kind
of international protection.

3. As the First-tier Tribunal rightly explains  the  appellant  applied  for
asylum in the United Kingdom and asked to be recognised as a  refugee.   In
outline he claims to have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  China
because he has breached the one child policy. The put him at risk from  the
authorities and caused him to leave China which caused him to have dealings
with loan sharks and snakeheads and he claims now to fear  the  authorities
and loan sharks and snakeheads in the event of his return. Additionally  he
claims to be a victim of trafficking.

4. He has previously applied for asylum and his appeal was dismissed.

5. A major feature of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  reasoning  in  the
appeal that I have to consider was that the  appellant  had  added  nothing
useful to the case that had been determined previously.

6. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  in  a  fully  reasoned
decision finding it arguable, amongst other  things,  that  the  judge  had
misunderstood the evidence and  so  had  concluded  irrationally  that  the
appellant had not been complaining about  problems  he  had  had  in  China
before  he  left  and  the  alleged  error  led  the  judge   to   conclude
unsustainably that the appellant was not at risk now because he was not  in
trouble when he lived in China.

7. That point is well made in the grounds but Mr Clarke made a  very  strong
defence of the Decision and Reasons.

8. I mean Mr Burrett no disrespect whatsoever by beginning with Mr  Clarke's
submissions.

9. The appellant's case was clearly set out  in  the  grant  of  permission.
Essentially it was suggested that the judge had factored into  his  adverse
credibility findings a  false  premise  based  on  the  misreading  of  the
evidence.  Mr Clarke submitted there  were  two  lines  of  attack  in  the
grounds of appeal.  The first was the finding that ought not to  have  been
made and the second was the consequences of the appellant having claimed to
have been trafficked.

10. As is set out under point five of the grounds of appeal  the  First-tier
Tribunal gave as one of its reasons for disbelieving the appellant's  claim
that "the appellant was able to remain in China from 1997 to 2002  and  was
not arrested by the Chinese authorities".  This is a reference to paragraph
80 of the decision and reasons where the judge continued:

  "I am of the view that [the Chinese authorities] would have been able  to
  find the appellant during the course of five years.  The appellant's case
  is that during the period from 1997 to 2002, the appellant moved  between
  various cities and provinces in China."

11. It is the appellant's case in his grounds that the  First-tier  Tribunal
did not deal with his evidence saying that he did have difficulties  during
this time.  The appellant relied on an "Addendum Witness  Statement"  dated
17 March 2020 which specifically referred to his earlier  statement  relied
upon on in a hearing on 4 August 2016.  In that statement he explained  how
he had had seven children with his wife at a time when, by  reason  of  the
well-known Chinese "one child" policy he was permitted  to  have  only  one
child. An official from the family planning authority  came  to  fine  him.
The appellant persuaded the authorities to wait  until  he  was  in  better
financial circumstances but this added a bribe to  his  bills.   When  they
came to collect the money in 1997 there was an altercation and  he  hit  an
officer and was detained and eventually sent to prison.

12. It was his claim that he was tortured in prison and detained  for  three
months until his wife secured his release by paying a bribe  having  raised
capital from a loan shark.  His business collapsed during his  absence  and
could not get alternative work because of his history of problems with  the
authorities.  His debts increased.  He said that  after  his  release  from
detention:

  "The police as well as the family of  the  injured  police  officer  kept
  coming to check and harass me.  I did not feel safe, and  the  harassment
  also made it extremely difficult for me."

13. However the addendum witness statement relied on does not  revisit  this
point.  It offers no new evidence on the claim to have  been  harassed  and
ill-treated after release from detention.  At  paragraph  89  of  the  2016
decision the judge said:

  "The appellant was able to continue and live and work in various parts of
  China between 1991 and 2002.  Had the authorities  had  any  interest  in
  him, they would have been able to find him and detain him.  The fact they
  did not do so demonstrates that the appellant is  not  a  wanted  man  in
  China as he claims.

14. As Mr Clarke pointed out, the claim that the appellant had been  hassled
was clearly before the judge in 2016 and it was rejected.  The reasons  for
rejecting it  are  not  clear  but  that  the  decision  was  not  appealed
successfully and Mr Clarke submitted the issues are settled.

15. Mr Clarke submitted that the First-tier Tribunal was  plainly  aware  of
further evidence from the appellant but dealt with it satisfactorily.

16. The appellant had relied on a letter purportedly from his wife in  China
stating that the Chinese authorities and the Chinese mafia had been looking
for the appellant since 2019.  This is explained at  paragraph  81  of  the
Decision and Reasons.  However,  the  judge  did  not  find  that  evidence
reliable.  He  did  not  understand  why  the  appellant's  wife  would  be
interested in offering him any support of any kind in 2019 because  it  was
the appellant's case that in 2017 his wife wanted nothing whatsoever to  do
with him.

17. Further the judge had seen a letter from Hestia, which I  understand  to
be a respected charity based in London that offers support particularly  to
the victims of trafficking. The judge noted a difference between the letter
supposedly from the appellant's wife and the letter from Hestia  suggesting
that the appellant had not been consistent in his account which  the  judge
found indicative of untruthfulness.  Mr Clarke submitted there was no legal
error whatsoever disclosed in the judge's approach to the fact-finding.

18. Mr Clarke then directed his submissions to  what  he  described  as  the
"trafficking side of the claim".

19. He argued that  the  judge  had,  rightly,  started  with  the  existing
decision and then looked for further evidence.  There was a development  in
the case.  The appellant's claim to have been trafficked appeared  to  find
favour with journalists from both the BBC and the Financial Times  but  the
appellant had not been able to persuade the competent authority that he was
a victim of trafficking and the judge found no reason to be impressed  with
the opinions of journalists.  The judge attached  "significant  weight"  to
the claim for trafficking being made late.  It was not raised for more than
ten years after the appellant claimed to have escaped but the judge did not
just leave things there.  He also looked at an explanation for it not being
raised and was not impressed that the appellant  said  his  representatives
had not asked him directly.  Even allowing for  alleged  reticence  on  the
part of the appellant the judge found it incongruous that the appellant was
able to overcome his reticence to talk about his experiences in  China  but
not the more recent experiences of escape from China.

20. Mr Clarke submitted that the judge's approach was entirely lawful.

21. The judge considered the  report  of  a  consultant  psychiatrist  a  Dr
Dhumad and noted the conclusion that the appellant  was  suffering  from  a
moderate to depressive episode and post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and  a
moderate but significant risk of suicide on return to China.  The judge did
not regard this as evidence that the appellant was telling the truth  about
his experiences in China but  directed  himself  at  paragraph  65  of  the
Decision and Reasons that he  had  "made  allowances  for  the  appellant's
mental health when assessing credibility".  The judge  found  at  paragraph
125 of the Decision and Reasons that there had been nothing before  him  to
show the appellant would not be able to get  the  necessary  mental  health
treatment in China.

22. It is against  this  background  that  I  consider  again  Mr  Burrett's
submissions.

23. The judge has formed a view on the evidence and has  used  the  existing
decision as a starting point and no  more.   Mr  Burrett  made  submissions
which might have gone to show how the decision  could  have  been  resolved
differently but that is not the point.  All of the evidence was  considered
by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  reached  a  conclusion  that  the
appellant does not like.

24. I am not persuaded there is anything unlawful  in  the  decision  and  I
dismiss the appeal.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 May 2021                    |





