


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/01877/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 June 2017                           |On 28 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     BTM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Anderson a Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for  asylum  and
       ancillary protection on 8 October 2015. His appeal was dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands ("the Judge") following a hearing on
       20 January 2017.

    2. I make an anonymity order  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as  this  was  an  asylum  and
       ancillary protection claim. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court
       directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
       publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
       Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others,  all  parties.
       Any failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
       contempt of court proceedings.

The grant of permission


    3. Judge Dineen of the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal
       (27 March 2017) only on the grounds that it  is  arguable  that  the
       Judge erred in relation to;
          1) findings regarding his return to  Zimbabwe  as  the  Respondent
             does not intend to return him there, and
          2) a finding that he could return to South Africa if he  concealed
             his true identity.


Party's positions

    4. Mr Diwyncz relied on the  rule  24  notice  (13  April  2017)  which
       basically said that the Judge did not err.  He  submitted  that  the
       comments regarding Zimbabwe were otiose as there was no intention to
       return the Appellant there. Accordingly, any error in  referring  to
       it was not material. The Appellant had lied  when  he  obtained  the
       false documents so he could do so again.


    5. Miss Anderson relied on the grant of permission.

The Judge's decision

    6. The Judge comprehensively rejected the account the Appellant gave of
       having had problems in either Zimbabwe or South Africa in a detailed
       assessment. She found that;
          1) he was born a citizen of Zimbabwe [37],
          2) he entered South Africa illegally and would have been unable to
             obtain naturalisation there [38],
          3) he obtained a South African passport that was not in  his  name
             through briberym but did not acquire South African  nationality
             through that [39],
          4) he was as  likely  to  have  entered  South  Africa  using  his
             Zimbabwean passport as not, and found work in Pretoria, Durban,
             and Johannesburg [41],
          5) he was in Durban and became a father in 2008, was able to  find
             work then, obtained hospital treatment, applied using the South
             African passport to come here in 2010 which  was  refused,  and
             moved to Johannesburg [42],
          6) he formed a new relationship with a girl from  Beit  Bridge  in
             Zimbabwe  where  he  went  to  visit,  was  joined  by  her  in
             Johannesburg when she fell pregnant,  lived  there  until  2014
             during which time he travelled to and from Beit Bridge where he
             went out  with  friends,  and  was  involved  in  a  brawl  and
             fingerprinted in Beit Bridge in April 2013 and  then  used  his
             South African ID [43],
          7) he had relationship problems throughout 2014 but remained  with
             his girlfriend [44],
          8) he fabricated an account of being arrested in  Beit  Bridge  in
             2014 [45],
          9) he found his girlfriend in bed with another man in 2015 on  his
             return from work leading to an altercation [46],
         10) he came here without difficulty having  established  he  had  a
             job, funds, and family in South Africa, was of no  interest  to
             the South African authorities, and was working and living there
             peacefully [47],
         11) he had moved around South Africa  for  housing  and  employment
             [48],
         12) he is TBB, a Zimbabwean national [49],
         13) his father was granted refugee status due to his activities  in
             Zimbabwe, his mother resides in Zimbabwe  and  has  influential
             friends, her partner is involved in Zanu PF, and he  (i.e.  the
             Appellant) can reside with his mother and his 3 children  [50],


         14) his family have visited him in South Africa [52],
         15) he had not told the truth about events  in  Zimbabwe  following
             his father's departure to the United Kingdom, and had not  told
             the truth about being arrested or detained in Zimbabwe in  2004
             or 2014 [55],
         16) he has not established  he  lost  his  Zimbabwean  passport  or
             cannot obtain a replacement, and  he  can  return  to  Zimbabwe
             directly or via South Africa [56],
         17) neither the South African or Zimbabwean  authorities  have  any
             interest in him [57], and
         18) he is of Manyika ethnicity, speaks Shona, lived in Harare,  was
             educated to 'A' level standard, was never  politically  active,
             has no MDC profile, would not  attract  the  attention  of  the
             authorities in Zimbabwe at the airport or  when  travelling  to
             his family [61].


Discussion

    7. There was no  material  error  of  law  in  relation  to  the  Judge
       referring to Zimbabwe for the following reasons.  He  would  not  be
       returned there by the Respondent. The comments the Judge  made  were
       material to the decision as to whether he would be at real  risk  of
       return to South Africa which is where the Respondent intends to send
       him, as the possibility exists that he would be returned from  there
       to Zimbabwe. This was referred to when Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
       remitted this matter to the Judge following a hearing on  18  August
       2016 at [23] of his determination. The Judge was therefore  required
       to consider it. In any event the Judge made sustainable findings  as
       set out above regarding there being no real risk  in  Zimbabwe,  and
       permission to appeal in relation to those matters was not granted.


    8. It is an error of law to require someone to lie on his return  to  a
       country to avoid persecution about something as fundamental  as  his
       identity. The Judge found that the Appellant is TBB and a citizen of
       Zimbabwe. He cannot be required to  live  his  life  out  as  BM  as
       explained in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31. However, the  question
       is whether there is a real risk he would be  required  to  live  his
       life under a false name. The  Judge  rejected  the  account  of  him
       having problems in his real name in South Africa where he  was  able
       to obtain a work permit in his own identity to live and work  there.
       In those circumstances, there is no real risk he would  be  required
       to lie. In addition the Judge was entitled to find that there was no
       real risk he would be persecuted on his return to South Africa  even
       if he chose to lie, given her finding at [49]  that  "returning  him
       with a fraudulent passport may mean he suffers prosecution for doing
       so but the consequences of such  a  prosecution  do  not  amount  to
       persecution" which was sustainable on the evidence.


    9. I do not in all these circumstances accept that the Judge materially
       erred in law.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.






Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
28 June 2017
