
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01236/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34 Without a     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 30th September 2020               |     On 06th October 2020            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

   1. The appellant, a national of Iran, appealed against  the  respondent's
      decision of 24th January 2020 to  refuse  his  claim  for  asylum  and
      humanitarian protection.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Forster  dismissed
      the appeal for the reasons set out in a decision  promulgated  on  1st
      March 2020. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge O'Garro on 30th May 2020.


   2. Directions were made by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kopieczek  on  6th  July
      2020 setting out his provisional view that in light  of  the  need  to
      take  precautions  against  the  spread  of  Covid-19,  it  would   be
      appropriate  to  determine  whether  the  making  of  the   First-tier
      Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error on a point of law,
      without a hearing. He made directions for  the  parties  to  file  and
      serve further submissions and, if a party considers that a hearing  is
      necessary, for the party to submit reasons for that view no later than
      21 days after the notice was sent to the parties.  The Directions made
      by Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek were sent to the parties on 9th July
      2020.


   3. By email on 16th July 2020, the respondent sent to the Upper Tribunal,
      the respondent's rule 24 response.   The  appellant's  representatives
      were copied in to that  email.   In  the  respondent's  response,  the
      respondent accepts Judge Forster made a material error of law  in  his
      decision.  The respondent  accepts  that  at  paragraph  [30]  of  the
      decision, Judge Forster properly noted that  the  appellant's  Kurdish
      ethnicity is a factor which must be  considered  together  with  other
      factors personal to his position.  Judge  Foster  stated  the  Iranian
      authorities are reasonably likely to be suspicious  of  the  appellant
      because he is a Kurd and subject him to heightened scrutiny on  return
      to Iraq (sic).  The judge noted  that  on  return  from  the  UK,  the
      appellant will be questioned about  his  activities  in  the  UK,  and
      although there is evidence that the  appellant  was  engaged  in  some
      political activity in the UK, that will not have brought  him  to  the
      attention of the authorities.  The respondent  accepts  Judge  Forster
      has not adequately addressed why the appellant would not  be  at  risk
      upon return because of his social media posts.  The  respondent  notes
      the challenge to the decision is limited to the risk upon return,  and
      in the circumstances, submits it may be appropriate for  the  decision
      to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.


   4. The appellant does not appear to have made any written submissions  in
      support of the grounds of appeal, or filed any response to the rule 24
      response received from the respondent.


   5. Rule 34 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides
      that the Upper Tribunal may make any decision without a  hearing,  and
      the Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by  a  party  when
      deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any  matter,  and  the
      form of any such hearing. The  directions  issued  by  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Kopieczek provided the parties with an opportunity  to  set  out
      their view as to whether a hearing is necessary and for the  party  to
      submit reasons for that view. Neither the appellant nor the respondent
      has expressed a view as to whether a hearing is  necessary,  in  order
      for the Tribunal to determine whether the decision of Judge Forster is
      infected by a material error of law.


   6. In light of the concession made by the respondent and the view I  have
      taken on the error of law, I am satisfied that  it  is  in  accordance
      with the overriding objective and the interests of justice  for  there
      to be a timely determination of the question whether there is an error
      of law in the decision of the FtT.  Taking into account  the  position
      adopted by the respondent, it is entirely appropriate for the error of
      law decision to be determined on the  papers,  to  secure  the  proper
      administration of justice.  There is in my judgement, no prejudice  to
      the appellant in my proceeding in this way.


   7. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.  First, Judge Forster
      failed to make clear factual findings on material evidence. The
      appellant claims that although there is reference at paragraphs [19]
      to [25] of the decision to evidence of political activities that the
      appellant has been involved in since arriving in the UK, Judge Forster
      failed to make clear factual finding that the appellant holds a
      Facebook account clearly attributed to him with anti-Iranian
      government material.  Second, the judge failed to properly apply or
      consider the relevant country guidance decisions in his analysis of
      the risk upon return.


   8. The respondent concedes the decision of Judge Forster should be set
      aside, and in the circumstances I need say nothing more about the
      grounds of appeal.  The respondent accepts the Judge did not
      adequately reason why he would not be at risk upon return, because of
      his Facebook posts.  I accept the decision of the FtT is infected by
      an error of law and that the appropriate course is for the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Forster to be set aside.


   9. As to disposal, I note Judge Forster made a number of adverse
      credibility findings against the appellant and the appellant claims
      there is no clear finding that the appellant holds a Facebook account
      on which anti-government messages have been posted. I have carefully
      considered what is said at paragraph [20] of the decision of Judge
      Forster regarding the appellant's Facebook account. Although it might
      be implicit from what is said in that paragraph that Judge Forster
      accepted the appellant does have a Facebook account in his name that
      has been set up since coming to the UK on which anti-government
      messages have been posted, the judge finds that the appellant's
      explanation that he has done this now, because he is in a free
      country, is not credible.  What was required, is a clear finding as to
      whether the appellant has a Facebook account, and the nature of the
      material posted on it.  Why the appellant has set up an account may
      not be entirely relevant if there is a possibility that the
      appellant's actions may have come to the attention of the Iranian
      authorities and put him at risk upon return.


  10. As findings of fact will be necessary and the nature and extent of any
      judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive, in my judgment, the
      appropriate course if for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier
      Tribunal for hearing afresh.


  11. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


  12. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge Forster
      promulgated on 1st March 2020 is set aside.


  13. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
      with no findings preserved.


Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         30th September 2020
             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
