
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01396/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely by Skype for Business                |On 02 February 2021           |
|On 14 January 2021                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Joseph, instructed by NLS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (SC).   This
    direction applies to both the respondent and to  the  appellant  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who  was  born  on  4  January
    1985.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 January 2010.   In  2011,
    she unsuccessfully applied for leave to remain as a visitor.  On 30 May
    2012, the appellant was served with notice of intention to  remove  her
    (IS151A) as an overstayer.  On  10  October  2017,  the  appellant  was
    refused leave to remain on the basis of her private and family life  in
    the UK.

 4. On 18 January 2019, the appellant claimed asylum.  On 28 January  2020,
    the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's  claims  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Page on 23 September 2020.  In his determination sent on
    1 October 2020, Judge Page dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds, and under Arts  2  and  3  of  the
    ECHR.  In doing so, he rejected the appellant's claim to be at risk  on
    return to Bangladesh as a result of  her  claimed  fear  from  her  ex-
    husband.  However, Judge Page allowed the appellant's appeal under  Art
    8 on the basis that para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules (HC 395
    as amended) applied because, on return to Bangladesh, there were  "very
    significant obstacles" to her integration.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against Judge Page's decision in favour of the appellant under
    Art 8 of the ECHR.  In essence, the Secretary of State  contended  that
    the judge had erred in law by failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that there were "very significant obstacles" to her integration
    in Bangladesh under para 276ADE(1)(vi).

 7. On 21 October 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parkes) granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 8. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing by Skype for Business on  14
    January 2021 at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre.  I was based in court
    and Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary of State, and Mr  Joseph,
    who represented  the  appellant,  joined  the  hearing  via  Skype  for
    Business.

The Issues

 9. It was accepted by both representatives  that  no  challenge  had  been
    brought to the judge's adverse decision in respect of  the  appellant's
    international  protection  claim  under  the  Refugee  Convention,   on
    humanitarian protection grounds, and under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

10. It was accepted that the only issue was whether the judge had erred  in
    law in finding in the appellant's favour under  Art  8,  in  particular
    para 276ADE(1)(vi).

The Judge's Decision

11. In respect of the appellant's Art 8 claim, Judge  Page  approached  her
    claim on the basis  that  it  was  contended  that  her  mental  health
    problems created, "very significant obstacles" to  her  integration  in
    Bangladesh.  The background was, as was accepted by Mr  Howells  before
    me, that the appellant had a history of a  psychotic  illness  and  had
    twice been "sectioned" under the Mental Health Act 1983.  In support of
    her claim, before Judge Page the appellant  relied  upon  a  bundle  of
    documents running to 31 pages.  It was accepted by Mr Joseph before  me
    that the appellant had last been discharged from detention in May  2016
    and that she  continued  to  be  prescribed  antipsychotic  medication,
    namely ten milligrams of Olanzapine daily.

12. The judge dealt with the appellant's Art 8 claim at paras 19-21 of  his
    determination.

13. At paras 19-20, the judge set out some of the medical evidence relating
    to the appellant's mental health and concluded that para  276ADE(1)(vi)
    applied.  He said this:

         "19. However, the appeal under Article 8 does  not  depend  on  the
             appellant's credibility or accuracy of recall.  It is accepted
             by  the  respondent  that  the  appellant  has  mental  health
             problems that are being treated in the United Kingdom.   There
             are pages and  pages  of  medical  notes  emanating  from  the
             appellant's doctor.  I will only refer to the letter dated  16
             March 2020 from Dr William Jones in which he informs that  the
             appellant has been registered at the surgery since April  2015
             - and that the appellant has a previous history  of  psychotic
             illnesses and was under the  care  of  'the  psychiatrists  in
             London'.  Dr Jones states: 'there is  unfortunately  no  clear
             diagnosis from them, except that she has psychotic  episodes.'
             The  appellant  remains  on   antipsychotic   medication,   10
             milligrams  daily  and  has  an  open  appointment  with   the
             community mental health team.

         20.  I accept the submission made by Mr Joseph  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant  that  the  medical  evidence  (which  records   the
             appellant as being  sectioned  under  the  Mental  Health  Act
             twice) makes it plain that her illness has had  a  significant
             impact on how she is able to function.  The  appellant  has  a
             history of anxiety and of depression  and  psychotic  episodes
             and still has this illness.  I  turn  to  the  position  under
             Article 8 and ask if there are very significant  obstacles  to
             the appellant's integration into Bangladesh  where  she  would
             have to go if required to  leave  the  UK  to  meet  paragraph
             276ADE(1)(vi) and I conclude that there  are.   Plainly  there
             are difficulties facing  the  appellant  if  she  returned  to
             Bangladesh  with  mental  health  problems  in   the   present
             circumstances."

14. Then, in para 21, the judge went on to consider advice from the Foreign
    and Commonwealth Office ("FCO") concerning travel to Bangladesh and the
    Covid-19 crisis as follows:

         "21. I have to judge the evidence as at the date of the hearing.  I
             start with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office [FCO] advice on
             travel to Bangladesh.  At the present time all  but  essential
             travel to Bangladesh is advised against.  The  FCO  note  that
             the government in Bangladesh has asked people to stay at  home
             from 10 p.m. until 5 a.m.  Outside these hours the government
             has instructed that people should only leave  their  homes  if
             there is an urgent need.  There are  ongoing  restrictions  of
             movement between districts.  Anyone not complying  with  these
             requests could face legal action.  Bangladesh authorities have
             announced  a   new   traffic   light   system   for   lockdown
             restrictions.  Areas across the country with a high number  of
             COVID-19  cases  will  be  designated  as  red  zones.   These
             restrictions may come into force at short notice.   A  limited
             public transport service has  resumed  across  Bangladesh  but
             public transport in designated red zones  may  be  restricted.
             Those seeking medication must  carry  any  medical  papers  or
             prescriptions with them and be prepared to answer questions if
             stopped  by  law  enforcement  authorities.    Healthcare   in
             Bangladesh is poor.   I  find  that  the  appellant's  current
             mental  health  problems,  that  are  not  disputed   by   the
             respondent, amount to very  significant  obstacles  to  return
             when coupled with the COVID-19 pandemic crisis  that  is  most
             pertinent in Bangladesh.  The appellant meets the requirements
             of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  and  consequently  her  appeal  is
             allowed under Article 8 to this extent."

The Submissions

15. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed in paras 20  and  21  of  his  determination  to  give
    adequate reasons why he was satisfied that there were "very significant
    obstacles" to the appellant's integration in Bangladesh.

16. Mr Howells accepted that the appellant had mental health  problems  but
    that the judge had failed to explain why it was  that  the  appellant's
    mental  health  problems  meant  that  there  were  "very   significant
    obstacles" to her integration.  He pointed out that the judge had  only
    relied upon the letter of 16 March 2020 from Dr Jones which referred to
    the appellant's current treatment.  Mr Howells submitted that the judge
    had failed to engage with any evidence, and to  make  any  finding,  in
    relation to whether the appellant would be able to continue to  receive
    that treatment in Bangladesh.   Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  only
    reference to the availability of treatment in Bangladesh was in para 21
    where the judge referred to "healthcare" and  that  its  provision  was
    "poor" in Bangladesh.

17. Mr Howells submitted that the judge's  reference  to  the  FCO  advice,
    which  he  did  not  understand  to   have   been   referred   by   the
    representatives, was mainly concerned with the feasibility  of  return,
    rather than the appellant's circumstances in Bangladesh.  In support of
    that submission, Mr Howells pointed out  that  in  para  21  the  judge
    referred to there being "very significant obstacles to return",  rather
    than there being very significant obstacles on return.

18. Mr Howells submitted that there was very little  consideration  of  the
    appellant's specific circumstances on return to  Bangladesh,  including
    the material concerned with the availability of mental health treatment
    in Bangladesh which was referred to at page 16 of the refusal letter or
    the limited documents at pages 27, 29  and  30-31  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.  In particular, Mr Howells pointed out that the second document
    dated from 1 August 2011 and therefore was  of  limited  assistance  in
    determining the appellant's appeal in 2020.

19. Mr Joseph submitted that the  judge  had  properly  considered  whether
    there were very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in
    Bangladesh on return,  rather  than  focusing  on  the  feasibility  of
    return.  In particular, he pointed out that  the  judge  had  correctly
    approached the issue in para 20 when he found  that  there  were  "very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into  Bangladesh".



20. Mr Joseph accepted that there was limited  material  before  the  judge
    concerning the availability of mental health provision  in  Bangladesh.
    He pointed out that the refusal letter did not take issue with  whether
    treatment would  be  available  to  her.   He  relied  on  the  judge's
    reference to the evidence supporting her  psychotic  episodes  and  the
    need for antipsychotic  medication  on  a  daily  basis.   However,  he
    accepted that there was no finding on whether that treatment  would  be
    available in Bangladesh.

21. As regards the  FCO's  advice,  Mr  Joseph  (who  had  represented  the
    appellant at the hearing before Judge Page) did not think that  he  had
    provided that information to the judge and neither had  the  Presenting
    Officer.  His  recollection  was  that  Judge  Page  referred  to  this
    material having become aware of it  in  an  earlier  case.   Mr  Joseph
    submitted that the judge  was  entitled  to  take  that  material  into
    account.

Discussion

22. In allowing the appeal  under  Art  8,  Judge  Page  relied  upon  para
    276ADE(1)(vi) which provides as follows:

         "(1) The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
             on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the  date
             of application, the applicant:

             ....

             (vi) ... is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in
                  the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any  period  of
                  imprisonment)  but  there  would   be   very   significant
                  obstacles to the applicant's integration into the  country
                  to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."



23. In Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 923 the Court  of  Appeal  considered
    the test of "very significant obstacles" in the context of s.117C(4)(c)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).   The
    approach is equally applicable to para 276ADE(1)(vi).   The  court  (at
    [9]) referred to the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Treebhawon
    [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC).  Underhill LJ said this (at [9]):
         "9. [The meaning of  "very  significant  obstacles"]  was  recently
         addressed by the Upper  Tribunal  (McCloskey  J  and  UTJ  Francis)
         in Treebhawon v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
         UKUT 13 (IAC). At para. 37 of its judgment the UT said:
              "The other limb of the test,  'very  significant  obstacles',
              erects a self-evidently elevated threshold,  such  that  mere
              hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere upheaval  or
              inconvenience,  even  where  multiplied,  will  generally  be
              insufficient in this context."
         I have to say that I do not find that a very useful  gloss  on  the
         words of the rule. It is fair enough  to  observe  that  the  words
         "very significant" connote an "elevated" threshold, and I  have  no
         difficulty with the observation that the test will not  be  met  by
         "mere inconvenience or upheaval". But I am  not  sure  that  saying
         that "mere" hardship or difficulty or hurdles, even if  multiplied,
         will not "generally" suffice adds anything of substance.  The  task
         of the Secretary of State, or the Tribunal, in any  given  case  is
         simply to assess the obstacles to integration  relied  on,  whether
         characterised as hardship or difficulty or anything  else,  and  to
         decide whether they regard them as "very significant".

24. In Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813 the Court of Appeal explained  (at
    [14]) the meaning  of  "integration"  in  s.117C(4)(c)  which  is  also
    applicable to para 276ADE(1)(vi).  Sales LJ (as he then was) said this:


         "14.  In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration"
         into the country to which it is proposed that he  be  deported,  as
         set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a  broad  one.
         It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to  sustain
         life while living in the other country. It is  not  appropriate  to
         treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss and  it  will
         usually be sufficient for a court  or  tribunal  simply  to  direct
         itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea  of
         "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life."

25.  Consequently,  the  test  of  "very  significant  obstacles"  sets  an
    "elevated threshold" and the task of the judge is to  assess  what,  if
    any, obstacles there were to the appellant's integration in  Bangladesh
    and whether those obstacles  were  "very  significant".   The  idea  of
    "integration" requires a broad  evaluative  judgment  to  be  made  and
    whether the appellant would be a "enough of an insider"  in  Bangladesh
    in terms of her understanding of life, with a capacity  to  participate
    and be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in society and to build up
    within a reasonable time human relationships to give substance  to  her
    private and family life in Bangladesh.

26. The central issue relied upon before Judge Page to establish that there
    were "very significant obstacles" to  the  appellant's  integration  in
    Bangladesh was the impact upon her mental health if she returned there.
     Despite the  judge's  reference  in  para  21  to  there  being  "very
    significant obstacles to return" (my emphasis),  I  am  satisfied  that
    this  experienced  judge  was,  in  substance,   concerned   with   the
    appellant's circumstances when she had returned to  Bangladesh,  rather
    than focusing on the feasibility of her returning there in the Covid-19
    crisis.  I have reached that conclusion despite the  judge's  reference
    to the FCO advice which was, albeit only in part, concerned with issues
    of return, rather than circumstances on return.  But, as can be clearly
    seen in para 21, the FCO advice did, to  some  extent,  deal  with  the
    circumstances in Bangladesh also.

27. Consequently, it was crucial for the judge was to assess the impact  on
    the appellant's mental health on return to Bangladesh and  whether  any
    impact  gave  rise  to  "very  significant  obstacles"  (applying   the
    "elevated threshold" that contemplates) to her integration.  Mr Joseph,
    rightly, accepts that there  was  limited  evidence  before  the  judge
    despite what he refers to as there being "pages and  pages  of  medical
    notes" from the appellant's GP.  The letter from Dr Jones, to which the
    judge  made  reference,  dates  from  March  2020  and  refers  to  the
    appellant's "previous history of psychotic  illness".   It  notes  that
    there has "unfortunately [been] no clear diagnosis" for those psychotic
    episodes.  It notes that the appellant remains prescribed a daily  dose
    of ten milligrams of the antipsychotic drug,  Olanzapine.   It  further
    notes that she has an "open  appointment"  with  the  community  mental
    health team.  There was so far as I can tell, and none was pointed  out
    to me, any evidence that the appellant  has  engaged  with  any  mental
    health professionals  following  her  last  discharge  from  'Secondary
    Mental Health Services' as set out in the letter of 16 May 2017 from Dr
    A Gibbs-Samfat (at pages 8-9 of the appellant's bundle).  The  evidence
    was, as Mr Joseph accepts, that the appellant had been sectioned on two
    occasions but had been released in May 2016 and  had  not  subsequently
    been  subject  to  compulsory  detention.   The  appellant's  condition
    appears to be stable with the medication.

28. It  was,  therefore,  highly  relevant  to  determine  the  appellant's
    prognosis  and  implications  for  her  mental  health  on  return   to
    Bangladesh  which  included  an  assessment  of  whether  her   current
    medication (which can be assumed to be medically  necessary)  would  be
    available to her.  At page 16 of the refusal decision  a  quotation  is
    taken from the CPIN, "Bangladesh: Medical and Healthcare  Issues"  (May
    2019) which quotes a MedCOI response of 4 September 2015 stating, inter
    alia, that "[m]ental healthcare  is  offered  by  both  government  and
    private facilities, the  vast  majority  being  concentrated  in  urban
    areas".  It goes on to say that "[m]ost psychiatrists work in  tertiary
    care in urban areas".  It reports that "all or  almost  all  physician-
    based clinics (81-100%) have assessment and treatment Protocols for key
    mental health conditions available".  The  conclusion  reached  in  the
    refusal letter is that: "treatment is available for your mental  health
    condition in Bangladesh".

29. There were, in addition, two documents in  the  appellant's  bundle  at
    pages 27-29 and 30-31 respectively, in particular the  first  of  which
    from the World Health Organisation, "Mental  Health  -  Current  Mental
    Health Situation  in  Bangladesh"  (25  September  2019)  which  deals,
    sometimes in rather  general  terms,  with  the  current  situation  in
    Bangladesh (at least in 2019) in relation  to  mental  health  and  its
    treatment.  The other document is, as Mr Howells pointed out,  somewhat
    dated as it relates to 2011.

30. Nevertheless, in order for Judge Page  properly  to  determine  whether
    there were "very significant obstacles" to the appellant's  integration
    in Bangladesh because of her mental health problems, it  was  incumbent
    upon him to assess whether the treatment (which for these purposes  can
    be  taken  as  medically  necessary)  in  the  form  of   antipsychotic
    medication would be available to her.  The fact that the appellant  had
    a history of anxiety and depression  and  psychotic  episodes  did  not
    indicate, in itself, the implications for her on  return.   Dr  Jones's
    letter did not assist in this by reflecting on the implications for her
    on  return.   It  also  said  nothing   about   the   availability   of
    antipsychotic medication in Bangladesh.  The judge's only reference  to
    the position in Bangladesh is in para 21 when he  says  "healthcare  in
    Bangladesh is poor".  Even if that were the case, it does not focus  on
    the provision of mental health  treatment  which  was  central  to  the
    appellant's claim.

31.  For  the  above  reasons,  I  accept  the  substance  of  Mr  Howells'
    submissions.  I am satisfied that the judge erred in  law  because,  by
    failing to grapple with the evidence  and  the  central  issue  of  the
    impact  upon  the  appellant's  mental  health  (and  availability   of
    treatment) on return to Bangladesh, he failed to give adequate  reasons
    for his finding that the "high threshold" in para  276ADE(1)(vi),  that
    there were "very significant obstacles" to her integration on return to
    Bangladesh, was met.  The judge's decision  to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 cannot stand and is set aside.

Decision

32. Accordingly, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

33. At the conclusion of the hearing both representatives indicated that if
    that was my conclusion, then the appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing in relation to Art 8 of the ECHR.



34. I agree.  The appropriate disposal of the appeal, having regard to  the
    nature of and extent of  fact-finding  and  paras  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement, is to remit the appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in order to remake the decision de novo  in  relation  to
    Art 8 of the ECHR.  That appeal to be heard by a judge other than Judge
    Page.

35. The decision (and related findings) dismissing the  appellant's  appeal
    under the Refugee Convention, on humanitarian  protection  grounds  and
    under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR stand and are preserved.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             20 January 2021



