

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01763/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 November 2018                      | On 20 December 2018                |



                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss G Abonie, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant a national of  Sudan,  date  of  birth  1  January  1987,
    applied for protection on the basis of political  asylum,  Humanitarian
    Protection grounds on 29 August 2017.  The Appellant's application  was
    refused by the Respondent on 30 January 2018.  His appeal against  that
    decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble (the Judge)  who
    on 12th March 2018 dismissed the  appeal.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on 12th April 2018, there is  no  Rule  24  response  from  the
    Secretary of State.

2.   The  principal  ground  of  real  substance  turns  on  the  continuing
    applicability of the country guidance cases of AA [2019] UKAIT 0056 and
    MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010.  The question that was  posed
    to the Judge was whether or not the country policy information note was
    sufficient to demonstrate that circumstances had moved on  in  relation
    to the Sudan and in particular to the risks to Non-Arab Darfuris  which
    it was accepted the Appellant is.  The issue raised is  really  whether
    there is a continuing  problem,  for  example  in  Khartoum.   For  the
    reasons  given  the  Judge  departed  from  the  country  guidance  and
    concluded, not least because the Appellant's account was not  believed,
    albeit he is a Non-Arab Darfuri, that he was not at  risk  were  he  to
    return to Khartoum and would face no real risk of  persecution  because
    of his ethnicity.  Therefore there was  no  Convention  reason  and  it
    similarly followed that there was no serious risk of harm on  a  return
    to Khartoum.

3.   Mr Howard drew my attention to the  background  information  which  was
    provided to the Judge and in particular  to  a  number  of  pages  from
    different authors or organisations which  spoke  of  the  clearly  poor
    position for Non-Arab Darfuris: Also dealt with, to a  degree,  in  the
    country policy information note from 2017.  Certainly, it was  not  the
    basis for optimism as to how Non-Arab Darfuris would be  treated.   The
    case of SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940 is a familiar case on  the  point
    that country guidance should not be  departed  from  unless  there  are
    cogent, very strong grounds to do so and the evidence adduced justifies
    moving on from the conclusions that the country guidance  Tribunal  had
    reached.  It seemed to me that was a completely trite  proposition  but
    the fact was that the Judge did not, by  reference  to  the  background
    evidence, seem to enter into any consideration of the totality  of  it:
    Rather than simply relying on the information note as demonstrating the
    likelihood that the Appellant would be safe in Khartoum, whether  as  a
    failed asylum seeker or as a Non-Arab Darfuri.  In the circumstances  I
    conclude the Judge's consideration of that critical  issue  bearing  in
    mind that it is not simply determined by the credibility of  the  claim
    once it was accepted that the Appellant is a Non-Arab Darfuri.

4.   For these reasons therefore I find the superficial  approach  taken  to
    the background evidence, which was largely unacknowledged  despite  the
    various and reliable sources well-regarded and frequently used,  showed
    that there has been a material error  of  law  in  failing  to  provide
    proper and adequate reasons for the decision or in the conclusion  that
    the Appellant does not face or would not be likely  to  face  the  real
    risk of persecution because of his ethnicity on return.   A  subsidiary
    issue raised relates to whether or  not  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration into Sudan as a member of the Fur ethnicity.
     I conclude the Judge failed to properly  address  that  issue  at  all
    which is somewhat surprising when the Secretary of State had raised, as
    the Judge acknowledged,  the  point  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances: Putting aside whatever is the  correct  test  but  there
    were no very significant obstacles to reintegration.  The  Judge  never
    dealt with that.  It might be assumed that the Judge did not  expressly
    deal with it because he thought there was no merit.  He  may  be  right
    about that.  It is not my place to comment but I  have  to  say  it  is
    inadequate to properly address what was  an  issue  raised  before  the
    Judge, whatever the merits may have been: At this stage I cannot form a
    view on their merits in any event and it seems to me that  the  matter,
    insofar as it remains of continuing interest  in  the  conduct  of  the
    appeal, needs to be addressed by the remaking of this decision.

5.   I was therefore satisfied that that matter was an error of law and  the
    Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

6.   The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The appeal  is  allowed
    to the extent that the matter must be remade in the First-tier Tribunal
    on all issues.

7.   An anonymity order was made and is continued.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 12 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
