

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01498/2018


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision Promulgated         |
|on 29 January 2020                            |2 March 2020                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr G Brown instructed by BA Chambers Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 30 May  2019  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hemingway  set  aside  the
        decision of a  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  None  of  the
        findings were preserved.
     2. The matter comes before the Upper  Tribunal  today,  following  the
        making of a  judicial  transfer  order,  for  it  to  substitute  a
        decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.



Background


     3. The appellant, MS, is a female citizen of Mauritius born on  the  2
        September 1978.
     4. MS arrived in the UK and was granted entry clearance on  26  August
        2004 as a visitor, with leave valid to 28 February 2005.
     5. Further leave as a student was granted from 23 December 2004  which
        was extended on occasions so as to expire on the 30 September 2009.
     6. On 12 October  2016  MS  was  referred  to  the  National  Referral
        Mechanism.
     7. MS formally claimed asylum on the 22 November 2016.
     8. The core of MS's case,  summarised  at  [10]  of  the  reasons  for
        refusal letter, is that after three months of arriving  in  the  UK
        she moved in with an aunt who was financing her studies  but  later
        ran away from her aunt's house and began a relationship with a  man
        who said he would help MS to obtain a student visa.  The  man  took
        the money from MS for the fees but attempted to pay the fee using a
        fake credit card, as a result of which MS claims the  college  told
        her she would have to pay double the original fee or she  would  be
        reported to the authorities.
     9. MS claims the man took not only her money but also that raised from
        jewellery she was made to pawn and then left with MS's best friend.
    10. In or around December 2010 MS's employer  asked  to  see  her  visa
        which she confessed had expired as a result of which she was unable
        to work there. MS was threatened with eviction  when  she  met  two
        other people she names as [JP] and [SP] who said they would  assist
        MS as a result of which she moved in  with  them  in  January.   MS
        claimed she knew [SP] from Mauritius.
    11. The family had three children. MS worked as a cleaner for them  and
        other families. MS was paid by the other families and would have to
        pay bills for the [P]'s at times from her funds.
    12. MS began an affair with [SP] which she  states  he  instigated.  He
        also claimed he would marry MS when he obtained his own immigration
        papers. MS claims she felt she had no other option.
    13. In October 2016 [JP] learned of the relationship following which MS
        was forced to leave the house.
    14. MS claimed a real risk on return from associates of [JP]  and  [SP]
        as a result of the affair.
    15. The respondent accepted the  appellants  nationality  but  not  the
        claim to face a real risk as claimed.
    16. In her latest witness statement dated 22 January 2020 MS claims she
        fell pregnant twice as a result of the affair, having  an  abortion
        on both occasions.
    17. At [8-15] of that statement MS writes:

             "8.  I have been tortured and hurt by those who I thought were
                  going to help me. From my first boyfriend [SR] and Mr  and
                  Mrs [P].  My life has been destroyed by others  and  I  am
                  still being made to suffer, my mental health problems mean
                  I cannot remember things I cannot sleep properly I live in
                  fear all the time.


             9.   My life is broken I am all alone and have no  one,  if  I
                  was sent back where would I go? Once I get off  the  plane
                  who will help me?  I have nothing and no one  to  go  back
                  too, Mrs [P] told me she will have me  killed  once  I  go
                  back. My life is not safe.  My family do not speak to me I
                  have lost all contact with everyone in my home country, my
                  brother and aunty in the UK have disowned me.


             10.  Mr [P] is a singer form Mauritius his wife is a  promoter
                  they do events and are very popular and  well  known  with
                  contacts with the government and are powerful, I have seen
                  so many singers in their home when I used to  live  there,
                  these rich people would take drugs at the house.  Both  Mr
                  And Mrs [P] know all sorts of people and can get  anything
                  done.  They will harm me no matter what.


             11.  The only help I have  is  from  my  support  workers  who
                  listen to me and support me, I am on medication and see my
                  GP on a regular basis.


             12.  I am not in a good place I have tried and  tried  to  get
                  evidence but I am alone what can I do on my own?  Who  can
                  I turn to? Who will support me?  Mr [P] and his wife  will
                  have people track me and find me to harm me.


             13.  In respect of future  fear,  I  confirm  that  if  I  was
                  returned to  Mauritius  I  will  be  Killed  as  [SP]  has
                  threatened me and my family.  Also if I return back I will
                  have no one to return to as my father has disowned me.


             14.  In respect of Article 8.  I can confirm that I have built
                  my life here; I have studied and worked in the UK.  I have
                  started living my life the way I want and trying to  enjoy
                  life as much as I can.  I know there have been issues with
                  the couple however if I was to return I will be killed."

    18. On 12 October 2016 MS was referred to the Competent  Authority  for
        it to consider whether there were reasonable grounds to believe she
        was a victim of modern slavery. On 17 October  2016  the  Competent
        Authority informed MS there were reasonable grounds to believe  she
        was a victim of human trafficking.  Following  the  review  process
        involving a careful consideration of the case it was concluded,  in
        a decision dated 15 January 2018, that  there  are  not  sufficient
        grounds, on the balance of probabilities, to believe MS has been  a
        victim of modern slavery resulting in her claim  being  refused  in
        the Conclusive Grounds Decision.
    19. MS's account was found to be inconsistent. It  is  written  in  the
        decision:

             "You state that you moved in with your Aunt's cousin  in  2007
             who was abusive to you.  Following this you had to arrange  to
             finance your own studies.  You state that in  2009  your  visa
             expired; you were  struggling  to  pay  the  fees,  your  then
             boyfriend paid via a false card and so  the  college  withheld
             your passport and charged you double (AIR Q36-62).


             However UKVI records note that the college stated you had paid
             the fees in full and  had  bank  statements  showing  you  had
             �1666.29 in your account.  There was a sponsorship letter from
             your Uncle however this was not accepted as he  was  not  your
             father  or  your  official  sponsor.   This   information   is
             inconsistent with your account.  It is considered inconsistent
             that the college did not inform the Home Office of non-payment
             of fees."

    20. It is also noted MS reported Mr [P] to  the  police  for  rape  but
        later retracted the statement. In the decision, in relation to this
        aspect, it is written:

             "Weight is attached  to  the  information  received  form  the
             Metropolitan Police on 12/01/2017.  This provided  details  as
             to why the allegations you made against the couple were closed
             with no charges made; you were free to come and  go  from  the
             property, had a key and later stated you had not  been  raped.
             It is considered this adds weight to the view  that  you  were
             not subjected to actions amounting to modern slavery."

    21.  It  was  not  accepted  MS  had  been  subjected  to   an   active
        transportation/recruitment/harbouring/receipt and faced an abuse of
        power whilst in a position of  vulnerability.  Her  claim  was  not
        found credible by the decision-maker.
    22.  In  relation  to   the   question   of   whether   MS   had   been
        recruited/transported/transferred/harboured/received    for     the
        purposes of sexual exploitation, it was not considered that MS  was
        subjected  to  sexual  exploitation.  The  decision-maker,  in  the
        alternative, reports that  even  if  MS's  claim  that  her  aunt's
        husband tried to influence her to sleep with him and threatened her
        if she ever told her aunt, MS  chose  not  to  enter  into  such  a
        relationship and was not exploited by the aunts husband in any way,
        which did not therefore constitute sexual exploitation.
    23. The decision maker accepted that if MS's claim that she voluntarily
        entered into a relationship with her aunt's nephew who lived in the
        same house and whom she went to live with in Brighton  around  2007
        was true, in which MS claimed the man used  her  for  sex  and  was
        occasionally violent, this indicates MS faced domestic violence but
        that the same was not sufficient to amount to sexual exploitation.
    24. The decision-maker was not satisfied MS  had  established  domestic
        servitude on the facts of the case.
    25. In relation to the alleged abuse by Mr and Mrs [P],  the  decision-
        maker notes MS's claim that she met Mr [P], a former school friend,
        on the street and agreed to go and stay with him and his wife.  The
        decision maker noted MS's claim to have been raped  by  Mr  [P],  a
        claim she later retracted having admitted she was having an  affair
        with him; although she claimed he took advantage of  her  situation
        and told her he would marry her when he obtained his  papers  which
        he obtained via his relationship with Mrs [P]. MS told the decision
        maker that Mr [P] was violent and that she feared being  abused  by
        him.
    26. The decision-maker was not satisfied MS  had  established  she  was
        subjected to sexual exploitation.  MS entered into  a  relationship
        voluntarily with a promise to marry but that when Mrs Prem  learned
        of the affair there was an argument in which Mr Prem blamed MS  and
        her keys were removed from her after which she  never  returned  to
        the household.
    27. On the basis of the evidence as a whole the decision-maker was  not
        satisfied MS met the three constituent elements of the  trafficking
        definition or two constituent elements of  slavery,  servitude  and
        forced/compulsory labour on the balance of probabilities.
    28. MS also seeks to rely upon evidence by way of a  witness  statement
        from Rachel Winterbottom of the  City  Hearts  Integration  Support
        Programme based in  Sheffield,  dated  22  January  2020.   MS  was
        referred to this organisation having exited the NRM  following  the
        negative Conclusive Grounds decision. Support  from  the  programme
        commenced in February 2019. Ms  Winterbottom  states  that  MS  has
        presented with low mood frequently and being stressed, anxious  and
        emotional and gets confused  and  is  incoherent  if  stressed  and
        anxious. The letter refers to MS seeing her  GP  about  her  mental
        health as a result of which she was referred to the  mental  health
        services and to the Doncaster Rape Sexual Abuse Counselling Service
        (DRSACS). Due to there being a six-month wait for counselling  City
        Hearts referred MS to their counselling  service  as  a  result  of
        concerns about her declining mental health. Ms Winterbottom  states
        in the letter:

             "[MS's] symptoms are symptomatic with trauma, which are likely
             to have been caused by the previous  exploitation  and  sexual
             abuse  that  she  has  been  subjected  to  in  the  past  and
             exasperated by the prospects of returning to Mauritius and not
             being safe. I have witnessed  these  same  symptoms  in  other
             victims of human trafficking and modern slavery and am of  the
             opinion that [MS] is indeed a victim of human trafficking  and
             modern slavery. She  is  a  vulnerable  adult  with  poor  and
             fragile mental health who would  suffer  upon  return  to  her
             country. This should be taken into consideration in the making
             of a decision on her asylum claim."

    29. A report from a counsellor of Gardenia Counselling Services,  dated
        22 January 2019 (assumed to be a dating  error  which  should  have
        read 2020), refers to MS beginning counselling on 25  October  2019
        where she presents with symptoms of PTSD, high  levels  of  anxiety
        and overwhelming fear.
    30. The counsellor in the letter records:

             "[MS] was trafficked by  people  within  her  own  tight  knit
             cultural community and feels  very  betrayed  by  them.  After
             being forced into domestic servitude, she was then  repeatedly
             raped by the  man  she  was  employed  by.  This  has  had  an
             extremely  detrimental  effect  on  [MS's]  psychological  and
             emotional well-being.


             [MS] lives in fear that she will be found by  her  traffickers
             and fears for her life and that of her family  back  home,  as
             she has received death threats by a message for  both  herself
             and her parents."

    31. The counsel's opinion is that further counselling/therapy  will  be
        required.
    32. There is also  a  report  from  bpas  (British  Pregnancy  Advisory
        Service) confirming MS had an abortion on 14 May 2014 and a  second
        document with a different reference, from  the  same  organisation,
        dated 1 November although the year of its issue is  not  specified.
        It is  assumed  MS  provides  the  same  as  evidence  of  the  two
        abortions.
    33. A letter from MS's GP addressed to her solicitors dated 22  January
        2020 is in the following terms:

             "I have  been  reviewing  MS  since  September  2019.  I  have
             reviewed her with multiple problems  including  both  physical
             and psychological. These comprise of muscle  and  joint  pains
             which are possibly due to  fibromyalgia.  She  has  also  been
             struggling with psychological symptoms including low mood  and
             anxiety. She also has symptoms  in  keeping  with  PTSD  which
             includes flashbacks and nightmares about previous  experiences
             of abuse prior to being in the United Kingdom.  She  has  been
             referred to a specialist counselling  service  called  DRASACS
             she is also currently  on  medication  for  her  psychological
             problems. This is Citalopram  20mg  once  daily  which  is  an
             antidepressant. She also uses a number of eyedrops.


             MS has clearly been under an enormous amount of stress for the
             period of time that I have been reviewing her. She  has  often
             talked about the significant impact that her  asylum  case  is
             having on her.


             Although I cannot say with certainty  the  exact  impact  that
             being forced to Mauritius would have on her I think  it  would
             be reasonable to say that it would have a  significant  impact
             on her mental health at least in the  short-term.  This  would
             likely comprise of her having further issues with low mood and
             anxiety symptoms."

    34. All the available medical evidence has been considered, even though
        there may be no specific reference to the same, together  with  the
        country information relating to Mauritius.



The Advocates Submissions



    35. The case proceeded by way of submissions only. Throughout a careful
        eye was kept upon MS who did not show adverse signs of being unable
        to cope with the proceedings such that  any  reasonable  adjustment
        was required and nor was any suggested by Mr Brown. MS's  situation
        and presentation has been factored into the decision-making process
        in accordance with guidance for vulnerable witnesses.
    36. Mr Brown submitted the issue was whether it was believed  MS  is  a
        victim of trafficking. He submitted MS had given credible  evidence
        of her experiences and that when she came to  the  United  Kingdom,
        bar suffering from migraines, she was in good health which  is  not
        the position now. Mr Brown sought to rely upon the recent GP report
        together with the medical earlier report of Dr Cowan  a  Consultant
        Psychiatrist  dated  28  July  2018  which  it  was  submitted   is
        supportive of MS's account.
    37. Mr Brown submitted the evidence raises the issue  of  the  risk  of
        suicide in light of her psychological problems which arose  due  to
        the controlling behaviour of her employers. MS does not know  where
        her former employers are, and they could be back in Mauritius.
    38.  Although  there  was  some  evidence  regarding   sufficiency   of
        protection this will not assist MS as she has no support  from  her
        family either whom she claims to have abandoned her and who but are
        not willing to persist.
    39. Mr Brown submitted it should be accepted MS was trafficked  by  her
        employers who are people with reach beyond the United Kingdom  and,
        in the alternative, if that is not the case that her  private  life
        becomes an issue.
    40. It was submitted the evidence shows MS is a vulnerable  person  who
        is fragile and not able to cope on her own on return. There is also
        the risk of suicide with no evidence that the  respondent  has  put
        any steps in place to minimise any such risk.  MS's  mental  health
        will deteriorate if returned with increased  risk  of  suicide.  MS
        also needs assistance by way of counselling and the  lack  of  such
        support gives rise to an article 8 claim as it will impact upon her
        moral and physical integrity.
    41. Mr Diwnycz refers to the  respondent's  decision  and  accepts  the
        medical evidence is relevant. The report of Dr Cowan is  noted  and
        her professional opinion of the risk of suicide  at  the  date  the
        report was written, added to which there is now the  GP  letter  22
        January 2020 containing the  GPs  opinion.   It  is  submitted  the
        question is whether that evidence is enough to show it was  a  real
        risk of suicide sufficient to engage article 3.
    42. Mr Brown in response stated that it was necessary to  consider  the
        background evidence as a whole that in relation to the private life
        Article 8 and the impact upon MS's mental health  due  to  lack  of
        mental health public support in Mauritius.  It  was  submitted  the
        evidence is supportive of a claimed real risk if MS is removed from
        the United Kingdom such that the appeal should be allowed.



Discussion



    43. It is not disputed that MS's distress is real. In the copy  of  her
        medical records provided to the respondent on 1 March 2017 there is
        an entry recorded by a counsellor dated 25  November  2016  in  the
        following terms:

             "History: 2ns session - shared a lot of her past  experiences.
             Voiced regret, shame and a lot of fear. She said I  went  from
             one place to another trusting people that ended up being used.
             Said "I feel like a tissue that people used and thrown in  the
             bin". We explored what this felt for her and she said "I  have
             WHY WHY WHY and how did all this happen to me and WHEN will it
             end"."

    44. A person falling in with those who may not share proper  values  or
        who are prepared to  take  advantage  of  individuals  or  who  are
        trusted as to their personality, intentions, and demeanour taken as
        according with those of another person, but which  later  turn  out
        otherwise does not,  per  se,  entitle  a  person  to  a  grant  of
        international protection.
    45. MS entered the United Kingdom as a visitor and then a student.  She
        stayed with an aunt. There is no credible evidence of  difficulties
        being experienced with this relative. MS  claims  as  a  result  of
        problems with her uncle she was forced to leave this  accommodation
        and fell in with a third party who took the money she  provide  for
        the payment of her college fees which he then tried to pay for with
        a false credit card, which has been shown to be a claim that  lacks
        credibility for the reasons set  out  in  the  conclusive  decision
        following the college confirming that the fees  had  been  paid  in
        full with MS providing evidence of further funds being available to
        her.
    46. The evidence supports MS's claim to have had an abortion which ties
        in with her claim to have had a sexual  relationship.  Although  MS
        initially reported  having  been  raped  to  the  police  when  the
        relationship with Mr and Mrs [P]  broke  down  the  allegation  was
        later withdrawn. The evidence supports a finding that  although  MS
        may have been misled the relationship with Mr [P] was consensual.
    47. That is not to undervalue the distress that will no doubt have been
        felt by MS when she realised she was being used by this individual,
        as a result of the abortion, and what she  may  have  felt  by  his
        betrayal when Mr Penn blamed her for their relationship  when  this
        was discovered by his wife.
    48. In relation to the submission by Mr Brown that MS is  a  victim  of
        trafficking/modern day slavery, this was  considered  and  rejected
        following the NRM referral.
    49. In DC (trafficking: protection/human rights appeals) Albania [2019]
        UKUT 351 it was said that:

          i)  In  a  protection  appeal,  the   "reasonable   grounds"   or
             "conclusive grounds" decision of the Competent Authority  (CA)
             will be part of the evidence that the tribunal  will  have  to
             assess in reaching its decision on  that  appeal,  giving  the
             CA's decision such weight as is due, bearing in mind that  the
             standard of proof applied by the CA in a "conclusive  grounds"
             decision was the balance of probabilities;


         ii) In a human rights appeal, a finding by the tribunal  that  the
             CA has failed to reach a  rational  decision  on  whether  the
             appellant has been the victim of trafficking, such  as  to  be
             eligible for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  for  that
             reason alone, may lead the tribunal to allow the human  rights
             appeal, on the basis that removing the appellant at this stage
             would be a disproportionate interference with the  appellant's
             Article 8 ECHR rights. This scenario is,  however,  of  narrow
             ambit and is unlikely to be much encountered in practice  (the
             UT stressed that all the tribunal would be  finding  would  be
             that removal would be disproportionate before  the  respondent
             was able to rectify the failure);


        iii) In a human rights appeal, the question whether  the  appellant
             has been the victim of trafficking  may  be  relevant  to  the
             issue of whether the  appellant's  removal  would  breach  the
             ECHR, even where it is not asserted there  is  a  trafficking-
             related risk of harm in the country  of  proposed  return  and
             irrespective of what is said in sub-paragraph (ii) above: e.g.
             where the fact of trafficking may have  caused  the  appellant
             physical or psychological harm. Here, as in sub-paragraph  (i)
             above, the CA's decision on past trafficking will be  part  of
             the evidence to be assessed by the tribunal.

    50. It is not made out  on  the  evidence  that  the  decision  of  the
        Competent Authority in this case is  irrational.  Even  though  the
        question of whether MS is a victim  of  trafficking/modern  slavery
        was considered the balance of probabilities rather than  the  lower
        standard applicable to a protection appeal, it is not made out that
        the findings on either basis are  unsafe.  The  evidence  from  the
        college clearly undermined completely MS's  claim  in  relation  to
        that core aspect of the case. The evidence  from  the  Metropolitan
        Police and other sources made available, including the  appellant's
        own statements and medical reports, support the conclusion that the
        real issue is the trust MS put  in  certain  people  but  ended  up
        feeling being used by them.
    51. The Office of the United Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees
        (UNHCR) guidelines on international protection state: 'An important
        aspect of this definition is an understanding of trafficking  as  a
        process comprising a number of interrelated actions rather  than  a
        single act at a given  point  in  time.  Once  initial  control  is
        secured, victims are generally moved to a place where  there  is  a
        market for their services, often where they  lack  language  skills
        and other basic knowledge that would  enable  them  to  seek  help.
        While these  actions  can  all  take  place  within  one  country's
        borders,  they  can  also  take  place  across  borders  with   the
        recruitment taking place in one country and the  act  of  receiving
        the victim and the exploitation taking place in another. Whether or
        not an international border is crossed, the  intention  to  exploit
        the individual concerned underpins the entire process.'
    52. It is not made out on the evidence that MS has been the subject  of
        threat or use of force or other form of  coercion  to  achieve  the
        consent of any of the other individual she refers to having control
        over her. MS fails to establish that any consent which she  clearly
        gave to the sexual relationship, the paid and unpaid employment  in
        her  aunts  property   as   a   result   of   obtaining   rent-free
        accommodation, was obtained as a result of  the  threat  of  force,
        abduction, fraud, or abuse of power, although MS's claim based upon
        the deception of Mr [P] and her alleged position  of  vulnerability
        is noted. It is not made out however that any  deception  that  may
        have been employed is such as that which occurs when a person  ends
        up being exploited through prostitution  who  may  originally  have
        been under  the  impression  there  were  legitimate  education  or
        employment opportunities.
    53. It is not made out that MS is a victim of exploitation such  as  to
        enable a finding to be made that this is a modern slavery  case  on
        the facts.
    54. There is also no credible evidence of physical coercion against MS,
        including the threat of the use of force or the actual use of force
        against her, or withholding travel or immigration documents.
    55. There is no credible evidence of the use of psychological  coercion
        such as blackmail, forcing MS to pay an excessive amount  of  money
        for substandard accommodation, making significant  deductions  from
        her 'salary', threats of rejection from, or disapproval by  a  peer
        group or family members or social stigma. It is in  particular  not
        made out this is a case in which MS has been exploited sexually  or
        subjected to sexual exploitation or other forms of sexual  violence
        to entice her over time to take part in activity in which  she  may
        not be an entirely willing participant.
    56. It is also not made out MS has been trafficked for the  purpose  of
        'exploitation' in the form of either: sexual  exploitation,  forced
        labour or services, slavery  or  practices  similar  to  slavery  ,
        servitude, forced criminality, removal of  organs  (also  known  as
        organ harvesting), on the facts.
    57. The relevant issues in such cases is the  purpose  of  the  acts  a
        victim complains of. It is not made  out  the  intention  of  those
        involved was for the purposes of exploitation. It is not  made  out
        on the facts this is a gender related violence case.
    58. Nor is it made out that such aspects, in any event, tip the balance
        of the article 8 assessment in MS's favour.
    59. In relation to the risk of suicide Mr Diwnycz referred  to  [11-13]
        of the report of Dr Cowen which is in the following terms:

             "11.     Suicide: [MS] took some preparatory steps to end  her
                  life but was talked out of this by a friend she met  in  a
                  shop whilst thinking of buying the pills. It is  difficult
                  to know, had she not met the  friend,  whether  she  would
                  have taken any further steps i.e. actually  purchased  the
                  pills and taken them. She has taken no  preparatory  steps
                  towards suicide either before or since.  Even  though  she
                  may have had suicidal thoughts, she has been able to argue
                  herself out of these.


             12.  Risk of suicide if returned to Mauritius:  [MS]  told  me
                  that  she  had  not  considered      being   returned   to
                  Mauritius as a possibility, despite the fact that the Home
                  Office could decide to deport her. [MS's]  assertion  that
                  she has "never been free" and doesn't know her  own  mind,
                  combined with comments from her counsellor suggesting that
                  she  isn't  very  realistic,  makes  me  think  that   she
                  struggles,  and  has  always  struggled,  to   cope   with
                  difficult situations. When pressed as to what she would do
                  about accommodation in Mauritius eventually  she  told  me
                  she would live with her family. She was pessimistic  about
                  her chances of gaining employment.  She  did  not  mention
                  suicide as a response  to  being  returned  to  Mauritius.
                  Obviously a suicide attempt could not be  ruled  out,  and
                  suicide  attempts  are  not  necessarily  related  to  the
                  severity of a mental  illness.  However  given  MS's  past
                  history (see above, J.11)) it is unlikely  that  MS  would
                  make a  serious  suicide  attempt  faced  with  return  to
                  Mauritius.


             13.  MS fears that Mr and Mrs Pam could harm her or her family
                  were she returned to Mauritius on  the  basis  of  threats
                  they have made. I have no  way  of  knowing  whether  MS's
                  fears are realistic; her fears  regarding  this  are  not,
                  however, based on any delusional thinking."

    60. The reference to the ability to  return  to  live  with  family  in
        Mauritius was noted by Dr Cowen. There is no credible evidence this
        option is no longer available to MS or that she  will  not  receive
        support from this source if returned.
    61. There is also recorded in the copy of MS's medical records constant
        reference to there being no active suicidal thoughts detected.
    62. It is accepted that in principle, the risk of  suicide  can  engage
        Article 3, but the threshold is very high. In J v SSHD [2005]  EWCA
        Civ 629 the Court of Appeal set out the test in Article 3 cases  as
        follows.  (i) the feared ill treatment must be of a  minimum  level
        of severity; (ii) a causal link must be shown between  the  act  of
        removal and the inhuman treatment relied on;  (iii)  in  a  foreign
        case the Article 3 threshold will be  particularly  high.  (iv)  in
        principle it was possible for an Article 3 case to succeed  on  the
        basis of a risk of suicide and (v) in a  foreign  case  of  suicide
        risk it would be relevant to  consider  whether  the  fear  of  ill
        treatment in the receiving state was objectively well  founded;  if
        not, this would weigh against there being  a  real  risk  of  there
        being a breach; and (vi) it would  also  be  relevant  to  consider
        whether the removing  and/or  the  receiving  state  had  effective
        mechanisms to reduce the risk; if there were, this would also weigh
        against there being a real risk of a breach.  The Court  of  Appeal
        went on to say that the Tribunal was correct to consider separately
        the risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 in the UK,  in  transit
        and in Sri Lanka.  In relation to the risk in the UK it was open to
        the Tribunal to conclude that the risk of suicide in the  UK  would
        be adequately managed by the UK authorities and that in combination
        with the support of the appellant's family  they  could  bring  the
        risk of suicide to below the Article 3 threshold  when the decision
        to remove was taken.  In relation to the risk of suicide  on  route
        the Tribunal was entitled to infer  that  the  Secretary  of  State
        would take all reasonable steps to discharge his obligations  under
        section 6 of the Human Rights Act and take judicial notice  of  the
        arrangements that the Secretary of State made to escort  vulnerable
        persons on return.  In relation to the risk of suicide in Sri Lanka
        the Tribunal was entitled to take into account  the  evidence  that
        there would be family support on return, that  the  claimant  would
        have access to medical treatment, and that his fears of persecution
        were not objectively justified.
    63. In AA (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 23 the Court  of  Appeal  acknowledged
        distinguished between  "domestic"  cases,  where  the  risk  is  of
        suicide in this country on being told of the decision or of suicide
        in transit, and "foreign" cases, where  the  risk  relates  to  the
        situation after arrival in the receiving country.  The  Court  said
        "Any Immigration Judge is entitled to take the view that  the  risk
        of suicide in the UK upon learning of a final  decision  to  remove
        her would be adequately managed in this  country  by  the  relevant
        authorities:  see  J,  ante,  paragraph  57.  ...   Moreover,   the
        Immigration Judge  would  be  entitled  to  assume  that  the  Home
        Secretary would take appropriate  measures  to  guard  against  any
        suicide attempt during the relatively  brief  transit  to  Belgium,
        including the provision of appropriately qualified escorts: see  J,
        paragraphs 61 and 62."
    64. In AXB (Art 3 health: obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT 397
        it was confirmed that where an individual, asserts that he would be
        at real  risk  of  committing  suicide,  following  return  to  the
        Receiving State, the threshold for establishing Article 3  harm  is
        the high threshold described in N v United Kingdom [2008] ECHR 453,
        unless the risk involves hostile actions  of  the  Receiving  State
        towards the individual, which does not in MS's case.
    65. Also in AXB it was found (i) In a case where an individual, asserts
        that his removal from the Returning State would violate his Article
        3 ECHR rights because  of  the  consequences  to  his  health,  the
        obligation on the authorities of a Returning State dealing  with  a
        health case is primarily one of examining the fears of an applicant
        as to what will occur following return and assessing the  evidence.
        In order to fulfil its obligations, a Returning State must  provide
        "appropriate procedures" to allow that examination  and  assessment
        to be carried out.  In the UK, that is met in the first place by an
        examination of the case by the Secretary of State and  then  by  an
        examination on appeal by the Tribunal  and  an  assessment  of  the
        evidence before it;  (ii)  There  is  no  free-standing  procedural
        obligation on a Returning State to make enquiries of the  Receiving
        State concerning treatment in that State or  obtain  assurances  in
        that regard.  Properly understood, what is referred to at [185]  to
        [187] of the Grand Chamber's judgment in  Paposhvili  concerns  the
        discharge of respective burdens of proof; (iii) The  burden  is  on
        the individual appellant to establish that, if he is removed, there
        is a real risk of a breach of Article 3 ECHR to  the  standard  and
        threshold which apply.  If the appellant provides evidence which is
        capable of proving his case to  the  standard  which  applies,  the
        Secretary of State will be precluded from  removing  the  appellant
        unless she is able to provide evidence countering  the  appellant's
        evidence  or  dispelling  doubts  arising   from   that   evidence.
        Depending  on  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case,  such
        evidence might include general evidence, specific evidence from the
        Receiving State following enquiries made  or  assurances  from  the
        Receiving State concerning the treatment of the appellant following
        return.
    66. The evidence does not establish a credible  real  risk  of  suicide
        although it is accepted MS might react adversely to being told  she
        is to be returned to Mauritius. It is not made out  treatment  will
        not be available in the United Kingdom and MS has  failed  to  show
        that any treatment that will be required will not be  available  in
        Mauritius from doctors in primary, secondary and/or tertiary health
        care facilities if required. It is accepted the  standard  of  care
        for mental health issues is not the same in  Mauritius  is  in  the
        United Kingdom, but MS fails to establish  the  services  that  are
        available will not be sufficient to prevent a breach of  article  3
        on return.
    67. MS claims to have a fear on return from Mr and Mrs [P] but even  if
        Mr [P] is a singer who may return to Mauritius from time to time it
        is not made out there is a credible real risk  of  harm  from  this
        individual to the  appellant  if  she  is  returned.  There  is  no
        evidence of ongoing threats while she has remained  in  the  United
        Kingdom sufficient to warrant a grant of international  protection.
        Whilst MS feels she has been badly wronged  by  these  individuals,
        and has a subjective fear of them, MS fails to establish such  fear
        is objectively well-founded sufficient to entitle her to a grant of
        international protection. MS has  also  failed,  despite  it  being
        raised from [32] of the reasons for refusal letter, to  demonstrate
        that the authorities in Mauritius will be unwilling  or  unable  to
        offer her protection if she sought it in the circumstances that she
        describes.  MS  fails  to  establish  any  credible  real  risk  of
        persecution by the State or from non-state  actor  from  which  the
        state is unable to provide protection, for a Convention  reason  or
        otherwise.
    68. MS fails to establish an entitlement to a  grant  of  international
        protection  under  either  the  Refugee  Convention,  Qualification
        Directive, Immigration Rules, or Articles 2 or 3 ECHR.
    69. In relation to Article 8 private life based upon the withdrawal  of
        counselling and support in the UK, in N v UK (Application 26565/05)
        the Grand Chamber upheld the decision of the  House  of  Lords  and
        said  that  in  medical  cases  Article  3  only  applied  in  very
        exceptional circumstances particularly as the suffering was not the
        result of an intentional act or omission of a  State  or  non-State
        body.  The EctHR said that Article 3 could  not  be  relied  on  to
        address the disparity in medical care  between  Contracting  States
        and the applicant's state of origin.  The fact  that  the  person's
        circumstances, including his  or  her  life  expectancy,  would  be
        significantly reduced was not sufficient in itself to give rise  to
        a breach of Article 3.  Those  same  principles  had  to  apply  in
        relation to the expulsion of any person afflicted with any serious,
        naturally occurring physical or mental illness  which  might  cause
        suffering pain or reduced life expectancy and  required  specialist
        medical treatment that might not  be  readily  available  or  which
        might only be available at considerable cost.   Notably  the  court
        held that no separate issues arose under Article 8(2) in that  case
        and so it  was  not  even  necessary  to  consider  the  Claimant's
        submission that removal would  engage  her  right  to  respect  for
        private life.
    70. MS fails to establish a credible breach of Article 3 on  the  basis
        of her medical needs.
    71. In relation to MS's mental health and Article 8(2) ECHR,  in  Djali
        [2003] EWCA Civ 1371 the Appellant's wife was suffering from severe
        PTSD.  Medical  reports  indicated  that  she  was  only  on  anti-
        depressant medication because she was  too  disturbed  to  commence
        psychotherapy.  The psychiatrist was satisfied that  returning  her
        to Kosovo would have a  detrimental  effect  on  her  physical  and
        mental health.  Simon Browne LJ said that she  was  not  undergoing
        psychotherapy treatment in the UK so, if  such  treatment  was  not
        available in Kosovo the  actual  effect  of  return  could  not  be
        serious harm.  At most, return would "imperil her  prospects  of  a
        better recovery" which would not engage Art 8(1).  Simon Browne  LJ
        did not consider that the Art 8 (1) threshold was  crossed  but  he
        went on to say that, even if Art 8 was engaged, this  was  only  "a
        borderline case of interference"; it was a case  widely  replicated
        throughout the asylum system; and,  given  the  grave  problems  of
        asylum overload facing this country, it  was  inevitable  that  the
        decision maker would regard the interests of immigration control as
        the imperative and overriding factor in such a case.
    72. In Nacic and Others  v  Sweden  (Application  no.  16567/10)  ECtHR
        (Fifth Section) 2012 it was held that aliens who  were  subject  to
        expulsion could not, in principle, claim any entitlement to  remain
        in the territory of a Contracting State in  order  to  continue  to
        benefit from medical, social  or  other  forms  of  assistance  and
        services  provided  by  the  expelling  State.  The  fact  that  an
        applicant's circumstances, including his life expectancy, would  be
        significantly reduced if he were to be removed from the Contracting
        State was not sufficient in itself to give  rise  to  a  breach  of
        Article 3. The decision to remove an alien who was suffering from a
        serious  mental  or  physical  illness  to  a  country  where   the
        facilities for the treatment of that illness were inferior to those
        available in the Contracting State may raise an issue under Article
        3, but only in a very  exceptional  case,  where  the  humanitarian
        grounds against the removal were compelling:  N  v  United  Kingdom
        (Application no. 26565/05), 27 May 2008 considered (para 49)
    73. The test under UK domestic law remains the correct test - see EA  &
        Ors (Article 3 medical cases - Paposhvili  not  applicable)  [2017]
        UKUT 445).
    74. It is accepted MS has formed a private life in the  United  Kingdom
        including engagement with the support services referred to  in  her
        bundle. So  far  as  the  issue  was  the  proportionality  of  any
        interference with that private life caused  by  the  withdrawal  of
        counselling  and  support  services,  I  find  the  respondent  has
        established  that  any  interference  is   proportionate   to   the
        legitimate interest  relied  upon.  MS's  status  has  always  been
        precarious since her leave expired, MS is not economically  active,
        MS has no legitimate expectation to be able to remain in the United
        Kingdom whatever her wish to do so,  MS  has  failed  to  establish
        treatment  is  not  available  in  Mauritius,  and  has  failed  to
        establish that returning her will amount to an unlawful reach of  a
        protected right pursuant to article 3 on medical grounds or article
        8 medical and private life grounds ECHR.
    75. Whilst there is considerable sympathy for MS  whose  life  has  not
        turned out as she would have wished, such sympathy  cannot  be  the
        basis for finding  the  respondent's  decision  not  proportionate.
        Having carefully considered  all  the  competing  aspects  of  this
        appeal the only conclusion realistically available on the facts and
        in law is that the appeal must be dismissed.


Decision

    76. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    77. I make an anonymity order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  No  report   of   these
        proceedings  (in  whatever  form)  shall  directly  or   indirectly
        identify the appellant. Failure to comply  with  this  order  could
        lead to a contempt of court".


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27 February 2020
