
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01022/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 June 2019                      |On 27 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     KA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Pickering, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as KA.




Introduction

      1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to his international protection claim.

Background

      2. In a decision sent on 25 March 2019,  First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')
         Judge Moxon dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,
         having made adverse credibility findings regarding the  appellant's
         claimed political activities and having  accepted  that  there  was
         good reason to depart from the country  guidance  in  AA  (Non-Arab
         Darfuris  -  relocation)  Sudan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00056  and   MM
         (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC) ('the CG cases').

      3. At the FTT hearing the respondent accepted that the appellant is  a
         citizen of Sudan and  a  non-Arab  Darfuri  (member  of  the  Berti
         tribe).  It follows  that  if  the  CG  cases  were  followed,  the
         appellant would be entitled to  refugee  status.   However  at  the
         beginning of the FTT hearing the respondent  submitted  that  there
         was cogent country background evidence to support  the  proposition
         that the CG cases can  be  departed  from  i.e.  there  is  now  an
         internal relocation option  to  Khartoum,  for  non-Arab  Darfuris.
         Again,  at  the  beginning  of  the   hearing,   the   respondent's
         representative submitted a Country Policy and  Information  Note  -
         Sudan: Non-Arab Darfuri, dated September 2018 ('the CPIN').

Grounds of appeal

      4. The appellant challenged the FTT's decision on three grounds:

          1) The FTT should have granted an adjournment for  the  appellant
             to address the submission, made for  the  first  time  at  the
             hearing before the FTT, that the CPIN  justifies  a  departure
             from the CG cases;

          2) There was insufficient cogent country background  evidence  to
             justify a departure from the CG cases;

          3) The FTT's factual finding that the appellant failed to provide
             evidence that Sudanese officials  can  be  bribed  to  provide
             documents is inconsistent with the country background evidence
             before it.

      5. In a decision dated 23 April 2019, FTT  Judge  Swaney  granted  the
         appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT') on  all
         grounds.

      6. The respondent has submitted a rule 24 notice dated  10  May  2019.
         This focuses upon the FTT's reasons for refusing an adjournment and
         contends that there was no unfairness.

      7. The matter now comes before me to determine whether  Judge  Moxon's
         decision contains an error of law.



Hearing

      8. At the beginning of the hearing Mrs Pettersen conceded that the FTT
         erred in law in reaching the findings  it  did  and  in  particular
         grounds (1) and (2) were clearly made out.   She placed no reliance
         on the rule 24 notice.

      9. Both representatives agreed that the FTT decision  contains  errors
         of law for the reasons identified in the grounds of appeal and that
         it is appropriate for the decision to be re-made de novo in the FTT
         as extensive  fact-finding  may  be  necessary,  dependent  on  the
         continued applicability of the CG cases.  In any event, this  is  a
         case in which fairness demanded an adjournment of the FTT  hearing.
         Having considered all the matters in the round and in the light  of
         para 7.2 of the relevant Senior President's Practice  Statement,  I
         indicated that I agreed that this is an appropriate case  to  remit
         to the FTT.

     10. Mrs Pettersen confirmed that the respondent did not resile from his
         concession before the FTT that the appellant is  a  member  of  the
         Berti tribe and the FTT should re-make the decision accordingly and
         in pursuant to all the  relevant  country  evidence  including  any
         updated country guidance.

Error of law discussion

Ground 1 - adjournment

     11. It is uncontroversial that  the  country  guidance  in  a  CG  case
         remains in place until it is expressly superseded or replaced.  The
         relevant country guidance in relation to Sudan was updated after  a
         hearing in 2014.  This has been followed by the respondent for many
         years.  The decision letter in this case is dated 21  January  2019
         and does not refer to the CG case at all.  Significantly, it  post-
         dates the September 2018 CPIN.  Yet, the decision letter  does  not
         give the slightest hint that the CG cases on Sudan  should  not  be
         followed because of the further information contained in the  CPIN.
         The situation in Sudan has been evolving and fluid for many  years.
         Given these circumstances, Mrs Pettersen has properly conceded that
         procedural fairness required the FTT to  grant  an  adjournment  in
         order to meet the respondent's submission (made for the first  time
         at the hearing) that the CG cases on Sudan should not be  followed.
         The decision letter in this case was drafted only six weeks  before
         the FTT  hearing.   The  appellant  and  his  representatives  were
         entitled to assume that the respondent did not dispute that the  CG
         cases remained appropriate, notwithstanding the  changes  described
         in the CPIN, when the respondent failed to make  any  reference  to
         this within the decision letter itself.

     12. As acknowledged by Mrs Pettersen, it matters not that the appellant
         has focussed upon his  political  activities  and  not  his  tribal
         origin.  If the appellant is at risk  of  persecution  for  reasons
         relating to his tribal origin, then the country  guidance  must  be
         applied.



Ground 2 - CG

     13. Given the conclusions I have reached on ground 1, there is no  need
         for me to address ground 3.

Ground 3 - credibility

     14. Mrs Pettersen was also correct to concede that the FTT erred in law
         in finding at [35(b)] that there was no country evidence to support
         the appellant's claim that he was able  to  obtain  documents  with
         bribery.  There is extensive country evidence  to  support  endemic
         official corruption in Sudan.  Although this constituted one reason
         for the FTT's adverse credibility findings, the FTT regarded it  to
         be  sufficient   to   significantly   undermine   the   appellant's
         credibility.  This finding therefore infects the remainder  of  the
         credibility findings.

Decision

     15. The FTT's decision contains an error of law and is set aside.

     16. The decision is remitted to the FTT where it shall be remade  by  a
         FTT Judge other than Judge Moxon.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
25 June 2019

