
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01068/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 22 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Stainthorpe, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant, who is a national of Iran, appeals with permission,  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M Wilson.  For reasons  given  in
    his decision dated 15 April 2019, the judge dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated 22 January  2019
    refusing to grant asylum and humanitarian protection.  The basis of the
    appellant's claim is that he fled Iran because he was  threatened  with
    forced conversion by the Pasdaran from being a Sunni to a Shia  Muslim.
    He is of Kurdish ethnicity.  There was no dispute as to the appellant's
    origins or that he was a Sunni Muslim.

 2.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  of   his
    difficulties  with  the  Pasdaran  and  the  judge  came  to  the  same
    conclusion.  At [9] he explained:

         "9.  I find  the  appellant's  claim  that  the  Pasdaran  in  Iran
             attempted to force him to convert his religion to Shia  Muslim
             from his born-into faith  of  Sunni  Muslim  was  inconsistent
             throughout; indeed, so erratic and unreliable was his  account
             that there was little in it that  I  could  believe.   I  also
             found him to be an evasive witness during the  course  of  his
             oral evidence, this necessitating the repetition  of  numerous
             questions because he chose to  answer  them  by  referring  to
             matters about which he was not asked.   At  one  point  I  was
             constrained to intervene in the proceedings to remind  him  of
             the solemn promise he made at the outset of the  hearing  that
             he would speak the truth in answer to all questions put to him
             in his evidence.  I was also satisfied  that  his  failure  to
             address questions was  not  due  to  any  misunderstanding  as
             between him and the interpreter, since at the  outset  of  the
             hearing they each confirmed that they understood  one  another
             and they seemed  to  me  to  do  so  throughout  the  hearing.
             Nonetheless, I did check with the interpreter as to whether in
             his professional  judgment  there  were  or  might  have  been
             problems of understanding or misunderstanding between him  and
             the and the appellant.  He gave me his  assurance  that  there
             were not, and confirmed that  they  freely  conversed  without
             difficulty."

 3. This passage is followed by a detailed survey of the evidence  that  is
    interspersed with the judge's reasons for  disbelieving  the  appellant
    culminating in a finding at [21], as follows:

         "21. My assessment of the appellant's account and asylum claim.   I
             do not believe any part of the appellant's  claimed  chronicle
             of events leading up to his departure from Iran for the United
             Kingdom.  I am satisfied that  he  gave  conflicting  accounts
             about all aspects of  his  claim,  including  the  threats  he
             allegedly received in Iran and as to who made them; this  part
             of his account was riddled with speculation and inconsistency.
              He was likewise inconsistent about  never  personally  having
             been threatened, about his father only having been threatened,
             then claiming that the whole family was  threatened.   He  was
             likewise inconsistent as to there being a  single  threat,  or
             otherwise,  and  inconsistent  about  his   father's   alleged
             disappearance, ranging from him going  out  to  work  one  day
             never to return, to his mother witnessing the Pasdaran in  the
             act of kidnapping him.  He provided a shifting  account  about
             when the alleged threats were made and as to when  it  was  he
             left Iran, and an account about  why  he  secured  a  passport
             before he left the country that  cast  grave  doubt  upon  his
             claim to have fled Iran in fear of his life.  In addition,  he
             concealed  information  from  the   respondent   about   which
             countries he passed through on his way to the United  Kingdom,
             only revealing in his oral evidence  that  he  spent  time  in
             Italy, but  giving  an  incredible  account  as  to  how  this
             information came to light.  I find that  irrespective  of  any
             other considerations,  his  actions  in  this  matter  further
             damaged under statute his already damaged credibility.  Simply
             put, I do not believe a word of his account,  I  am  satisfied
             that his persecution claim was cooked-up  and  fabricated  and
             that it has no merit."

 4. Thereafter the judge  directed  himself  in  relation  to  two  country
    guidance decisions relevant to the appellant's case, being SSH  and  HR
    (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]  UKUT  308  and  HB
    (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430.  The judge then explained why  he  did
    not consider the appellant qualified for humanitarian protection.   The
    judge  also  set  out  an  Article  8  analysis  and   concluded   that
    interference with the appellant's private life  was  proportionate  and
    furthermore considered the case with  reference  to  Article  3.   With
    further reference to HB (Kurds) Iran CG he concluded that  this  ground
    was not made out.

 5. The appellant  is  the  author  of  the  grounds  of  challenge.   With
    reference to the judge's observations in  the  decision  based  on  the
    appellant's performance at the hearing  and  cross-examination,  it  is
    argued that the judge had made no assessment  of  the  possible  causes
    such as the lack of education  or  mental  illness.   Accordingly,  the
    appellant contends that he  had  not  received  a  fair  hearing.   The
    paragraph in question was as follows:

         "16.  Continuing  his  line  of   questioning,   the   respondent's
             representative put to the appellant a fourth time that he  had
             given different versions  of  what  happened  to  his  father,
             including in his witness statement  where  he  said  that  his
             mother witnessed his father being  kidnapped.   He  asked  the
             appellant whether this was or was  not  true.   The  appellant
             replied that he could not remember, but he then denied  having
             stated   his   father   was   kidnapped.    The   respondent's
             representative reminded him that he had put it in his  witness
             statement, a witness statement that he signed as true  only  a
             month ago and which he adopted as part of his  oral  evidence.
             It was at this point that I intervened to remind the appellant
             of the promise he gave at the outset of the  hearing  that  he
             would speak the truth in his evidence.  He again  agreed  that
             he would do so.  I asked the  respondent's  representative  to
             continue.  He asked the appellant why he stated in his witness
             statement  that  his  mother  had   witnessed   his   father's
             kidnapping.  The appellant replied that he did not  know  why,
             but his mother knew that his father had been threatened.   The
             respondent's representative asked  the  appellant  whether  he
             wrote his own witness statement, to which he replied that  his
             mother knew this.  I formed the opinion from  these  exchanges
             that the appellant was  simply  not  answering  the  questions
             asked of him.  I formed the opinion that his evidence  was  so
             fitful and changeable that it could not be relied upon as  the
             truth."

 6. In granting  permission  to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane
    extended time and considered that the judge  had  "...  arguably  acted
    irrationally or unfairly and  arguably  pre-judged  the  issue  of  the
    appellant's credibility when paragraphs 9 and 16 his decision (as cited
    above) are considered.

 7. The grounds of challenge were drafted it appears without  help  form  a
    legal representative in which the appellant raises  as  an  explanation
    for the problems in giving the evidence  a  failure  by  the  judge  to
    assess possible causes such as a "lack of education of mental illness".
     It is contented that the appellant had not been given a fair hearing.

 8. The appellant was  unrepresented  and  assisted  by  a  Kurdish  Sorani
    interpreter.  He was satisfied that he understood  the  appellant  with
    whom I had an exchange as to the nature of  the  hearing  and  why  his
    appeal had been dismissed.  I referred  also  to  the  basis  on  which
    permission to appeal had been granted.  I asked him if  there  was  any
    medical evidence that he was suffering  from  a  mental  illness.   The
    appellant explained that he had  been  to  see  a  doctor  in  Scotland
    although he could not remember when.  He had done so to tell the doctor
    that he could not sleep and that he forgot things easily and  was  very
    forgetful.  This had taken place before the hearing.  He had asked  the
    doctor to provide a report and medicine.  The appellant was  given  the
    latter.  He had also asked for someone to support him mentally and told
    that he would be sent a letter.  The appellant confirmed  that  he  had
    told his "lawyers" about this but that he had also told his solicitors.



 9. As to whether he had been to school in Iran,  the  appellant  explained
    that he was uneducated and that he could not read.  As to  the  judge's
    decision, the appellant affirmed that he had told the truth and did not
    understand why the case had been  refused.   He  was  unaware  who  had
    prepared the grounds of challenge but thought maybe his solicitors had.



10. By way of submissions, Mr Stainthorpe explained that the appellant  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2018 and that his hearing had
    been a year later.  He had been represented by a solicitor  during  the
    hearing and there was no evidence  that  the  appellant  suffered  from
    anything that would undermine his evidence.  No issues had been  raised
    at the hearing on this aspect.  As to the observations by FtTJ Keane in
    granting permission,  Mr  Stainthorpe  responded  that  the  judge  had
    recorded throughout the evidence he had heard  and  there  was  nothing
    unfair in the judge reminding the appellant to  tell  the  truth.   The
    decision revealed that the judge had also checked the position with the
    interpreter.

11. I reminded the appellant at the end of those submissions which had been
    translated that the position of the Secretary of State was  that  there
    had been no unfairness.  The judge had not made a mistake and  I  asked
    the appellant if there was anything he wished to add  to  what  he  had
    said already.  His response was that he insisted he had told the truth.

12. There was no evidence before the judge of the appellant suffering  from
    any mental health issues.  The appellant was represented by counsel and
    there is no indication in the decision of any intervention based on the
    points raised in the grounds.  The FtT is a  specialist  one  which  is
    accustomed to hearing evidence in circumstances where an appellant  may
    have limited education.  The judge was clearly alive to  the  potential
    issue of comprehension in the light of  the  enquiries  made  that  are
    recorded in paragraph [9] cited above.  There is no reason  to  suppose
    that the judge had made up his mind about the  appellant's  credibility
    prior to his intervention recorded in [9].  As will be seen  from  this
    paragraph, which is cited  above,  the  judge  also  checked  with  the
    interpreter to ensure that the  appellant  understood  what  was  being
    said.

13.  Turning  to  the  judge's  reasons  for  rejecting   the   appellant's
    credibility the judge was entitled to note the inconsistencies relating
    to  the  core  of  the  account  in  paragraph  [12]  and  the  further
    inconsistency is that he considered  emerged  from  a  reading  of  the
    interviews of the appellant as explained in paragraph [13].

14. Other inconsistencies are addressed in paragraph [14] including, in  my
    judgment, a key aspect at [15] as follows:

         "The  appellant  claimed  that  his  father  disappeared,  this  as
         disclosed at this asylum interview in answer to  question  59.   He
         stated that he went missing ten days before the appellant  and  his
         mother left Iran.  In answer to questions 65-66 his  father  simply
         went out to the farm and never came back.  However, at paragraph 33
         of his witness statement he gave a  completely  different  account.
         He claimed that his mother witnessed his father being kidnapped  by
         the Pasdaran.  At the hearing the respondent's  representative  put
         the account discrepancy to him, asking him  which  version  of  the
         same matter was true.  The appellant replied that his  father  went
         out to work one day but did not return.  The question was repeated,
         this time the appellant replied that his mother  saw  the  Pasdaran
         and stated  that  they  had  threatened  his  father  before.   The
         question was repeated a third time.  He replied that his father did
         not return."

15. Paragraphs [16] to [19] continue with a record of the appellant's  oral
    testimony and the  judge's  findings  as  a  result.   Aspects  of  the
    appellant's journey to the United Kingdom were addressed  in  [18]  and
    [19] leading to a conclusion at [20]:

         "I find that the above exchanges provide ample illustration of  the
         appellant inventing or adapting his  evidence  as  he  went  along,
         depending upon the prevailing direction of the questions.   I  find
         his evidence in this matter, in common  with  other  areas  of  his
         account, inconsistent,  contradictory  and  completely  lacking  in
         credibility."

16. In my judgment the judge's determination reveals a careful analysis  of
    all the evidence and conclusions on the appellant's  credibility  which
    were open to him.  I am not satisfied that he erred on the basis  of  a
    challenge on which permission has been granted.  I  am  satisfied  that
    the judge gave legally correct reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  the
    appellant based on the findings reached would not be at risk on  return
    simply by virtue of  his  Kurdish  ethnicity  alone.   The  judge  also
    considered humanitarian protection and Article 3.  Here too  I  am  not
    persuaded that there is any error of approach by the judge and cite  in
    particular the penultimate paragraph [32]:

         "In making my decision I have reminded myself of  HB  (Kurds)  Iran
         CG, to which I have above referred.  Here, it was held  inter  alia
         that whilst Kurds in  Iran  face  a  level  of  discrimination  the
         evidence does not support a contention that such discrimination is,
         in general, at such a level as to amount to persecution or  article
         3 ill-treatment.  However, to the Iranian  authorities'  suspicions
         and sensitivity to possible Kurdish political  activity,  those  of
         Kurdish ethnicity are regarded with  even  greater  suspicion  than
         hitherto and are reasonably likely to be  subjected  to  heightened
         scrutiny on return to Iran.  This said, the mere fact  of  being  a
         returnee of Kurdish ethnicity with or  without  a  valid  passport,
         even if combined with illegal exit,  does  not  create  a  risk  of
         persecution or article 3 ill-treatment.  In noting this I  am  also
         satisfied that in the appeal before me the appellant does not  fall
         within any  of  the  risk  categories  in  HB  the  Upper  Tribunal
         identified, not least because I am  satisfied  that  his  claim  in
         (sic) was fabricated in its entirety."

17. In my judgment the judge did not stray into error in any aspect of  his
    decision or that there had been procedural unfairness.  This appeal  is
    dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 20 August 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


