
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Numbers:
PA/01849/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 March 2019                        |On 08 May 2019                     |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD UIST
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                          MR alford erroll williams
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Iqbal, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Grenada. His date of  birth  is  3  April
    1997. He appealed against the decision of the respondent on the  ground
    that the respondent's decision to deport him  (following  a  conviction
    for serious offences for which  he  received  a  sentence  of  7  years
    imprisonment) breached his rights  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.   The appellant did not attend the hearing.
    FTTJ Cohen dismissed his appeal on the merits, having decided  at  [19]
    that it was in the interests of justice to proceed in his absence.  The
    appellant was granted permission to appeal  by  FTTJ  Robertson  on  14
    January 2019. The sole ground of appeal  is  that  the  judge  did  not
    consider an application to adjourn which was received by  the  FTT  the
    night before the hearing.

 2.  We feel as that we have no option in this case but to  set  aside  the
    decision of the FTT and remit to the FTT for a fresh hearing.  We do so
    the  ground  of  procedural  unfairness.  We  are  satisfied  that   an
    application to adjourn was made  by  the  appellant  and  that  it  was
    received by the FTT before the hearing. We are satisfied  that  it  was
    not placed before  FTTJ  Cohen  when  he  decided  to  proceed  in  the
    appellant's  absence.  There  was  some  evidence  in  support  of  the
    application that the appellant was at Charing Cross Hospital on the day
    of the hearing, having complained of chest pains.

 3. At the same time we have to remark that we are concerned about both the
    quality of the application that was sent at the eleventh hour the night
    before the hearing and the possible justification for the  application.
    It would appear from the material to which we have been  referred  that
    there was no acute episode  requiring  the  appellant's  attendance  at
    hospital on both 28 and 29 November 2018.  We are also surprised  that,
    although he was seen at one hospital on the morning and early afternoon
    of 28 November 2018, he did not attend at Charing Cross Hospital  until
    the morning of 29 November 2018.  There was no  explanation  given  for
    the appellant having failed to comply with directions of the FTT. There
    was no explanation given by those representing him  why  they  did  not
    attend the hearing.  Nevertheless, as stated we are satisfied  that  an
    application was made with supporting evidence and  that  this  was  not
    properly put before the judge. The FTT will be mindful of our  comments
    about the adjournment  application.  In  the  event  of  the  appellant
    failing to attend a future hearing,  the  FTTJ  may  consider  checking
    whether there has been an application made which has not been  properly
    linked to the file. The decision of the FTT is set aside because  of  a
    procedural irregularity. The matter is remitted for a fresh hearing.



Signed                                Lord                              Uist
Date 30 April 2019

Lord Uist
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

