
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01015/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 8 November 2016                  |On: 10 November 2013                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               van quang pham
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Harris, instructed by The Sethi Partnership
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a national of Vietnam born on 9 September 1990,  entered  the
United Kingdom on 11 March 2014 with a Tier 4  General  Student  visa  valid
until 19 November 2014. He was granted further leave to remain on  the  same
basis until 24 September 2015. On 17 September 2015 he made  an  appointment
with the Asylum Intake Unit and claimed asylum on 24 September 2015. He  was
interviewed about his claim, which was then refused on 22 January 2016.

He appealed against that decision and his appeal was  heard  in  the  First-
tier Tribunal on 12 July  2016  and  dismissed.  Following  an  unsuccessful
application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  permission  was
granted in the Upper Tribunal on 5 October 2016.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claims to have joined the Viet Youth for Democracy  on  1  May
2009 and to have undertaken activities  in  Vietnam  including  distributing
leaflets. He claims  to  have  been  arrested  once  on  2  June  2013  when
attending a demonstration in Hanoi and to have been  released  after  a  day
due to lack of evidence. He was  questioned  again  a  week  later  but  not
formally arrested. He came to the UK in March 2014  and  began  working  for
the  Viet  Youth  for  Democracy  (VYD)  UK  branch,   regularly   attending
demonstrations. In August 2015 his friend Hoan Ngoc  Dang  was  arrested  in
Vietnam and, according to his (the appellant's) family, gave his name  under
interrogation, leading to an arrest warrant being issued  against  him  (the
appellant). His father was arrested and detained for a day in  his  absence.
The appellant claims to have become more open with his activities in the  UK
since he came to know of the arrest warrant, and has been photographed at  a
demonstration outside the Vietnamese Embassy.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not  accept  that  he
was wanted by the Vietnamese authorities as a result of  his  membership  of
the Viet Youth for Democracy (VYD). The respondent noted that the  appellant
had submitted a letter of support from Harry Nguyen, the founder of the  VYD
in the UK, but that there was  no  proof  of  identity  submitted  with  the
letter. The respondent noted inconsistencies between the  account  given  in
the letter and the appellant's own account and accorded  it  little  weight.
The respondent considered that the appellant's failure to  claim  asylum  on
arrival in the UK undermined his credibility. It was not  accepted  that  he
would be at risk on return to Vietnam.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bradshaw. The judge heard from the  appellant  and  from  his
witness Harry Nguyen. She found the appellant's credibility  to  be  damaged
in several respects and she rejected his claim to be of adverse interest  to
the Vietnamese authorities.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal and was initially  refused,  but  was  subsequently  granted  on  a
renewed application on the grounds that the judge had arguably erred in  her
evaluation  of  the  evidence.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen,  in  granting
permission, considered it arguable that  the  judge  had  not  given  proper
consideration  to  the  expert  evidence  or  the  "decision  to  prosecute"
document produced by the appellant.

Appeal Hearing

Both parties made submissions before me.

Ms Harris submitted that the judge had misunderstood the appellant's  claim,
as had the respondent, by considering that it was not  a  "sur  place"  case
and by applying section 8 on the basis of the appellant's delay in  claiming
asylum. The appellant's claim had never been  that  he  was  at  risk  as  a
result of his activities in Vietnam prior  to  coming  to  the  UK,  as  the
extent of his activities was not known to the authorities at that time,  but
the risk arose as a result of him coming to the  adverse  attention  of  the
Vietnamese authorities whilst  he  was  in  the  UK,  when  his  friend  was
arrested and gave his name. He made his claim for asylum shortly after  that
and there was therefore no delay and  section  8  ought  not  to  have  been
applied. Ms Harris submitted  that  the  judge's  error  in  considering  Mr
Nguyen to be the only representative of the VYD in the UK, showed a lack  of
anxious scrutiny of the evidence. There was no proper consideration  of  the
expert evidence.

Mr Clarke submitted that the judge gave careful consideration to the  expert
evidence and was entitled to reject it  for  the  reasons  given.  She  gave
proper reasons for rejecting the appellant's account of the  arrest  of  his
friend  in  Vietnam  and  identified  a  significant  discrepancy   in   the
documentary evidence. Mr Clarke addressed  the  grounds  seeking  permission
and submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  well-reasoned  findings  on  the
evidence. With regard to the last ground referring to Article 8,  Mr  Clarke
submitted that Article 8 was not pursued before the First-tier Tribunal.

Consideration and findings

Taking Mr Clarke's last point first, it is clear from the skeleton  argument
that Article 8 was not a  ground  pursued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge. Ms Harris quite properly did not pursue that ground as  she  accepted
that she had not been present at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
and had no information to suggest  that  Article  8  was  argued.  There  is
therefore no merit in the last of the appellant's grounds.

With regard to the other grounds seeking permission, I consider most  to  be
largely nonsensical and I see little relevance  to  the  issues  before  the
First-tier Tribunal and the findings made by the  Tribunal  in  the  grounds
referring to Chapter 1, section 14 of the Home Office IDIs and to  paragraph
334 of the immigration rules. Ms  Harris,  again  quite  properly,  did  not
specifically address  those  grounds  but  focussed  on  the  more  relevant
matters and the matters upon which permission had been granted.

I do not, however, find any merit in Ms Harris' submissions in  relation  to
internal relocation and section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
of Claimants, etc) Act 2004. The former reflected the grounds at  [4]  where
it was asserted that the judge  erred  in  considering  internal  relocation
when the fear of persecution was from the Vietnamese authorities  and  would
thus exist throughout the country. However it  is  plain  that  the  judge's
reference, at [10], to paragraph 339O of the immigration rules  was  by  way
of general background to the law and that it was not  a  matter  upon  which
she made any findings, or indeed needed to make any findings given that  she
rejected in its entirety the appellant's claim to be of adverse interest  to
the Vietnamese authorities and to be at risk in his home area.

As to section 8, the judge's reference at [12] was, again, simply by way  of
background to the law, and it is plain that she did not take section 8  into
account, or apply its provisions, when  assessing  the  credibility  of  the
appellant's account. It is also plain that she was perfectly aware that  the
appellant was not claiming to have been at risk at the time he came  to  the
UK owing to past activities, but that the timing of his  claim  was  related
to the subsequent arrest of his friend and  his  name  being  given  to  the
Vietnamese authorities. The fact that she made findings on  the  appellant's
claim as to his past involvement and activities with the VYD in Vietnam  and
his  involvement  since  coming  to  the   UK,   did   not   demonstrate   a
misunderstanding of the basis of his claim, as Ms Harris submitted, but  was
simply part of her overall assessment of credibility and risk on return.

As regards the judge's adverse findings on the  merits  of  the  appellant's
claim, it seems to me those  were  cogently  reasoned  and  were  fully  and
properly made. The judge was  perfectly  entitled,  at  [31],  to  make  the
adverse findings that she did about the  appellant's  involvement  with  the
VYD on the basis of his vague and limited knowledge. At  [35]  to  [38]  the
judge  identified  various  inconsistencies  between  the  evidence  of  the
appellant and his witness Mr Nguyen, some particularly significant, such  as
how many times they had met and the level of involvement  of  the  appellant
and his family in political activities. The grounds, at [7],  refer  to  the
judge failing to appreciate the explanations given by the appellant  and  Mr
Nguyen before reaching her conclusion at [38] and [39], but,  as  Mr  Clarke
properly  submitted,  the  grounds  provide  no   information   about   what
explanations these  were,  and  again  are  somewhat  nonsensical.  For  the
reasons clearly and cogently given, the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
conclude that Mr Nguyen had little awareness of the appellant's  involvement
in activities and to  place  the  limited  weight  that  she  did  upon  his
evidence. The fact that she may have  erred  at  [20]  in  stating  that  Mr
Nguyen was the UK's only representative (which in fact was  taken  from  the
record of  the  appellant's  evidence  at  interview  at  question  97),  is
immaterial.

The grant of permission refers to the judge's consideration  of  the  expert
evidence and the "decision to prosecute" document  and  it  was  Ms  Harris'
submission that the judge wrongly rejected  the  expert  evidence  as  being
only assertions, at [53]. However it is clear that the judge  gave  detailed
and careful consideration to the expert report and provided  various  cogent
reasons for attaching the limited weight that she did to  it.  At  [48]  she
found that the expert  was  considering  risk  on  the  basis  of  incidents
relating to people of a different level of prominence to the  appellant,  at
[49] that he had wrongly described the nature of the  document  relied  upon
by the appellant as an  arrest  warrant,  and  at  [51]  that  he  had  been
inconsistent in his opinion of whether the appellant would have come to  the
attention of the authorities. Ms Harris submitted that the reference by  the
expert to the document as an arrest warrant  was  not  a  reason  to  attach
little weight to his report, as  the  document  was  technically  an  arrest
warrant, albeit described as a "decision  to  prosecute"  and  that  he  had
given proper reasons at [5.3.9]  for  considering  it  to  be  an  authentic
document. However, as Mr Clarke submitted, there  were  proper  reasons  why
the document should not be regarded as reliable, as identified by the  judge
at [43] and [44]. The judge noted that the  appellant's  evidence  was  that
the document was said to have resulted from the arrest of his friend  on  18
August 2015 and to have been handed to his mother on 20 August 2015, yet  it
was dated after those events, on 25 August 2015.  The  judge  was  perfectly
entitled to reject the document as unreliable on that  basis  and  that,  in
turn, reflected on the weight to be given  to  the  expert  report  and  the
credibility of the appellant's account of the arrest of his friend  and  the
subsequent interest in him.

For all of these reasons I find no merit in the grounds  and  consider  that
the judge's decision was based upon a full and  careful  assessment  of  all
the evidence and cogently reasoned findings on the evidence. The  judge  was
perfectly entitled  to  place  the  limited  weight  that  she  did  on  the
documentary evidence, the expert report, and the  appellant's  evidence  and
that of his witness and to conclude that the appellant's  claim  was  not  a
credible one. She was  entitled  to  conclude  that  he  was  never  of  any
particular interest to the Vietnamese authorities and to  reject  his  claim
to have come to their attention as a result of  his  friend  being  arrested
and giving his name. The conclusions reached  by  the  judge  were  entirely
open to her on the evidence before her. The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal
do not disclose any errors of law in her decision.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.




                               Signed   Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
