
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/01124/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                         |On 29 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     V R
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Martin, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The SSHD's decision dated 27  December  2017,  declining  to  grant
         leave on the basis of the appellant's further submissions.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Kempton, promulgated  on  3  April  2018,
         allowing the appeal.

     iv) The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT, stated in  the  application
         for permission to appeal filed on 12 April 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Lambert, dated 23 April 2018.

 3. Mr Govan submitted thus:

      i) The case the appellant advanced to the FtT was in  substance  based
         not on article 8 but on a protection need, or on  very  significant
         obstacles to her return.  The FtT rightly rejected both.

     ii) Bonds between a grandparent and grandchildren may constitute family
         life for article 8 purposes, but do not do so in the ordinary case.



    iii) The judge allowed  the  appeal  based  on  the  bonds  between  the
         appellant and her grandchildren.  Such an outcome had to  be  based
         on more than the normal emotional ties.

     iv) Kaur (visit appeals; article 8) [2015] UKUT 487 (IAC) at paragraphs
         38 - 39 illustrated what might be needed.  In that case  there  was
         found to be family life, based on a  grandmother  having  played  a
         central role in bringing up two grandchildren.  Here, there was  no
         equivalent finding.

      v) The evidence from and about the grandchildren  showed  healthy  and
         normal bonds, but nothing to justify the judge's conclusion.

     vi) The judge was bound to consider part 5A of the 2002 Act, "Article 8
         of the ECHR: Public Interest  Considerations",  but  did  not  even
         mention it.  In terms of section 117B, the appellant's private life
         in the UK was to be given  little  weight.   Absent  a  finding  of
         family life, or a basis for any such finding, there was nothing  by
         which the judge's conclusion on proportionality could be upheld.

    vii) The decision should be reversed.

 4. Mr Martin submitted thus:

      i) The judge might have been more explicit, but decisions were  to  be
         taken as written for the informed reader.

     ii) The judge at paragraph 32 noted and  rightly  gave  weight  to  the
         respondent's delay of over 4 years in dealing with the fresh claim.
          It was natural in the  appellant's  situation  that  over  such  a
         period  not  only  private  but  family  life  links   strengthened
         considerably.  By the time of the FtT hearing she had  been  living
         with her family in the UK for 11 years.

    iii) It was accepted that for an appellant who was not a member  of  the
         core family unit (of adult partners and minor children)  more  than
         the normal ties had to be  shown.   The  judge's  findings  on  the
         significance  of  the  ties   between   the   appellant   and   her
         grandchildren were sufficient for that purpose.

     iv) It was also accepted that given the terms  of  s.117B,  the  appeal
         could not have succeeded on grounds only of private life.

      v) The judge focused on the best interests  of  the  children  and  on
         delay by the respondent but also had regard to length of residence,
         degree of integration, family life in broad terms, and  ability  to
         speak English.  It also appeared that the appellant made no  claims
         on public funds, and was supported by her family, who were put in a
         position to do so partly by her domestic assistance.

     vi) The outcome might be thought by some to be on  the  generous  side,
         although no concession was made, but it fell within  the  range  of
         law and reason, and should not be set aside only for want of form.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. The decision of the FtT is not as explicit on the law, or in expressing
    its findings, as it might have been.

 7. The judge should have considered part 5A of the 2002 Act,  noting  that
    the case was bound to fail in terms of private life, and could  succeed
    only by finding that family life for article 8 purposes was constituted
    between the appellant and her grandchildren.  Without  that,  it  could
    not  be  found  that   removal   "would   in   the   circumstances   be
    disproportionate" (paragraph 37).

 8. The appellant has two adult children in Zimbabwe, and no grandchildren.
     She has two adult children in the UK and,  at  the  time  of  the  FtT
    hearing, 7 grandchildren; she now has 8.  She lives with her  son,  his
    partner and 2 grandchildren in Scotland.  Her son's other  3  children,
    from an  earlier  marriage,  live  nearby  and  are  regularly  in  the
    household.  She regularly visits  and  sees  her  daughter  and  her  3
    grandchildren who live in England.  (Her family members are all in  the
    UK lawfully.)

 9. Under the rather vague heading of "credibility  findings  and  reasons"
    the judge says at paragraph 23  that  the  appellant  "has  significant
    family life with her grandchildren".  Mr Martin did not found on  that,
    and it is expressed as part of summarising her case, rather than as the
    judge's conclusion.

10. At paragraphs 32 - 33, the judge says that delay by the  respondent  of
    over 4 years "is a very important issue in relation  to  family  life",
    and that during that period the grandchildren "have had the benefit  of
    the society of their grandmother".  At  paragraph  34,  she  says  that
    "there is a significant depth of feeling about the appellant as a  very
    important person in the lives of the grandchildren ... more  pronounced
    for the younger children."  At paragraph  35  the  judge  finds  "ample
    evidence of the significant role which the appellant has built up  with
    her  children  and  grandchildren  in  the   UK   ...   something   ...
    irreplaceable for the grandchildren in particular".   At  paragraph  37
    she says  it  would  be  upsetting  for  the  grandchildren  to  suffer
    deprivation of "that strong and constant relationship".

11. The thrust of  the  evidence  was  that  the  appellant's  overwhelming
    purpose in life is her family.  The decision,  as  a  whole,  makes  it
    sufficiently clear that the judge's view was that this comprised family
    life not only in the informal and extended sense, but within the  legal
    requirements of article 8.     The  failure  to  make  the  finding  as
    explicit as it should have been is not an error on a point of law, such
    as to require the decision to be set aside.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is maintained herein.


            [pic]


            22 October 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




