
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01152/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by remote       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|video conference on 11 February 2021 |On 5 March 2021                      |
|(V)                                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     I N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms K. Smith, instructed by Turpin Miller LLP
For the respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  22  January
    2020 to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes ('the judge')  dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 09 September 2020. The judge rejected  the
    credibility of the appellant's account of  abuse  by  his  parents  and
    subsequent exploitation by a local criminal  after  he  ran  away  from
    home. The judge noted that the National Referral Mechanism (NRM)  found
    that the appellant was not a victim of Modern Slavery having identified
    a number of inconsistencies in his account. For example, "the Appellant
    was inconsistent about whether he had been forced  to  take  the  white
    powder or not.." [11]. The respondent's refusal letter identified other
    inconsistencies in his evidence as to whether his mother  was  involved
    in the abuse or not [12]. The judge took into account the fact that the
    appellant was a minor when he was interviewed about his claim but noted
    that he was nearly 16 years old at the time so was "not as young as  he
    might have been" [14] and "would have been old enough to give  accounts
    that were consistent" [15]. Even taking this  into  account  the  judge
    observed that there were a number of differences in the  accounts  that
    he had given [14].

3.    The judge found that the appellant's account  of  whether  his  mother
    had been involved in his abuse or not was inconsistent [16]. The  judge
    observed that there were "issues over... whether or not he took, or was
    made to take, the white powder. Either he did take it or he did not, it
    is not a  part  of  his  account  where  different  details  are  being
    highlighted, the accounts are different." [17].

4.    The judge then noted that he raised  an  issue  with  the  appellant's
    counsel during submissions about his ability to  leave  Albanian  using
    his own passport i.e. after the witness had completed his evidence.  In
    what is a relatively concise decision, the next four paragraphs make  a
    series of plausibility findings relating to the  passport.  First,  the
    judge inferred that, given his young age, the passport must  have  been
    issued  with  his  parents'  consent.  He  concluded  that   this   was
    inconsistent with the appellant's account of abuse [19]. Second, it was
    unclear how the passport would have remained in his possession  if  the
    account were true [20]. Third, given the treatment the  appellant  says
    he suffered from Fredi, it was not plausible that he would be  able  to
    retain such an important document [21].  Fourth,  the  judge  found  it
    "surprising" that the appellant  would  have  been  able  to  keep  the
    passport on his person when it would have  been  an  obvious  means  by
    which Fredi would seek to prevent his escape [22]. The judge went on to
    make the following observations before concluding that the  appellant's
    account was not credible:

           "23.  That there is domestic violence in Albania,  that  children
           can be mistreated by their parent and that children who  end  up
           living on the streets are vulnerable to  exploitation  following
           grooming is sadly clear from the background  evidence.  This  is
           also true in relation to the  issue  of  corruption  within  the
           Police in Albania.

              24.      Reliance is place on the UN Report, report  of  Steve
           Harvey of the 15th of October 2019  and  the  ARC  reports.  The
           reports of the circumstances of those caught up in the cycle  of
           deprivation, poverty and abuse make grim reading and  for  those
           in such circumstances there is a risk of grooming,  the  use  by
           criminal gangs and trafficking. The issue is not  whether  those
           things happen but whether the appellant's account to  the  lower
           standard that applies, shows that he was treated in  Albania  as
           he claims and would be at risk on return."

5.     The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
following grounds:

       i) The judge erred by  failing  to  engage  with  evidence  that  was
          relevant to a proper assessment of  the  appellant's  credibility.
          First, the judge failed to take into account an explanation  given
          by the appellant in his statement, which might have explained  the
          apparent inconsistency in his evidence as to "whether or  not"  he
          was made to take  drugs.  Second,  the  judge  made  a  series  of
          credibility  points  about  the  passport   without   giving   the
          appellant a fair opportunity to address his concerns.  Third,  the
          judge failed to give adequate consideration to the  expert  report
          of Steve Harvey.

      ii) The judge failed  to  take  into  account  relevant  evidence  and
          failed to  make  adequate  findings  relating  to  sufficiency  of
          protection and internal relocation.

     iii) If the judge erred in relation to the first and second grounds  it
          followed that he also erred in his  assessment  of  whether  there
          were very significant obstacles to integration for the purpose  of
          paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules.

Decision and reasons

6.    Having considered the grounds of appeal and oral submissions  made  by
    both parties I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved
    the making of an error of law and must be set aside.

7.    The second and third grounds are  dependent  on  the  success  of  the
    first. It is open to a judge to consider the internal consistency of an
    appellant's account, but the assessment must be holistic and must  also
    take into account the extent to which the account  is  consistent  with
    background and other evidence relating to the  country  concerned.  The
    mere fact that there might appear to be an  internal  inconsistency  is
    not in itself sufficient to reject the account. A judge  must  consider
    whether the appellant  has  given  a  reasonable  explanation  for  the
    inconsistency  or  whether  the  inconsistency  might   be   adequately
    explained by other factors e.g. young age, disability  or  evidence  of
    trauma.

8.    It was open to the judge to consider  apparent  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's evidence  and  the  findings  relating  to  some  of  those
    inconsistencies have not been challenged.  None  of  the  three  points
    raised in the first ground would be sufficient  to  conclude  that  the
    credibility findings are unsafe if taken alone. But when taken together
    I find that they disclose cumulative errors of approach that amount  to
    an error of law.

9.    There is force in the submission that the  judge  failed  to  consider
    relevant evidence given in the appellant's witness statement to explain
    the 'white powder' issue. This originated  from  paragraph  44  of  the
    respondent's reasons for refusal letter.  The  respondent  specifically
    identified paragraph 21 of the appellant's original witness  statement.
    It was assumed that when he referred to  being  "physically  forced  to
    take the substance" that this meant that he was forced  to  ingest  the
    white powder. This was said to be inconsistent  with  his  evidence  at
    question 118 of the asylum  interview  where,  after  having  described
    Fredi taking the white powder and telling him that it made him  strong,
    he was asked whether he was  "required  to  take  some  of  this  white
    substance" and he replied "he did but I did not accept". This  appeared
    to be a reference to Fredi taking the white substance but the appellant
    refusing to do so. The wording of the decision seems to make clear that
    the judge also reduced  the  apparent  discrepancy  to  a  question  of
    "whether or not he took, or was made to take, the white  powder".  This
    was repeated in the next sentence when the judge said  "either  he  did
    take it or he did not" [17].

10.   In fact, the appellant had given an explanation  in  his  most  recent
    witness statement that was more nuanced. He explained that when he said
    at paragraph 21 of his initial statement that he "physically forced  me
    to take the substance. He was beating me and even threatened me with  a
    gun." that he was referring to being forced to take the bags  of  drugs
    to places for Fredi  and  not  to  ingesting  the  white  powder.  This
    explanation was at least capable of  explaining  the  inconsistency  if
    read in the  context  of  the  rest  of  his  initial  statement.  From
    paragraph 17 to paragraph 24 he made repeated reference to being forced
    to 'take' or 'deliver' bags for Fredi. At paragraph 20 he described how
    he refused to deliver the bags until he knew what was in them. That  is
    when Fredi showed him the white powder and told him  he  should  'take'
    (ingest) some. The wording of paragraph 21 was simply ambiguous in  the
    context of repeated reference to 'taking'  (delivering)  the  bags  and
    then a reference to Fredi telling him to 'take' (ingest)  some  of  the
    white powder. In English the work 'take' could have a  double  meaning.
    In an asylum appeal, this could be further complicated by  the  way  in
    which it might have  been  translated  to  or  from  Albanian.  It  was
    necessary for the judge to resolve this ambiguity by reference  to  the
    appellant's explanation. In reducing the issue to whether the appellant
    did or did not take the white powder, when in  fact  the  evidence  was
    more nuanced, the judge failed to take into account  relevant  evidence
    provided in the appellant's statement.

11.   It is clear from the face of the  decision  that  the  judge  did  not
    raise the 'passport' issue until submissions  when  the  appellant  had
    given evidence and could not answer the points. Mr Clarke  pointed  out
    that the respondent had noted at paragraph 45 of  the  decision  letter
    that the appellant had his own passport. It was considered  implausible
    that he would be able to retain it while he lived with  Fredi,  who  he
    claimed controlled and exploited  him.  The  appellant  addressed  this
    issue in his most recent statement. He said that he kept  the  passport
    on him at all times. Fredi simply did not know he had it. At  [22]  the
    judge refers to the passport being "kept flat against  the  Appellant".
    He found that it was implausible that Fredi would not want to take  the
    passport  from  him  but  failed  to  engage   with   the   appellant's
    explanation. Even if  Fredi  might  have  had  a  motive  to  take  the
    passport, if he did not  know  about  it,  it  might  still  have  been
    possible for the appellant to keep the document hidden.

12.   Compared to other credibility issues  identified  by  the  judge,  the
    'passport' issue formed a large part of his reasons for  rejecting  the
    credibility of the appellant's account. Some of the points made by  the
    judge were not in the decision letter. The appellant was  not  given  a
    fair opportunity to respond to those points in evidence  if  the  judge
    had concerns. It is at least arguably irrational to  conclude  that  if
    the appellant's parents were abusive  that  they  would  not  obtain  a
    passport for him. Even bad parents might obtain  an  identity  document
    for a child if there was a need for one. Aside from  not  putting  this
    issue to the appellant, the judge failed to take into account  relevant
    evidence that was before him. The screening interview recorded that the
    passport was issued on 20 August 2014, a year before the appellant left
    Albania. In a witness statement dated 27 November  2019  the  appellant
    responded to a number of issues raised by the respondent during the NRM
    process. At [13] of the statement he said that he  explained  that  the
    abuse from his parents got worse over time. As far as he could remember
    his mother obtained the passport for him as an  identity  document  for
    medical purposes.

13.   While the judge  appeared  to  acknowledge  that  the  background  and
    expert evidence showed that domestic abuse does lead to children living
    on the streets in Albania, who are then vulnerable to exploitation, and
    that there was a risk of grooming by criminal gangs, the last  line  of
    [24] does not make clear what weight the judge  might  have  placed  on
    this evidence, or in fact any other evidence, that might have supported
    the appellant's account.

14.   For the reasons given above I conclude that the combination of  points
    raised by the  appellant  are  sufficient  to  render  the  credibility
    findings unsafe. The First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of an error of law and must be set aside. The parties  agreed  that  it
    was appropriate for  the  decision  to  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal given that it would require a fresh hearing of the case. It is
    a matter for the First-tier Tribunal to make further directions on mode
    of hearing or any other case management decisions it deems necessary.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The case will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   M. Canavan          Date  02 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____

NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
