
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01349/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 September 2019                          |On 19 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     AJ
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sills, instructed by Bankfield Heath, solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born in 1987 and  is  a  male  citizen  of  Iran.  He
    entered the United Kingdom in March 2009 and claimed asylum. His  claim
    was refused and  his  subsequent  appeal  dismissed.  He  made  further
    submissions in 2013 which were refused. An application  for  settlement
    made on 8 January 2018 was also refused by the Secretary of State.  The
    appellant then made further submissions on the  basis  of  his  claimed
    conversion to Christianity. The respondent, in a  decision  made  on  1
    January 2019, refused the appellant's application. He appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on 1  April  2019,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside. My reasons for reaching a decision are as follows.

 3. The appellant claims to attend  a  Christian  organisation  called  the
    First Love Church. He claims to have been baptised by  this  church  in
    June 2018. In short, the judge did not believe  him.  However,  I  find
    that her reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim are flawed in law.
    At [33], the judge found that the appellant had  'started  attending  a
    church and gone through ceremony of baptism' but in the same  paragraph
    she found that the First Love Church is not 'recognised church  with  a
    recognised system for appointing ministers.' The judge stated that  she
    would, 'expect to see evidence from a recognised minister  of  religion
    who had spoken to the appellant on a one-to-one basis and he was  alive
    to the possibility that some appellants are not genuine. I would expect
    the evidence from the Minister about the appellant's  participation  in
    classes, his enthusiasm and  openness  about  his  faith  the  type  of
    questions he asks about his  religion....  in  genuine  cases  I  would
    expect the church to  keep  records  about  church  attendance  in  the
    classes which the appellant taken.'

 4. The judge does not explain what she means by the expression 'recognised
    church' as understood in the United Kingdom.  The  respondent,  in  the
    refusal letter, whilst accepting that the appellant had been  baptised,
    characterised the First Love Church  as  a  'student  association'  and
    thereafter referred to the First Love Church as a church only with  the
    addition of inverted commas.  However,  the  refusal  letter  at  least
    identified that the central issue in this claim is less the  nature  of
    the church or Christian community he frequents but whether or not he is
    himself a genuine convert to Christianity ('there is also no sufficient
    evidence from the 'church' to support your claim that you are a genuine
    Christian'). The judge, on the  other  hand,  appears  to  have  become
    overconcerned with the 'recognition' of First Love Church as a  church,
    without at any  point  referring  to  laws  or  regulations  which  she
    considered might confer such recognition  and  without  explaining  why
    attendance at a recognised church might indicate that the appellant was
    a genuine Christian convert whilst attendance at an informal  gathering
    of Christians might not. Moreover, it was for the judge to analyse  the
    evidence which was before her rather than to  criticise  the  appellant
    for failing to rely on evidence which she  considered  he  should  have
    produced or which she believes is usually produced in similar appeals.

 5. In the light of what I say above, I find that the judge's  analysis  is
    flawed. The decision is set aside. There will need to be  a  new  fact-
    finding exercise, the existing findings of  fact  being  set  aside  in
    their entirety. Consequently, the appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision at  all  following  a
    hearing de novo.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision  at  or  following  a
    hearing de novo.


Signed                              Date 30 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








