
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01877/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th August, 2016                          |On 31st August 2016           |
|Signed and sent for                           |                              |
|Promulgation on 30th August, 2016             |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   [B T M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Anderson, Clerk from Immigration Legal Advice
Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and  in
    this determination I shall refer to her as being, "the claimant".   The
    respondent is [BTM], who was born on [ ] 1985 and who, on  his  arrival
    in the United Kingdom ("UK"), was in  possession  of  a  South  African
    passport and claimed to be a South African national.


Immigration history

2.   On 18th June, 2004, the respondent applied for a visit visa  at  Harare
    British High Commission as a Zimbabwean  national,  named  [TBB].   The
    visa was refused.

3.   On 10th April, 2010, the respondent applied for a  visit  visa  at  the
    Pretoria BCG as a South African national, in the name [BTM].  This visa
    was refused on  15th  April,  2010.   The  respondent  applied  on  9th
    January, 2015, in the same name for a visit visa at  the  Pretoria  BCG
    and this was granted from 14th  January  until  14th  July,  2015.   He
    claims that on 30th January, 2015 he left South Africa and travelled to
    Doha arriving on the same day.  He  left  on  30th  January,  2015  and
    arrived in the United Kingdom the same day.  He used what the Secretary
    of State described as being his "valid South African passport" to leave
    South Africa.

4.   On 9th April, 2015, the respondent attended the asylum intake unit  and
    claimed asylum.

5.   The respondent's claim for asylum  was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in a letter dated 8th October, 2015 (the  "refusal  letter")  and
    his liability to removal under Section 10 of the Immigration  Act  1999
    was pointed out to him.

The refusal letter

6.   In Annex A to the refusal letter, the Secretary  of  State  noted  that
    the respondent had submitted a birth certificate and application for an
    identity document in the name of [TBB], but both those  documents  were
    found to be in poor condition.  A trace has been made on CRS and a visa
    match found.  The respondent  was  not  the  individual  shown  in  the
    photograph.  The Secretary of State believed that there  were  reasons,
    therefore, to believe that the respondent was not  the  individual  who
    applied for the visa on 18th June, 2014 in Zimbabwe.

7.   Additionally the respondent claimed that his family were living in  the
    UK and had been granted asylum.  The names he provided had been checked
    against Home Office records and his statement  that  these  individuals
    had been granted asylum is internally consistent.  However, despite the
    respondent's father being in the United Kingdom he  has  not  submitted
    evidence from him confirming that he is the respondent's father and the
    respondent's inability to provide  evidence  from  his  claimed  father
    undermined the respondent's claim.

8.   The respondent produced a South African passport on arrival in  the  UK
    in the name of [BTM], but the respondent managed to exit South  African
    passport control using this document and it appeared to have been  used
    by the respondent on a number of occasions.  The Secretary of State had
    no reason to doubt the authenticity of the  document  or  that  it  was
    issued properly to the respondent.

9.   The Secretary of State concluded at paragraph 26  of  the  letter  that
    the respondent is a South  African  national  and  indicated  that  she
    intended to remove the respondent to South Africa.

Appeal to the First Tier Tribunal

10.  The respondent appealed the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  and  his
    appeal was heard at North Shields by First-tier Tribunal Judge R L Head-
    Rapson ("the judge").  The judge appears to have  heard  oral  evidence
    from the respondent and from,  "members  of  his  family  in  the  UK",
    however, the judge does not set out a synopsis  of  the  evidence,  nor
    does she indicate which members of the respondent's family  in  the  UK
    gave oral evidence.  Instead, the judge believed that it was  necessary
    to determine whether the respondent was  a  Zimbabwean  national  or  a
    South African national.  The judge does not appear to  have  considered
    the possibility that the respondent might have both nationalities.  The
    judge found the respondent to be a credible witness.  At paragraphs  36
    and 37 the judge said this:-

         "36. The [respondent] was consistent in his witness  statement  and
             in oral evidence.  Whilst I acknowledge he  obtained  a  South
             African passport by illegal means and  did  not  claim  asylum
             upon entering the UK, I accepted his answers  that  he  feared
             being immediately returned.  I note that he stated that he was
             a South African  to  the  UK  immigration  officials,  I  also
             acknowledge  that  he  was  terrified  of  being  returned  to
             Zimbabwe.


         37.  Within the documentation provided by the [respondent] there is
             DNA evidence which proves that the [respondent] is the son  of
             his  father.   This  evidence  was  not  challenged   by   the
             [claimant].  I accept this DNA evidence and I therefore accept
             that the [respondent] is the  son  of  his  father  who  is  a
             Zimbabwean national who successfully  claimed  asylum  in  the
             United Kingdom on the basis of his political opinion."

11.  The judge allowed the respondent's appeal, having found that he  was  a
Zimbabwean citizen.

The claimant's challenges to the determination

12.  The claimant challenges the judge's decision and asserts that he  erred
    in law.  It has always been the intention of the Secretary of State  to
    remove the respondent to South Africa and the judge  erred,  therefore,
    in considering the risk on the respondent's return to Zimbabwe.

13.  The respondent's claimed fear of return to South Africa was  stated  to
    be xenophobia and threats and violence from a Zulu boy, but  the  judge
    only made a single  finding  in  the  determination,  namely  that  the
    respondent is South African based on the DNA evidence  linking  him  to
    his father.

14.  The judge made no finding as to persecutory  risks  applicable  to  the
    respondent.  The judge implies that the sole risk to the respondent  in
    Zimbabwe is because  of  his  father's  political  activities  and  the
    political profile attached to his family name.   The  judge  found  the
    respondent to be a Zimbabwean national, but made no findings as to  the
    persecutory risk factors applicable to the respondent.  The  judge  did
    not explain why there should be any risk to the respondent if he is the
    son of his father some thirteen years later when the respondent himself
    has no political profile or links to his father's trade union activity.
     There was no consideration of the severity of  the  risks  or  whether
    internal relocation would be appropriate.

15.  The Secretary of State also criticised the judge  for  not  considering
    the risk factors in  the  country  guidance  case  of  CM  (EM  country
    guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC) and the  judge  has
    made no finding  on  the  possible  internal  relocation  to  Bulawayo.
    Finally, the judge is satisfied by DNA evidence as to the  respondent's
    paternity, but failed to recognise that a finding on paternity  is  not
    in itself evidence that the respondent  does  not  hold  South  African
    nationality, either alone or in addition to Zimbabwean nationality.

The hearing before me

16.  At the hearing before me, Ms Anderson  suggested  that  the  respondent
    gave a satisfactory explanation to the judge as to why he  had  arrived
    in the United Kingdom claiming to be a South African national  and  had
    given a satisfactory explanation as to why he could not now be returned
    either to South Africa or to Zimbabwe.  Mr  Diwncyz  pointed  out  that
    there was no intention to remove the respondent  to  Zimbabwe;  he  had
    maintained that he was a South African  citizen;  he  had  presented  a
    South African passport, and he was accepted by the  claimant  as  being
    South African.  The judge made a finding in respect  of  the  DNA  test
    based on the respondent's paternity.  The judge appeared to suggest  at
    paragraph 37 of the determination that the Secretary of State  accepted
    this evidence.  The fact that the Secretary of State did not  challenge
    evidence does not necessarily mean that the Secretary of State accepted
    it.

17.  There is no question of  the  respondent  being  removed  to  Zimbabwe,
    asserted Mr Diwncyz.

18.  I adjourned the hearing  briefly  in  order  that  the  representatives
    might have an opportunity of discussing the matter  between  themselves
    and to enable the Secretary of State to obtain a copy of the Tribunal's
    decision in KF (Removal directions and statelessness) Iran [2005] UKIAT
    00109 on which the presenting officer relied.

19.  On resuming the hearing I was told that there was no agreement  between
    the representatives'. Ms Anderson asked me to note that the  judge  had
    made a clear finding that the respondent was credible.   She  accepted,
    however, that the judge had made an error of law in  failing  to  apply
    country guidance and in failing to demonstrate that the judge had  done
    so.

20.  I reserved my determination.


My consideration of the matters and conclusion.

21.  I believe that the judge has  erred  in  law  and  that  the  error  is
    material in this determination.

22.  The claimant accepted  the  respondent's  nationality  as  being  South
    African, on the basis that the respondent claimed to be a South African
    on entering the United Kingdom and was in possession of  what  appeared
    to the Home Office to be an authentic South  African  passport  in  his
    identity.  The respondent had claimed to have obtained these  documents
    illegally, but had not adduced any evidence to substantiate that  claim
    other than his mere assertion.  The  judge  does  not  appear  to  have
    considered this, nor the fact that the respondent used that passport to
    pass through passport control in South Africa and appeared to have used
    the passport on a number of  occasions.   The  judge  appears  to  have
    simply accepted what the respondent said, without considering  all  the
    evidence.   The  judge  accepted  the   paternal   DNA   evidence   for
    establishing that the respondent is the son of  a  Zimbabwean  national
    and assumes on that basis, that the  respondent  does  not  hold  South
    African nationality.  In fact, the judge gave no  consideration  as  to
    whether or not the respondent might hold South African  nationality  in
    addition to or instead of Zimbabwean nationality.

23.  Having concluded that the respondent is a Zimbabwean national,  because
    his father was, the judge failed to deal with the respondent's  claimed
    fear of return to South Africa and  instead  allowed  the  respondent's
    appeal.  It is unclear on what basis the  appeal  is  allowed,  but  in
    paragraph 25 the  judge  says  that  the  respondent  fears  return  to
    Zimbabwe,  because  of  his  father's  political  activities  and   the
    political profile which was attached to  the  respondent's  name.   The
    judge has made no finding as to the persecutory risk factors  and  does
    not explain why, some thirteen years after the respondent's father left
    Zimbabwe, the respondent would be at any risk, since he has no personal
    political profile or other links to his father's trade union  activity.
    The judge has made no reference to the country guidance case of CM  and
    has made no findings on possible internal relocation to Bulawayo.

24.  The judge does not demonstrate that  in  considering  the  respondent's
    claim, the judge has considered the background material in order to put
    the claim into context and to better advise the judge in assessing risk
    on return.

25.  I have concluded that the determination cannot stand.  I set aside  the
    determination of the First Tier Judge.  Mr Diwncyz suggested  that  the
    matter should remain in the Upper Tribunal,  but  in  fairness  to  the
    respondent I believe that the only fair way in which the appeal can  be
    disposed of is for it to be reheard de novo by the First-tier  Tribunal
    by a judge other that First Tier Tribunal Judge R L Head-Rapson.   Were
    it to be retained in the Upper Tribunal it may be  many  months  before
    the matter could be relisted before me.


Notice of Decision

    I set aside the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  R  L  Head-
    Rapson.  This appeal should be heard afresh by  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than Judge R L Head-Rapson.  I  respectfully  suggest  that
    two and a half hours be allowed for the hearing  of  the  appeal.   The
    respondent has previously indicated through his representatives that he
    does not require an interpreter.




Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

