
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01772/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On 13 July 2021                      |On 15 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    MHMR
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by Greater London
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves a protection claim, I consider it is appropriate to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Raymond promulgated on 2 October 2020 ("the Decision"). By the Decision,
   the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's
   decision dated 4 February 2020 refusing his protection and human rights
   claims.


2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka of Tamil ethnicity.  He is
   married to a Sri Lankan woman, [CW].  She is a Buddhist and of Sinhalese
   ethnicity.

3. [CW] came to the UK on 5 October 2010 with entry clearance as a student
   and with the Appellant as her dependent.  [CW] was then given a post
   study work visa in 2012 to 2014, again with the Appellant as her
   dependent.  [CW] and the Appellant returned to Sri Lanka for a month in
   2013.  The Appellant's leave was extended again in 2014 to 26 October
   2015 as the dependent of [CW] who reverted to a student visa.  [CW] made
   an in-time application to remain with the Appellant as her dependent,
   based on their family and private life.  That was refused on 12 February
   2016.  [CW] and the Appellant appealed.  Their appeal was dismissed on 24
   April 2016.  Onward appeal rights were also rejected.

4. On 14 September 2016, the Appellant claimed asylum.  That claim was
   rejected on 16 February 2018.  An appeal was dismissed on 22 May 2018.
   Onward appeal rights were again rejected and the Appellant's appeal
   rights were exhausted on 9 August 2018.

5. Further submissions were made on 8 February 2019.  Those were accepted
   to amount to a fresh claim but were refused leading to the decision under
   appeal.

6. The Appellant suffers from mental health problems which lay at the heart
   of the further submissions.  He also submitted further evidence in
   relation to a claim to be at risk on return to Sri Lanka as he claimed to
   be suspected of being linked to the LTTE.  He also claimed that he was at
   risk as [CW]'s uncle is in a position of power and would harm him on
   return as he disapproves of [CW]'s marriage to the Appellant.

7. The Decision is, as Ms Jegarajah fairly accepted, a very detailed one,
   running to some 213 paragraphs over 51 pages.  Of course, what matters is
   the substance of the Decision and not its length.  However, the grounds
   of appeal do not take issue with the substance of the Decision.  The
   challenge is based squarely on what occurred at the hearing.  I will have
   to deal with that in more detail below when considering the grounds of
   appeal.  For the present, I note only that the Decision was reached on
   consideration of the documents, [CW] and Ms Jegarajah having withdrawn
   from the hearing following the Judge's refusals to grant an adjournment.
   I observe also that the Respondent was not represented at the hearing.

8. The grounds of appeal are summarised as follows:

   Ground one: the Respondent's review dated 8 July 2020 ("the Review") was
   improperly served.  The Judge should therefore have adjourned "to enable
   [the Appellant] adequate time to deal with the matters raised in the
   [R]eview".
   Ground two: The Review was unfair in that it raised points not taken in
   the Respondent's decision letter.  It is said that [CW] had insufficient
   time in the two hours accorded to her to deal with the points raised in
   the Review (as to which see below) and to explain matters to the
   Appellant.  It is asserted that the refusals to adjourn failed to take
   into account the Appellant's vulnerability.
   Ground three: The refusals to adjourn the hearing to another date were
   unfair.

9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on
   30 October 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:


    "..2.    The grounds assert that the judge erred in failing to grant an
    adjournment request on the basis that the respondent had submitted
    late, a review following the service of a skeleton argument.
    3.   The above is putting matters in simple terms.  It is apparent from
    the judge's decision and the grounds that many issues took place during
    the hearing.  Ultimately, counsel withdrew from the proceedings; that,
    per se, does not make the proceedings unfair.
    4.   However, in my view, a lot went on during the hearing, and I think
    it is in the interests of justice that the issues be explored further
    to see if there had been unfairness to the appellant.  The appellant is
    reminded that the burden remains on him.
    5.   There is an arguable error of law."

10. On 9 November 2020, the Respondent filed a Rule 24 reply in the
   following terms so far as relevant:


    "..2.    The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal.  In summary,
    the respondent will submit inter alia that the judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal directed himself appropriately.
    3.   The respondent submits that the first ground, in relation to
    whether respondent's review had been sent in time to the appellant's
    representatives, it appears this had been sent following the Case
    Management hearing.  From the post hearing statement from the
    appellant's solicitor it is now claimed the review had been received
    but had been overlooked and not been sent to the senior Solicitor.
    4.   The second ground claims it was unfair for the FTT Judge to fail
    to adjourn the hearing.  The respondent submits that the FTT gave the
    appellant's counsel and witness 2 hours to respond to the issues in the
    review.  That they then decided to withdraw when the adjournment
    request was refused was a matter for them.
    5.   The respondent requests an oral hearing."


11. The matter was listed before me to determine whether the Decision
   contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the
   decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.  I
   accept that if I were to find an error of law, the appropriate course
   would be to remit the appeal given the nature of the challenge to the
   Decision.


12. The hearing before me was conducted via Microsoft Teams.  There were no
   significant technical issues affecting the conduct of the proceedings.  I
   had before me a core bundle of documents relating to the appeal including
   the Respondent's bundle, the Appellant's bundle as before the First-tier
   Tribunal, the skeleton argument as before the First-tier Tribunal,
   various items of correspondence and loose documents including the Review
   to which I refer above, and the witness statements annexed to the grounds
   of appeal.  Given the nature of the challenge to the Decision, I need
   refer only to certain core documents, the witness statements and the
   Review.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Ground One: The Review

13. I need to begin my consideration of this ground and the challenge more
   generally with reference to a case management review ("CMR") which took
   place before First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom on 16 June 2020.  The
   following decisions were taken at that CMR:
   1) [CW] was appointed as the Appellant's litigation friend as a result of
      it being accepted that the Appellant lacked litigation capacity as
      confirmed by a report of Dr Halari.   Judge Froom noted that "[t]he
      appellant's partner can act fairly and competently as litigation
      friend and is already providing instructions to the appellant's
      solicitor.  There is no actual or potential conflict of interest
      between her and the appellant.".  [CW] was on that basis appointed by
      the Tribunal.
   2) The Respondent was ordered to file and serve a response to the
      Appellant's skeleton argument by no later than 4pm on Friday 17 July
      2020.  That was intended to address "in as much detail as possible the
      evidence submitted since the previous decision of the tribunal".
   3) All documents were ordered to be lodged with the Tribunal by email.  I
      accept that the decision made at the CMR did not provide how documents
      were to be served as between the parties.  It is to be noted however
      that the decision at the CMR took place against the backdrop of the
      first lockdown in the Covid-19 pandemic and at a time when the
      official guidance was that employees should work at home where
      possible.


14. The decision as originally sent provided for service of the
   Respondent's reply to the skeleton argument to be served and filed by 4pm
   on Friday 19 June 2020. However, at some point thereafter it appears to
   have been appreciated that this was either an incorrect date or allowed
   insufficient time for the review to take place.    The decision as
   annexed to the notice of hearing dated 8 July 2020 provided for the 17
   July date.  The Review was in fact filed on 8 July 2020.


15. The Appellant's complaint that the Review was improperly served stems
   from the inclusion in the letterhead of the solicitor's firm of a
   statement that service by fax and email was not accepted.  I have however
   pointed to the backdrop of the pandemic and first lockdown.  Moreover,
   the Appellant's solicitors had been using email to correspond not only
   with the Tribunal but also with the Respondent's Presenting Officers Unit
   (see for example letter dated 8 June 2020 enclosing a further bundle of
   evidence).  I do not of course criticise the Appellant's solicitors in
   that regard.  I accept that the letters were sent also by post.  However,
   given the circumstances pertaining at the relevant time, it might be
   expected that the Respondent would also use email as a means of
   communication (particularly since the Respondent's offices were probably
   more heavily staffed in normal circumstances with therefore a potentially
   higher risk of infection if individuals did not follow the guidance to
   work from home).


16. The Review was sent only by email to the Appellant's solicitor.  It was
   however properly filed with the Tribunal at the email address given in
   the CMR decision.  Unfortunately, it appears that the email address used
   by the Respondent to send the Review was that from which the 8 June 2020
   letter was sent.   The Respondent cannot be faulted as, since the
   Appellant's solicitors would not accept service by email, no general
   email address was provided.   The email covering the 8 June letter does
   include the details of two other members of the Appellant's solicitor's
   firm and it might perhaps have been sensible for all those so named to be
   included in the email serving the Review.


17. The Respondent was not to know however that the sender of the 8 June
   2020 email was about to go on maternity leave.  That person, Ms
   Erampamoorthy, has signed a witness statement dated 30 September 2020
   which was with the grounds challenging the Decision.   In that statement,
   she apologises to the Tribunal for failing to action the email from the
   Respondent.  She accepts that it was her responsibility to do so and that
   she did not realise that the email had arrived until she was asked about
   it by the solicitor, Mr Komathan, on the day of the hearing before Judge
   Raymond.  She confirms that she was working from home by June 2020 due to
   her pregnancy and the pandemic.  She gave birth on 2 August 2020, and it
   may be that she was on maternity leave by 8 July 2020.  She does not
   confirm that this was so.  It is not suggested that there was any "out of
   office" message placed on her email to alert senders of email
   correspondence that she was on maternity leave if she was.  Ms
   Erampamoorthy herself takes responsibility for overlooking the email.
   She does not suggest that the Review should not have been sent in this
   way.  That is a realistic position to take in the circumstances
   prevailing at that time.


18. In any event, I consider this ground to be something of a red herring.
   The Appellant and his representatives were provided with the Review on
   the day of the hearing by Judge Raymond and given time to consider it.
   The real issue is whether they were given sufficient time to consider it
   or whether the hearing should have been adjourned to another day.  It
   appeared to be suggested by Ms Jegarajah in the course of her submissions
   that Judge Raymond was wrong to provide the Review and insist that the
   Appellant consider the issues therein.  She appeared to suggest that the
   Judge should simply have ignored the document given its non-receipt by
   the Appellant particularly since the Respondent was unrepresented at the
   hearing.  If I understood that submission correctly it is misconceived.
   Whether or not the Review was correctly served, it was correctly filed.
   The Judge could not simply ignore it.


19. For the foregoing reasons, there is no error of law disclosed by ground
   one.  As I say, however, the real issue is the fairness of the hearing
   given that the Review was received by the Appellant and his
   representatives (or at least only came to their attention) on the morning
   of the hearing.

Ground two: Appellant's vulnerability

20. Although, as I say above, the central issue in this appeal is the
   fairness of the hearing, the second ground is also by way of a
   preliminary consideration in that context and so I deal with it
   separately before coming to that issue.


21. As I have already noted, [CW] was appointed by the Tribunal as a
   litigation friend at the CMR.  On that occasion the Respondent did not
   apparently object to the appointment. There is no suggestion that the
   Tribunal does not have the power to appoint a litigation friend nor could
   there be following the Tribunal's decision in R (oao JS and Others) v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department (litigation friend - child)
   [2019] UKUT 64 (IAC) ("JS").

22. The Review asserts both that the Appellant is "enhancing his medical
   condition for the sole purpose of bolstering his asylum claim" and that
   [CW] is not a suitable person to act as a litigation friend.  The drafter
   of the Review appears to have been unaware that the Tribunal had already
   appointed [CW] as the Respondent sets out the process as being for the
   Tribunal to appoint and for the Respondent to be able to make objection
   to "the request".  The position at that time was, as I have already
   noted, that [CW] had been appointed without objection from the
   Respondent.  I observe also that the point taken about [CW]'s credibility
   based on what she has previously said about her father's employment is
   made in the context only of her suitability to act as a litigation
   friend.


23. There was some discussion at the hearing before me about the role of a
   litigation friend.  For that reason, it is necessary for me to say
   something about that and the purpose of appointing a litigation friend.

24. The role of a litigation friend is neatly summarised in an extract from
   the White Book which is cited at [92] of the decision in JS as follows:


    "The litigation friend is required to take all measures he or she sees
    fit for the benefit of the child or protected party, supplementing the
    want of capacity and judgement of the child or protected party, his or
    her function being to guard or safeguard the interests of the child or
    protected party for the purposes of the litigation.  The discharge of
    that duty involves the assumption by the litigation friend of the
    obligation to acquaint him or herself of the nature of the action and,
    under proper legal advice, to take all due steps to further the
    interests of the child or protected party..."


25. The Tribunal goes on to refer to a case concerning the role of a
   litigation friend in mental health proceedings whose duties are "(i) to
   act competently and diligently and (ii) to act in the best interests of
   (and without conflict with) the party for whom he is conducting
   proceedings".


26. Whilst it is of course the case that the Appellant remains a party to
   the appeal, the litigation friend is there to give instructions.  That
   person in effect steps into the shoes of the party who lacks capacity to
   deal with the case. In this case, although [CW] might have wished to
   explain to the Appellant what was being said by the Respondent in the
   Review (if and insofar as he had capacity to understand this), she was
   not duty bound to do so.  Her duty was to advance the case in the
   Appellant's best interests and to provide the Appellant's legal
   representative with instructions.


27. The way in which ground two is advanced in relation to unfairness more
   generally is that the refusal to adjourn was "clearly in breach of the
   Presidential guidance on Vulnerable Persons".  I cannot accept that
   assertion.  It is appropriate to explain that conclusion by reference to
   the leading case about the treatment of vulnerable persons in the
   immigration context - AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home
   Department and another [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 ("AM").


28. As is said by the then Senior President at [16] of the judgment, the
   issue for the Tribunal Judge to consider is the needs of the individual
   appellant and how to ensure that the appellant has effective access to
   justice.  AM was a case concerning a vulnerable person who gave evidence
   in his appeal.  That does not apply in this case as it was agreed that
   the Appellant was unfit to give such evidence.  The steps to be taken by
   reference to the practice direction are set out with approval at [30] and
   [31] of the judgment.  Those do not apply here as there was no suggestion
   that the Appellant should give oral evidence.


29. Crucially for this case, the Senior President went on to consider the
   need in "a rare case" for the Tribunal to appoint a litigation friend and
   said this:


    "44. I have come to the conclusion that there is ample flexibility in
    the tribunal rules to permit a tribunal to appoint a litigation friend
    in the rare circumstance that the child or incapacitated adult would
    not be able to represent him/herself and obtain effective access to
    justice without such a step being taken.  In the alternative, even if
    the tribunal rules are not broad enough to confer that power, the
    overriding objective in the context of natural justice requires the
    same conclusion to be reached...."


   As reflected in that passage, it is the very appointment of the
   litigation friend which is designed to deal with access to justice for a
   person in the Appellant's position.   The Presidential Guidance is
   therefore not relevant as the Appellant was neither a witness nor in the
   position of needing to give instructions.


30. I will come on to the specific reasons why it is said that the Judge
   acted unfairly when refusing the adjournment when dealing with ground
   three.  I deal though briefly with a suggestion made by Ms Jegarajah that
   the Respondent's objection to [CW]'s appointment in some way affected her
   ability to act as a litigation friend.  If that is what Ms Jegarajah
   intended to suggest, it is a submission which lacks merit.  As I have
   observed above, the drafter of the Review appears to have misunderstood
   the stage which the appointment process had reached.  Once a litigation
   friend is appointed by the Tribunal it would be for the Tribunal to
   terminate that appointment.  It could not be done by a party to the
   appeal.  As it was, Judge Raymond rejected the objection but that does
   not matter.  Unless and until the Tribunal discharged the litigation
   friend, [CW] remained appointed and was in a position to give
   instructions to Ms Jegarajah.

Ground three:  Refusals to Adjourn and Fairness of Hearing

31. It is necessary to consider the Judge's refusals to adjourn in the
   round.  For that reason, it is also necessary to consider what occurred
   at and outside the hearing as a whole.  What I say below therefore takes
   into account the specific complaints made in ground two.


32.  I consider the issue of fairness in accordance with the guidance given
   in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) ("Nwaigwe") as
   follows:



    "If a Tribunal refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    considerations;  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to   intrude;
    denying the party concerned  a  fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most cases  the
    question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his
    right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on
    fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that  the  question  for
    the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT  acted reasonably.   Rather,
    the test to be applied is that of fairness:  was there any deprivation
    of the affected party's right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."



33. I make two observations before turning to consider fairness.  The first
   is that, if Ms Jegarajah as the advocate who appeared before Judge
   Raymond, had provided a witness statement in support of the grounds of
   appeal dealing with what occurred, it would not have been appropriate for
   her to represent the Appellant before me.  She did not provide a witness
   statement.  However, for that reason, I could not permit Ms Jegarajah to
   make submissions to me which amounted to the giving of evidence.


34. The second observation is that, in the course of her submissions, Ms
   Jegarajah made an assertion which appeared to suggest bias on the part of
   the Judge.  Although it is clear from the Decision that a submission was
   made to Judge Raymond at the time asking him to recuse himself (as
   recorded at [117] of the Decision), such an allegation formed no part of
   the pleaded grounds of appeal against the Decision.

35. There is a reference in the witness statement of [CW] which was
   attached to the grounds of appeal that the Judge "was being very
   sarcastic" towards her and Ms Jegarajah.  She makes a serious allegation
   about the Judge's attitude.  Judge Raymond was not asked to deal with
   that allegation as there is no pleaded cases of bias, either actual or
   apparent.  I cannot, as Ms Jegarajah suggested at one point, infer from
   the statement that the Appellant is challenging the Decision on grounds
   of bias.  If the Appellant wished to advance that case it should have
   been pleaded.  It is not.  For that reason, I say no more about the
   allegations which are made by [CW] in her statement.  As I have already
   noted, there is no witness statement from Ms Jegarajah made in support of
   those allegations.


36. I deal then with what occurred at the hearing.  I do not need to set
   out much of the detail of the interaction as between the Appellant (or
   more accurately [CW]) and Ms Jegarajah on the one hand and the Judge on
   the other as this is set out in some detail at [106] to [123] of the
   Decision.  In short summary of what is there said, the hearing had a
   fixed start time of 11.30am.  The Respondent was not present.  The
   Appellant was in attendance but was not to be called due to his lack of
   capacity.

37. As I have noted in relation to ground one, the Appellant did not at
   this stage have the Review, but the Judge provided it to Ms Jegarajah and
   [CW] in the short adjournment which he permitted to allow Ms Jegarajah to
   ensure that she had all the necessary documents.  The Appellant (or more
   accurately [CW]) was given two hours to check with his solicitors whether
   the Review had been received.  At [111] to [115], the Judge refers to the
   submissions made to him following the two hours' adjournment.  The
   submissions made were, in effect, that the Review had not previously been
   received and that it raised new challenges as regards the appointment of
   [CW] as the Appellant's litigation friend.

38. The Judge refused the adjournment at that point in time. Ms Jegarajah
   then said that she would need further time to take a statement from [CW].
    She was given a further hour.  Following the second adjournment, Ms
   Jegarajah asked the Judge to recuse himself based on the allegation of an
   appearance of bias.  The Judge declined and refused to adjourn.  [CW] and
   Ms Jegarajah then withdrew from the hearing.  The Judge has set out his
   reasons for refusing to recuse himself at [120] of the Decision and has
   recorded the complaint made by Ms Jegarajah to the IAC President about
   the Judge at [122] of the Decision.


39. In accordance with the guidance in Nwaigwe, I accept that the issue for
   me is whether the hearing was unfair rather than whether Judge Raymond's
   decision to refuse an adjournment was reasonable.  However, it is
   appropriate to record the summary of his reasons for refusing the
   adjournment at [121] of the Decision as follows:


    "In refusing the applications to adjourn I took the view that there was
    no unfairness to the appellant's only witness, his wife, who was
    represented by counsel, in expecting that the review could be addressed
    in the three hours I had provided for this to be done, between 12:00
    and 14:00, and then between 14:30 and 15:30. The review raised issues
    that flowed naturally from the core asylum claim, and even if by some
    internal administrative mishap in the running of the offices of
    instructing solicitors it had been overlooked, there was ample
    opportunity to address the review.  But instead that time was taken up
    in drafting a complaint against the presiding Judge."


40. It is next necessary for me to record in summary what is said by [CW]
   in her statement attached to the grounds of appeal.  In short summary,
   [CW] says that it was difficult for her to deal with the hearing at the
   same time as caring for the Appellant.  She explains in some detail what
   she had to do to look after him during the day.  What is said about the
   Appellant being asked to give evidence at [4] of the statement, however,
   is inconsistent with the Judge's record of what occurred which was that
   the Appellant was introduced but then asked to wait outside ([106] of the
   Decision).  [CW] considered that, by producing the Review, the Judge
   stepped into the shoes of the Respondent.  As I have already noted, the
   Respondent had filed the Review and sent it to the Appellant's solicitors
   who had received it albeit overlooked it.  Whether or not that was proper
   service, there could have been no reason to object to the Judge giving it
   to the Appellant's side.  No doubt, Ms Jegarajah would have informed [CW]
   that this was not overstepping the mark.

41. The focus of ground three as pleaded is that the Review had not been
   received by the Appellant's side prior to the hearing, it raised new
   matters and there was not time to deal with it as well as dealing with a
   vulnerable "client".  It is said that Judge Raymond should have permitted
   an adjournment to allow sufficient time to deal with the new matters.


42. In light of the way in which the ground is pleaded, I turn to look at
   the Review.  I begin with the list of issues identified by the Respondent
   at the outset (which are taken from the Appellant's skeleton argument
   before the First-tier Tribunal at the time of the CMR).  Those are as
   follows:


    "(i) Is the A a vulnerable person?
    (ii) Should the FTT grant permission to appoint the A's wife as his
    litigant in person [sic]?
    (iii)    What weight should be attached to the findings of FTTJ Gaskell
    in the decision dated 5th April 2018 applying the principles in
    Devaseelan 2002?
    (iv) Does the A face persecutory risk as a perceived member of the LTTE
    and one who breached bail in respect of an offence relating to the
    LTTE?
    (v)  Does the A's wife face persecutory risk as a PSG, women?  In
    particular, an identifiable woman Buddhist convert to Islam, an
    observant Muslim woman who wears clothes that mark her out as an
    observant Muslim, and as a woman at risk of FGM and forced marriage?
    (vi) Will removal place the R in breach of Article 3 ECHR?"


   Issue (v) is then identified as a "new matter".


43. The Respondent then sets out her position in what is termed a "Counter
   Schedule".  As I have already observed, the Review in relation to issues
   (i) and (ii) is misconceived.  The Tribunal had already determined that
   the Appellant lacked capacity and required a litigation friend and that
   [CW] should be appointed his litigation friend.  The Appellant complains
   of new points being raised within those issues about the extent of the
   Appellant's medical condition and [CW]'s credibility but, to all intents
   and purposes, those were irrelevant as the issue regarding the
   appointment of a litigation friend had already been determined.


44. Even if those points were still relevant, it is difficult to identify
   what it was which created the need for an adjournment.  In relation to
   issue (i), the Respondent inferred that "the appellant is enhancing his
   medical condition for the sole purpose of bolstering his Asylum claim".
   It is clear from the decision under appeal that the Respondent did not
   accept that the Appellant's medical condition met the necessary threshold
   of severity.  The Appellant had produced medical evidence which it was
   for the Judge to consider.  Ms Jegarajah would obviously have been
   familiar with that evidence since it was produced by those instructing
   her.  She would undoubtedly have been in a position to marshal that
   evidence and direct the Judge's attention to that which supported the
   extent of the Appellant's condition.


45. In relation to issue (ii), the Respondent referred to an application as
   a visitor ("VAF") made by [CW]'s father in which he stated that he was "a
   Medical Lab Technician" whereas [CW]'s evidence was that he "used to work
   as a Biomedical Scientist in the Sri Lankan Army".   I accept that the
   VAF was new evidence.  However, there are two reasons why I am unable to
   understand how this created problems for the Appellant.  First, the point
   raised is a very short one.  There might have been a plausible
   explanation for the inconsistency (perhaps regarding the timing of [CW]'s
   father's employment positions).  In any event, [CW] could have provided
   instructions to Ms Jegarajah very shortly.  The facts were in [CW]'s
   knowledge and did not involve a need to take instructions or evidence
   from the Appellant himself.


46. Moreover, although I had initially understood this evidence to be
   relevant to the underlying asylum claim as to risk on return, the only
   relevance placed on it by the Respondent is as to the credibility of [CW]
   and therefore her suitability to act as a litigation friend.  As I have
   already noted, the issue had already been determined by the Tribunal.  As
   such, the evidence was largely irrelevant.   Although the credibility of
   both the Appellant and [CW] was at issue (including because of the
   findings of the Judge in the previous appeal determination), if it was
   necessary for [CW] to rebut this new point made by the Respondent, she
   could have done so in her oral evidence.  It is not clear why any further
   witness statement was needed.  Even if it was, it would have required a
   few sentences at most.

47. It is also appropriate to consider what the Judge made of the Review in
   relation to those two issues.  Those are dealt with briefly at [103] and
   [104] of the Decision as follows:

    "103.    I consider, however, that the observations of Dr Turner could
    be seen as giving some credence to the view of the respondent in their
    review of 08.07.20, that it can be inferred the appellant is enhancing
    his medical condition for the sole purpose of bolstering his asylum
    claim, because the medical records show that he did not mention his
    mental health difficulties to his doctors in 2017 [�3].
    104. I find that this is an issue raised by the respondent which falls
    to be addressed in my conclusions that will follow, in the light of the
    whole of the evidence in this appeal, and without it bringing into
    question the appropriateness of his wife acting as his litigation
    friend and giving evidence in his appeal, when he could not do so
    because of serious mental health problems, on matters in which both are
    claimed to have been intimately connected since 1998."

48. Judge Raymond did not therefore discharge [CW] as the Appellant's
   litigation friend.  [CW] having been appointed by the Tribunal in that
   capacity it would have required a direction of the Tribunal to discharge
   her.  Ms Jegarajah could therefore be assured that she was able to take
   instructions from [CW] unless and until a Tribunal Judge reached a
   different conclusion.  No doubt if Judge Raymond had considered it
   appropriate to discharge [CW] as the Appellant's litigation friend, he
   would have given an adjournment, but he did not do so.  As he also said
   and as I have already pointed out, the issues regarding the extent of the
   Appellant's mental health problems and [CW]'s credibility had to be
   considered against all the evidence.


49. I accept that the Judge, at [161] and again at [202] of the Decision
   did reach the conclusion that the Appellant was exaggerating his
   condition.  However, he reached those conclusions only after detailed
   consideration of all the evidence in that regard.  The very detailed
   credibility findings at [127] to [208] which include the findings about
   the Appellant's medical condition do include at [176] of the Decision
   reference to the inconsistency arising from the VAF but this is a minor
   point among many.


50. Although issues (i) and (ii) are said at [14] of the grounds to be
   those which caused difficulties to the Appellant and led to the need for
   an adjournment, I consider for completeness the remaining parts of the
   Review.

51. There can be no complaint about the impact of the findings of the
   previous Judge.  As is pointed out at [5] of the Review, this was also
   dealt with in the decision letter under appeal.


52. Likewise, issues (iv) and (vi) had been dealt with in the decision
   under appeal ([6] and [8] of the Review).


53. I accept that what is said in response to issue (v) at [7] of the
   Review is not cross-referenced to the decision under appeal.  It could
   not have been dealt with previously, however, as this is identified as a
   "new matter".  The facts as relied upon in the Review were however the
   subject of findings in the previous appeal and the only reference to new
   (background) evidence appears to be in relation to FGM.   As I have
   already noted, the grounds challenging the Decision do not identify this
   issue as being one with which the Appellant was unable to deal.

54. I sought to ascertain from Ms Jegarajah during the hearing before me
   why the Review gave rise to the need for an adjournment and therefore why
   the refusals to adjourn were unfair.  Although that is the way in which
   her grounds are formulated, she appeared reluctant to engage with those
   issues.  Instead, her primary submission made orally appeared to be that
   there was no prejudice occasioned by an adjournment because the
   Respondent was unrepresented and therefore the Judge should have granted
   the adjournment sought.

55. Whilst I accept that lack of prejudice may be a relevant consideration,
   it cannot be right that a party is entitled to an adjournment for that
   reason, simply because that party wants an adjournment and without more.
   In any event, prejudice is not restricted to detriment to either party
   but also to the Tribunal's procedures.  Here, a day had been set aside
   for the hearing.  If the hearing had been adjourned on the day, that
   would have meant that another case which might have been listed instead
   was not heard.  It would mean devoting another day of Tribunal time to
   the hearing of this case when, on the Judge's view, the hearing could go
   ahead without prejudice to the Appellant.  The Tribunal is of course
   required to have regard to the overriding objective to decide cases
   justly and fairly but also to avoid delay so far as compatible with
   proper consideration of the evidence.

56. I have carefully considered whether it can be said that the Appellant
   did not have a fair hearing due to the Judge's refusals to adjourn.
   Whether a hearing is unfair depends on context in all the circumstances.
   I have considered the Appellant's position as a vulnerable person and the
   challenges which that brings.  However, his vulnerability was dealt with
   by the appointment of [CW] as his litigation friend.  I accept that the
   Appellant was at court with her and might have required her attention
   alongside her role as the person providing instructions and as a witness.
    However, if the Appellant was to attend the tribunal hearing with [CW]
   (as he did), it would always have been the case that arrangements would
   need to be made for his care whilst [CW] was giving evidence and dealing
   with the case. It was for [CW] to ensure that suitable arrangements were
   in place.

57. The position was not changed by the late receipt of the Review.  The
   Review raised new points but only in relation to issues which had already
   been resolved by the Tribunal.  Even if those new points needed to be
   dealt with other than by way of submissions from counsel (which I do not
   accept in any event), they did not require any more than minimal
   instructions and evidence.  [CW] was given ample time to provide
   instructions on those very limited points.  She had the benefit of
   experienced Counsel who was very familiar with the case and had all the
   evidence with the limited exception of the VAF produced with the Review
   which had been filed well before the hearing (albeit I accept not seen by
   the Appellant's side until the morning of the hearing).


58. On the face of [CW]'s witness statement which accompanied the grounds,
   it appears that [CW] had made up her mind that she did not want the case
   to be dealt with by this particular Judge from the moment that she went
   into the hearing because she considered him to have made up his mind that
   the Appellant would lose.  As I have already noted, there is no pleaded
   challenge to the Decision based on bias and I do not therefore need to
   deal with those allegations.  The challenge to the Decision is on the
   basis that the hearing should have been adjourned because [CW] did not
   have sufficient time to deal with matters.


59. Having considered all the circumstances in accordance with the guidance
   given in Nwaigwe, and based on the Appellant's grounds as pleaded, for
   the reasons I have given, the hearing before Judge Raymond was not
   procedurally unfair.  He accorded the Appellant, and more importantly
   [CW] short adjournments which were of sufficient length to deal with the
   very limited new issues raised in the Review (insofar as those required a
   response at all).

60. For the foregoing reasons, there is no error of law in the Decision.  I
   therefore uphold the Decision with the consequence that the Appellant's
   appeal remains dismissed.


DECISION

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond promulgated on 2 October
2020 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  I
therefore uphold that decision with the consequence that the Appellant's
appeal remains dismissed.



Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated: 4 August 2021



