
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01383/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January 2019                             |On 7 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     BOC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Butler, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 23 June 2018 dismissing her appeal against  the
    respondent's decision of 15 January 2018 refusing her  application  for
    asylum.



Background.


2.    The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 3 April  1980.   It  is
    her account that she left Nigeria in 1989 with her father's consent and
    travelled to Italy with another woman.  She said that she was a  victim
    of modern slavery working in this woman's home and then  from  1995  to
    2000 in a hair salon she owned.  In 2000 she married  in  secret  while
    still living in Italy and in October 2002  came  to  the  UK  with  her
    husband, travelling on a multi-entry visit visa valid from August  2002
    until  14  February  2003.   On  26  July  2004  her  husband  made  an
    application for leave to remain naming her as his dependant,  but  that
    application was refused on 25 February 2009 and notice of liability  to
    removal was notified to the appellant on 26 March  2009.   She  made  a
    further application for leave in April 2010 which  was  refused  on  28
    January 2011 with no right of appeal.

3.    Her husband died on 13 April 2014 and she  claims  that  she  received
    threats from his family who regarded her as a  witch,  responsible  for
    his death.  In June 2014 she applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain,
    but this was refused on 30 October 2014 and her appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was dismissed in a decision issued on 9 June 2015.


4.    The appellant was encountered  by  immigration  officers  on  17  June
    2016.  She produced a document purporting to confirm  that  she  was  a
    British citizen, but this  was  found  not  to  be  genuine.   She  was
    detained and made a claim for asylum on 4 July 2016.  As  part  of  her
    claim she raised issues of modern slavery  and  trafficking.   She  was
    referred to the relevant  authorities  and  released  from  immigration
    detention on 13 July 2016.  On 21 April 2017  the  competent  authority
    decided that she had not been a victim of trafficking and on 15 January
    2018 the respondent  notified  the  appellant  that  her  claim  to  be
    recognised as a refugee or otherwise for leave to remain was refused.


The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


5.     At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   the   appellant
    maintained her claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and for  leave
    under articles 2, 3, 4 and 8 of the ECHR. The judge heard oral evidence
    from the appellant and  was  provided  with  a  bundle  of  documentary
    evidence  in  support  of  her  appeal  (A1-337).   This   included   a
    psychological  assessment  from  a  qualified  psychotherapist,   Susan
    Pagella, (at A21-37), a country  expert  report  from  Professor  Mario
    Aguilar (A38-73) and the decision of Judge Baldwin of 9 June 2015 (A192-
    205). The bundle also  contained  at  A257-337  background  information
    relating to Nigeria.

6.    The judge did not accept that the  appellant  was  at  any  risk  from
    threats from her late husband's family.  He noted that this  issue  had
    not been raised before  Judge  Baldwin  in  June  2015,  rejecting  the
    argument that the issue relating to her fear of ill  treatment  at  the
    hands of her former in-laws was raised or that her lawyers  had  chosen
    to omit any reference to it.  The judge found that  the  appellant  had
    not been targeted by threats or otherwise  from  members  of  her  late
    husband's family [50].

7.    He went on to consider the issues raised by her claim that  she  would
    be at risk as a person who had been previously trafficked.  He  rightly
    said that this had to  be  seen  in  the  context  that  the  competent
    authority had concluded that she had not been such a  victim  and  that
    her claims in this regard were, in effect, rejected in  their  entirety
    by Judge Baldwin at the previous hearing [53].

8.    There was further evidence on this issue in the  psychological  report
    by  Ms  Pagella.   The  judge  accepted  that  she  was  an  expert  in
    psychological assessment.  She said that the  appellant's  presentation
    symptoms fell within the spectrum of those who had been kept in a state
    of modern slavery without documentation, rights, holidays  or  payment.
    The judge accepted her diagnosis that the appellant was suffering  from
    symptoms of PTSD and associated  conditions  but  found  that  why  she
    presented  with  those  problems  was  not  so  straightforward.    The
    appellant had experienced the deaths of two  important  people  in  her
    life, her mother and her husband, whose death was apparently unexpected
    [57].  There were also factors which led him to find  that  on  balance
    her evidence was not credible including the delay in making  her  claim
    until she was served with a notice concerning her removal  and  he  did
    not accept her explanation about providing a false document  suggesting
    that she was a British citizen  [62].   On  the  issue  of  asylum,  he
    concluded that the appellant had not shown even to the  lower  standard
    that she had a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  any  convention
    reason if she was now to return to Nigeria and she was not a real  risk
    of ill treatment  contrary  to  article  3  as  a  previous  victim  of
    trafficking or at the hands of her late husband's family [63].


9.    The judge went on to consider the remarks of Professor  Aguilar  about
    the availability of protection from  the  authorities  in  Nigeria  and
    whether the appellant might be at risk as being "culturally  associated
    with a witch" because she was a single woman without  a  husband.   His
    report set out a full background to witchcraft and his  considerations,
    but the judge said that he found this almost completely unhelpful as it
    was an academic discourse, whereas the relevant context to a report  of
    this nature was the prevalence of such problems and  the  vulnerability
    of persons to such accusations.  He had not addressed that issue in any
    manner  that  assisted  the  Tribunal  [71].   The  judge,   therefore,
    concluded that the appellant had not shown that she faced a  real  risk
    of treatment contrary to article 3 on the basis of her mental health or
    her profile on return.


10.   The judge then considered article 8.  It was common  ground  that  the
    appellant had no family life in the UK and that she relied solely  upon
    issues of private life.  The appellant would be returning to Nigeria as
    38-year old woman who had lived in that country for  almost  the  first
    half of her life. (This finding is based on the finding of fact made by
    Judge Baldwin that the appellant  was  not  in  Italy  before  1997  or
    possibly 1998 [60]).  English was the formal language of Nigeria.   The
    appellant had married a  man  of  similar  background  to  herself  and
    appeared to have the support of friends in  this  country  and  in  her
    church.  She appeared to have made no enquiries and to have closed  her
    mind as to any relatives she might have in Nigeria [77].  The judge did
    not accept that she had none or that they were  not  capable  of  being
    traced.


11.   He accepted that medical  attention  was  available  in  Nigeria.   He
    found that the appellant was dependent on friends  and  her  church  in
    this country and had not sought to explain  why  at  least  some  basic
    support from them could not continue in practical terms were she now to
    be returned to Nigeria.  She also appeared to have made  no  effort  to
    trace her relatives there.  He was not satisfied that  there  were  any
    very significant obstacles to her reintegration into  Nigeria  and  she
    could not succeed in respect of private life under the Rules.

12.   The judge  went  on  to  consider  the  provisions  of  s.117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The appellant had a poor
    immigration history.  She had come to the country as a visitor and  had
    not had leave to remain since the beginning of 2003.  She  had  made  a
    number of unsuccessful applications  but  had  never  returned  as  she
    should have done.  She had failed to report and had proffered  a  false
    identity document suggesting that she was a  British  citizen  and  had
    made a very late claim only after she was threatened with removal.  Her
    private life appeared to be limited to  her  friends  and  her  church.
    Basic medical treatment should be available to her in Nigeria  and  she
    had access to financial support.   The  judge  said  that  he  did  not
    underestimate that it would be  difficult  for  the  appellant  now  to
    return to Nigeria after so  long  but,  in  his  judgment,  the  strong
    interest of the state in effective immigration control  outweighed  the
    private life of the appellant  and  the  decision  to  remove  her  was
    proportionate.


The Grounds of Appeal.


13.   There are two grounds of appeal.  The first  ground  argues  that  the
    judge erred in her his assessment of whether the appellant would be  at
    risk of serious harm as someone perceived to be a witch. He had  failed
    to give sufficient reasons or taken proper account of all the  relevant
    considerations.  Given that the  appellant  would  be  returning  as  a
    single person with no male protector, the judge had been wrong  to  say
    that the expert evidence of Professor Aguilar had  not  addressed  that
    issue in a way that assisted the Tribunal.  He was a recognised  expert
    whose account was drawn from his experience as  well  as  from  a  wide
    range of  background  sources.   It  is  argued  that  the  judge  gave
    inadequate reasons for rejecting this part of the appellant's claim.


14.   The second ground argues that, when assessing  article  8,  the  judge
    failed to take into account relevant evidence and  reached  conclusions
    not based on the evidence.  It is argued that he erred on the issue  of
    whether the appellant was in contact with her family.  In her  evidence
    she had said that she did not know where any of her  family  were,  did
    not have their contact details and did not know how to find them. It is
    argued  that  he  failed  to  take  this  evidence  into  account  when
    concluding that the appellant appeared to have made no enquiries and to
    have closed her mind to any relatives she might have in Nigeria.

15.   Further, the judge  had  relied  on  the  support  the  appellant  was
    receiving from her friends and church as a basis  for  concluding  that
    there would be adequate support on return. It is argued that  this  was
    not an adequate basis for such a finding.  He  had  accepted  that  the
    appellant had significant mental  health  issues,  but  the  background
    evidence indicated that there was  very  little  provision  for  mental
    health care in Nigeria and such that was  available  was  expensive  to
    access.  It is argued that there was no basis in the evidence  for  the
    judge to conclude that the appellant could continue to receive adequate
    support on return to Nigeria.  There would be no adequate financial and
    material support on return and in  the  absence  of  such  support  the
    appellant would face destitution and severe harm as  a  result  of  her
    poverty and serious mental health conditions which would amount to very
    significant obstacles to integration.


16.   Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal.   When  granting  permission  the  judge
    commented that whilst the judge gave cogent reasons  for  finding  that
    the removal of the appellant would be proportionate in the light of the
    public interest, it was just arguable that  she  erred  in  failing  to
    consider the impact of removal on the appellant's  physical  and  moral
    integrity in the light  of  her  accepted  mental  health  difficulties
    which, along with other accepted difficulties she faced, cast doubt  on
    the safety of  the  conclusion  on  proportionality.   There  was  less
    arguable merit in ground one, but all the grounds could be argued.


17.   In her submissions, Ms Butler argued that the judge had erred  in  law
    by failing to engage sufficiently with the complex picture relating  to
    the appellant's functionality in the UK and the predicted deterioration
    of her  condition  on  return  to  Nigeria.   Further,  the  judge  had
    misunderstood the nature of the support the appellant was receiving  in
    the UK.  The support was in the form  of  accommodation,  pastoral  and
    emotional support but it was wrong to proceed  on  the  basis  that  it
    included funding or would lead to the appellant receiving such  support
    in Nigeria, where treatment would generally require substantial  funds.
    The judge had also failed to take into account the background  evidence
    that individuals with mental health conditions  would  be  stigmatised.
    The judge had further erred when he said that the appellant had made no
    effort to contact relatives in Nigeria when her evidence was  that  she
    had lost their contact details and so could not make contact.   So  far
    as ground one was concerned, she  submitted  that  the  conclusions  by
    Professor Aguilar deserved some weight  as  conclusions  reached  by  a
    recognised expert who could speak from his own experience.


18.   Mrs Jones submitted that the psychological report had to be looked  at
    in the context that the expert had not had access to all  the  evidence
    including the interviews and the reasons  for  refusal  decision.   The
    appellant's claim could not succeed under article 3 whether  on  health
    or trafficking grounds.  When the decision was read as a whole, it  was
    clear that the judge had reached a reasoned decision properly  open  to
    him on the evidence.  In respect of ground one the judge's  comment  on
    the contents of the report being academic at (71) must be read  in  the
    context of the decision as a whole.  Regardless of this  evidence,  the
    judge had been fully entitled to reach  his  decision  on  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk of serious harm on return.   In  respect  of
    ground two, the issue of proportionality had to be  looked  at  in  the
    light of the findings on credibility.  It was for the judge  to  decide
    what inferences could be drawn from  the  evidence  and  there  was  no
    reason to believe that he misunderstood that evidence.

Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.


19.   I will deal first with ground one which argues that the  judge  failed
    to deal adequately with or to give sufficient reasons  for  taking  the
    view that the appellant, as a single woman without  a  male  protector,
    would not be at risk as someone perceived to be  witch.   There  is  no
    substance in this ground.  When dealing with the asylum claim the judge
    dealt with the issue of whether the appellant would be at risk from her
    husband's relatives and whether there would  be  a  risk  arising  from
    being trafficked.  These claims were rejected  on  credibility  grounds
    and  there  has  been  no  challenge  to  these  findings.   The  judge
    considered the evidence of Professor Aguilar and  his  suggestion  that
    the appellant might be culturally associated with being a  witch.   The
    judge was entitled to find that whilst the expert had  dealt  with  the
    academic background which might support such  a  claim,  there  was  no
    adequate basis in the evidence that the appellant,  in  her  particular
    circumstances, would be at such risk as the expert had not  dealt  with
    the prevalence of the problems and the vulnerability of persons to such
    accusations.  In any event, in the light  of  the  judge's  credibility
    findings and, in particular, that the appellant was not any  risk  from
    her late husband's family, there was no adequate basis in the  evidence
    to support a finding that she would be at real risk of ill-treatment as
    a perceived witch.

20.   Turning to ground two, the nub of the grounds and submissions is  that
    the judge failed  to  take  all  relevant  matters  into  account  when
    assessing proportionality. It was common ground that the appellant  had
    no family life in the UK but that article 8 was engaged on private life
    grounds. It is argued that there was a complex picture so  far  as  the
    appellant's circumstances were concerned, which indicated that she  had
    limited  functionality  in  the  UK  and  that  her   condition   would
    deteriorate on return to Nigeria. The judge accepted that the appellant
    showed symptoms of PTSD and associated conditions but was not satisfied
    that they arose because she had been kept in a state of modern  slavery
    or had been trafficked.  Whilst accepting that the appellant did suffer
    from conditions identified in the psychological report, he was entitled
    to find that they did not arise for the reasons claimed.

21.   He took into account the appellant's current treatment [68] and  found
    that the  relevant  medication  was  available  in  Nigeria  [78].   He
    accepted that there was a distinction  between  potential  availability
    and the ability of a person to access  it.   There  is,  therefore,  no
    reason to believe that the judge  failed  to  consider  the  impact  of
    removal on the appellant's physical and moral integrity. The judge also
    considered the evidence about the appellant being dependent on  friends
    and her church.  Whether the support was in the form  of  accommodation
    or pastoral and emotional support and not direct financial support does
    not undermine his comment that it  was  surprising  that  she  had  not
    sought to explain why at least some basic support from them  could  not
    continue in practical terms were she to be returned to Nigeria.

22.   The judge also commented on the fact that the  appellant  appeared  to
    have made no effort to trace her relatives in Nigeria.  It is submitted
    that he had misunderstood the  evidence  as  the  appellant  had  given
    evidence that she had lost contact with any relatives and did not  know
    how to contact them.  However, it was for the judge  to  assess  as  an
    issue of fact the potential support  available  to  her,  whether  from
    people in this country or from  relatives  in  Nigeria.   He  was  also
    entitled to note the evidence at the hearing before Judge Baldwin  that
    the appellant had been supported by one of her  husband's  cousins  and
    was said to have a  close  family  relationship  with  his  family  and
    particularly his children [78].  In the light of these findings it  was
    open to the judge to find that the appellant had prospects of  support,
    that there were no very serious obstacles to her  reintegration  in  to
    Nigeria and that she could not succeed in respect of the  private  life
    claim under the Rules.


23.   When assessing the issue  of  proportionality,  the  judge  took  into
    account the factors on the public interest side of  the  balance  ([79]
    already referred to at [12] above).  In the light of these  factors,  I
    am satisfied that the judge was fully entitled to  find  that  removing
    the appellant would be proportionate to a legitimate aim and  that  the
    public interest in maintaining effective immigration control outweighed
    such interference as there would be with the appellant's  private  life
    including her physical and moral integrity. In summary, the grounds  do
    not satisfy  me  that  the  judge  erred  in  law.   His  findings  and
    conclusions were properly open to him for the reasons he gave.


Decision.


24.   The First-tier Tribunal did not in law and  the  decision  to  dismiss
    the appeal stands.  The anonymity  direction  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal remains in force until further order.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 17 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
