
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01648/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th December 2017                          |On 8th January 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    MHIA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

Immigration history

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 2  April  1976.
    He applied for a visa on 17th December 2009 and this was granted to him
    until 11th May, 2011.  He entered the United Kingdom  on  14th  January
    2010 and in April 2011 he applied for further leave to remain as a Tier
    4 Migrant Student.  The respondent refused  this  application  on  30th
    December 2012 and the matter went to an appeal hearing. At  the  appeal
    hearing, which took place on 25 February 2012, the  appellant's  appeal
    was allowed.  The decision was promulgated on 27th February 2012.

2.   On 13th June 2014, the appellant then applied  for  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on form FLR(0), on the basis that he  was  unable  to
    complete his study due to mental health issues.  The  appellant  claims
    to have returned to Sri Lanka, first in 2012. On 7th July 2012  he  was
    granted further leave to remain in the United Kingdom until  13th  June
    2014.  He claims then that he returned again to Sri Lanka in  September
    2013.  It was on 16th September 2015 that the appellant claimed asylum.



The First Tier Tribunal

3.   On 4th February  2016,  the  respondent  considered  and  rejected  the
    appellant's asylum claim.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  A pre-hearing review was set down for hearing  on  8th  July
    2016, when the appellant's solicitors, who  have  been  the  same  ones
    throughout, applied for their first adjournment.  They applied  for  an
    adjournment on the basis that the appellant had  scarring  on  his  leg
    which  required  clinical  analysis  and  a  report.   They  have  been
    attempting to contact a psychiatric and scarring expert,  but  all  the
    experts were busy.  The matter proceeded at the pre-trial review on  22
    July 2016, when the appellant was represented by Counsel.   The  matter
    was adjourned until 20th October 2016.  On 20th October 2016, Mr Selwyn
    again appeared on behalf of the appellant  and  again  applied  for  an
    adjournment.  The judge granted an adjournment and issued the following
    directions:

    (1)  Both parties to endeavour to verify and arrest warrant if they are
         able to provide such verification and then to inform  the  Tribunal
         of the earliest possible time if they are able to  verify  then  to
         file and serve fourteen days before the next hearing.


    (2)  The appellant to file and serve a medical legal report and further
         medical documents relating to the appellant's health  to  be  filed
         and served fourteen days before the next hearing.  [My emphasis]


4.   The matter was adjourned until Wednesday 3  May  2017,  more  than  six
    months  later.   Unfortunately,  that  did  not  stop  the  appellant's
    solicitors seeking a further adjournment.

5.    The  respondent  had  served  and  filed  a  verification  report   in
    accordance with directions in January  2017.   It  appears  that  those
    representing the appellant did nothing to obtain a verification  report
    until receipt of the  respondent's  report,  and  only  then  did  they
    arrange with the appellant to seek  through  his  brother  confirmation
    from the family lawyer in Sri Lanka that the document was genuine.

6.   The Sri Lankan lawyer who originally obtained the  document  had  moved
    to Australia.  The appellant's brother met another lawyer and he agreed
    to provide a letter  confirming  authenticity  of  the  documents,  but
    unfortunately, he was away and out of the  country  and  that  was  the
    basis on which an application for an adjournment was made.

7.   This application was  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    Judge M A Khan and he refused the adjournment request on the basis that
    the matter had been adjourned on two previous occasions, the last  time
    in October 2016 when the parties were directed to  obtain  verification
    evidence if it was available.  The matter comes  to  me  today  because
    there are three challenges to the determination of Judge Khan.

The hearing before me

8.    The  second  of  the  three  challenges  suggests  that  there  is  an
    inadequacy of reasons for  rejecting  the  genuineness  of  the  arrest
    warrant.  Judge Khan questioned why the arrest warrant was issued by an
    officer in charge of a police station at Kalutara, when the appellant's
    home town was in Beuwala.  The grounds suggest this was not  raised  by
    the  respondent  and  was  not  a  matter  which   the   judge   sought
    clarification upon from Counsel at the hearing, had he done so he would
    have been told that Beuwala is a town in the Kalutara district.

9.   The second point that Judge Khan takes issue with is the fact that  the
    warrant was issued in 2013, rather than in 2009.  The judge appears  to
    overlook the fact that it may very well have been  the  case  that  the
    warrant was not issued until such time as the authorities became  aware
    that the appellant was back in the country.

10.  The third challenge is in respect of the credibility findings  made  by
    the judge and the fact that he has had  little  or  no  regard  to  the
    medical report prepared by Dr Sinha.  This assesses the consistency  of
    the appellant's physical scarring and psychological symptoms  with  his
    claim to have been tortured in Sri Lanka.  Nowhere in the determination
    did the judge consider the  potentially  corroborative  nature  of  the
    medical report.

11.  In respect of both these challenges, there are clear errors of law  and
    I am grateful to Mr Tarlow for confirming that he agreed.

12.  So far as the first challenge is  concerned,  this  suggests  that  the
    judge should have granted an adjournment, given  that  the  potentially
    important evidence was likely to become available in the  near  future,
    since a letter had been received by the appellant's brother  indicating
    that a new lawyer would be  in  a  position  to  shortly  provide  such
    evidence.

13.  I have been told today that even  now,  more  than  a  year  after  the
    original direction was issued, such evidence is not available but  that
    it is likely to become available.
14.  I am concerned,  because  the  appellant  appears  to  be  particularly
    vulnerable.  He has health issues which almost certainly are not  being
    helped by his current predicament.  The first direction issued on  20th
    October 2016, by First-tier Tribunal Iqbal is to the effect  that  both
    parties endeavour to verify the arrest warrant and if they  are  unable
    to provide  such  verification,  then  to  inform  the  Tribunal.   The
    appellant has had over a year in which to provide such verification and
    it is still not available.

15.  I have concluded that given the errors  of  law  in  the  determination
    which have been quite properly accepted by the  Presenting  Officer,  I
    must set aside the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan.
     Were I to adjourn this matter so that I could hear the appeal  in  the
    Upper Tribunal it is likely to be months before the matter were to come
    back to be heard by me.  In the  circumstances,  therefore,  I  believe
    that the interest of justice require that I remit  this  appeal  to  be
    heard afresh by a judge other than Judge M A Khan.  Three hours  should
    be allowed for the hearing of the appeal and a Tamil  interpreter  will
    be required.

16.  I want to make one thing perfectly  clear  to  those  representing  the
    appellant.  It is most  unlikely  that  any  further  applications  for
    adjournments made by them for verification documentation to be obtained
    and filed will be granted.

17.  The original direction makes it clear that the appellant was  under  an
    obligation to endeavour to verify the arrest warrant if he is able.  He
    clearly is not able to do so.  The matter will be heard whether or  not
    such evidence is filed.  Inevitably there will  be  some  delay  before
    this matter is listed and if it is possible for  that  evidence  to  be
    obtained before the matter is listed then all well and  good,  provided
    it is served and filed at the very earliest opportunity  and  not  left
    until the day of the hearing.  If it  is  not  available,  then  it  is
    extremely unlikely that any further application for an adjournment will
    be granted in order that it can be obtained.

18.  I hope that those  representing  the  appellant  will  now  proceed  to
    prepare  the  file  for  a  fresh  hearing   without   further   delay.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

