
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01529/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th May 2019                               |On 5th June 2019              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                  MISS E P
                            (ANONYMITY RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Clarke of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on 2nd May 1996, is  a  citizen  of  Albania.   The
    Appellant had made application for asylum.  The Respondent had  refused
    that application on 19th January 2018.  The Appellant had appealed that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal and her appeal was heard  by  Judge
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  Lucas  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  5th
    February 2019.  The judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 2. Application for permission to appeal was made on the Appellant's behalf
    and was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 2nd April 2019.   It  was
    found arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  failing  to
    give adequate weight to  the  country  expert  and  medical  report  in
    assessing the credibility of the Appellant's account.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 3. Ms Clarke made reference to the Grounds of  Appeal  submitted  in  this
    case to the Upper Tribunal.  It was submitted that the judge had failed
    to properly consider or give adequate  weight  either  to  the  country
    expert or the medical reports.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was submitted that the judge had looked at the reports and indeed at
    paragraphs 18  to  20  had  summarised  the  contents  of  the  medical
    evidence.  It was conceded  thereafter  the  judge  did  not  expressly
    return to the medical evidence when looking  at  credibility.   It  was
    further conceded that paragraph  36  of  the  decision  may  well  have
    disclosed something of an error.

 5. I reserved my decision to consider the documents and submissions  made.
    I now provide my decision with  reasons.   The  judge  had  within  the
    papers before him a lengthy country expert report, medical evidence and
    a medico-legal report.  On the  face  of  it  that  report  linked  her
    problems in Albania with the symptoms found by the Professor which  was
    of a complex psychiatric disorder.

 6. It is clear that the judge had  seen  those  reports  and  indeed  made
    reference to the medical report at paragraph 19 and quoted verbatim the
    concluding paragraph of the country report at paragraph 22.   That  was
    contained within that part of the decision where the  judge  summarised
    the evidence in the case and submissions.

 7. He began his findings or assessment of the evidence  at  paragraph  35.
    Having set out the burden and standard of proof in the  next  paragraph
    the judge stated "the Tribunal does not accept that the Appellant was a
    victim of human trafficking.  It relies in part upon the decision  made
    in this regard dated 24th August 2016".   That  decision  was  the  NRM
    decision  concluding  the  Appellant  was  not  a   victim   of   human
    trafficking.  It would have been open to the judge,  after  considering
    all of the evidence to perhaps have agreed with the conclusions of  the
    NRM report.  However, that does not appear  to  be  the  case  in  this
    instance, rather the judge has relied upon  that  report  in  terms  of
    reaching his decision.

 8. Further, there is no point within the findings of fact and  credibility
    any reference to the medical evidence.  It was incumbent upon the judge
    to consider that evidence in the round  when  considering  credibility.
    There is nothing within the decision that allows an inference that  was
    done.  Had the judge not relied in part upon the NRM and had looked  at
    the medical evidence in the round when  assessing  credibility,  it  is
    possible he may have reached a  different  conclusion  and  accordingly
    those failures amount to a material error of law in this case.

Notice of Decision

 9. I find that a material error of law was made by the judge in this  case
    and direct that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside
    and that a fresh decision needs to be made in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    before a judge other than Judge Lucas.

    Anonymity retained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
