
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01819/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 July 2016                           |On 17 August 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MAY DBE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [K G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Simon Harding of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen promulgated on 1  April  2016  allowing
    the appellant [KG]'s appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
    dated 6 October 2015 to deport [KG] and against  her  further  decision
    dated 9 October to  refuse  [KG]'s  asylum  and  human  rights  claims.
    Permission to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Deans on 10 May this year.

 2. Ms Gardner is a Jamaican citizen.  She arrived in the UK on  3  October
    2008 on a visitor's visa valid until 15 February 2009.  On 26  February
    2009 she applied for further leave to remain outside the Rules to  care
    for her uncle.  That application  was  refused  on  8  September  2009.
    Successive requests for reconsideration  were  turned  down  until  the
    final decision maintaining the  refusal  dated  13  December  2010.   A
    further application was made on 1 December 2011 again asking to stay to
    care for her uncle.  That too was refused.  On 16 May 2014 [KG] pleaded
    guilty to two offences of possessing  class  A  drugs  with  intent  to
    supply for which she received a sentence of imprisonment of four years.
     Notice of liability to deport was served on 4 August 2014  and  notice
    of a decision to deport was served on 10 November 2014.  On 19 November
    2014 [KG] wrote to the Home Office claiming asylum on the basis of  her
    sexuality.  She said that her family and friends  in  Jamaica  did  not
    know of her lesbianism as she had kept it a secret  from  them  through
    shame.  She provided information to the Home Office that she  had  been
    in a same-sex relationship with a woman named [J] since 1 June 2009.

 3. A Section 72 notice was served notifying [KG] that  by  reason  of  her
    conviction and sentence of more than two years she was presumed to be a
    danger to the community and not entitled therefore  to  the  protection
    conferred by Article 33 of the Refugee  Convention  prohibiting  return
    ("refoulement") to the country of origin.  By letter dated  15  October
    2015 the Secretary of State refused her  protection  and  human  rights
    claims on the basis that she would not be readily recognisable as a gay
    person and that even if she had been in  a  same-sex  relationship  her
    behaviour was, and would be, discreet.  The Secretary of State was  not
    persuaded therefore that [KG] would be persecuted  in  Jamaica  on  the
    grounds of her sexuality.  We note at this point that  nowhere  has  it
    been suggested that an actively gay person would  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution in Jamaica.  The Secretary of State appears to  accept,  in
    accordance with the country guidance of SW, that persons  in  same  sex
    relationships, particularly lesbians, would be at  risk  by  reason  of
    their sexual orientation in Jamaica.  There is no  appeal  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's finding that this was and is the case.

 4. There was an oral hearing before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cohen  at
    which both [KG] and her partner [J] gave evidence.  The  learned  judge
    made findings that [KG] was gay, had been with her  partner  [J]  since
    2009 and that it was a real and subsisting same-sex relationship  which
    had endured [KG]'s incarceration.  He decided that [KG] was entitled to
    remain on protection and also on human rights grounds under Article 8.

 5. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal were set out at some  length
    in her document dated 14 April. I do not propose to  recite  at  length
    from that as the arguments were concisely and very helpfully  presented
    and developed at the hearing by Mr Melvin.  The case for the  Secretary
    of State may be summarised under the following heads.

 6. First, it is said that there was insufficient consideration of  Section
    72 in the light of [KG]'s conviction and sentence.  Second, that  there
    was insufficient justification for the finding that she was credible on
    matters of her sexuality.  Linked to this, thirdly, it is said that the
    judge failed to take into account the timing of events leading  to  the
    asylum application including  the  fact  that  [KG]  had  made  several
    applications for leave to remain over the years without once mentioning
    lesbianism or making an asylum claim, that she had made  a  facilitated
    return scheme application in July 2014 effectively asking to go back to
    Jamaica and that the notice of liability to deport had come before  the
    date on which, on the evidence from the prison  authorities,  [KG]  had
    spoken to them about her sexuality.  Fourthly, that the  judge  omitted
    to assess the weight to be given to the witness  [M]'s  evidence  of  a
    crucial text "outing" [KG] in Jamaica, said by her to be  the  spur  to
    her asylum claim.   Fifthly  and  finally,  Mr  Melvin  criticised  the
    judge's Article 8 findings and as Mr Harding for [KG] accepted that  he
    could not defend these we record simply that  the  Article  8  part  of
    Judge Cohen's decision, whilst understandable perhaps, given  the  very
    firm conclusions he had reached as to [KG]'s lesbianism and her  likely
    persecution in Jamaica, did not take account of all balancing  factors;
    because it did not we find that  it  cannot  stand  as  an  independent
    decision to allow leave on human rights Article 8 grounds.

 7. Mr Harding maintained that  Judge  Cohen's  decision  and  findings  in
    relation to the asylum claim did not disclose any  material  error  and
    were therefore not susceptible  of  being  set  aside  on  appeal.   He
    accepted that the learned judge's reasoning was in some places hard  to
    follow, for instance paragraph 27 of the judgment appears to relate  to
    some completely  different  case.  However  on  the  key  findings,  in
    relation to Section 72 and [KG]'s lesbianism, Mr Harding submitted that
    the decision was clear, sufficiently reasoned and unassailable.

 8.  We agree.  We are not persuaded that Judge Cohen erred.   The  judge's
    conclusions in relation to the two Section 72 presumptions are  clearly
    dealt with at paragraphs 33 to 35 of his decision.   As  to  the  first
    presumption, namely whether dealing in class A drugs was to be regarded
    as a particularly serious crime, the judge clearly  concluded  that  in
    his view the criminality on this occasion did not fall to be considered
    as such.  It is not suggested that he was wrong to make  that  finding.
    We simply observe that we cannot see what more he could have said about
    it.  As to the second of the presumptions the  evidence  is  summarised
    shortly by the judge at paragraph 35 of his decision  but  despite  the
    brevity it is clear what has lead him to conclude that the  presumption
    regarding danger to the community in the UK has been  rebutted.   Again
    the finding itself is not challenged as irrational or wrong.

 9. As to his findings that [KG] was a credible witness and  that  she  had
    given  credible  evidence  about  her  sexual   orientation   and   her
    relationship with [J], the judge gave full reasons for these:   in  the
    course of dealing with the evidence at  paragraphs  19  to  27  of  his
    judgement there are repeated references to identical details  of  their
    relationship having been given by [J].  At paragraph 36 for instance he
    described [KG]'s evidence as detailed and compelling supported  by  the
    evidence from [J] and from the previous partner [M].  At  paragraph  38
    he refers to highly consistent credible and detailed evidence from [KG]
    and [J].

10. It is clear that the judge did have the full history in mind, including
    the FRS application in July, as he refers to this in the last  sentence
    of paragraph 11 of his decision.  He did not get the  factual  position
    wrong: at paragraph 36 of the judgment  he  refers  to  the  report  to
    prison authorities of her lesbianism in September/October  2014  before
    going on to note the deportation decision notified  in  November  2014.
    It is true that the judge did not specifically refer in paragraph 36 to
    the notice of the liability to deportation sent in August 2014 but  his
    earlier recital of the history at paragraph 3 of his decision  mentions
    this notice in August, demonstrating that he had it in mind.   The  key
    finding which he made concerned her sexuality and whether  or  not  she
    would be perceived as a lesbian in Jamaica, i.e. whether or not she met
    the country guidance criteria for persecution set out in  the  case  of
    SW.  He recited his conclusions in that respect at paragraph 41 of  his
    decision.

11. As Mr Harding rightly pointed out it is very  clear  from  the  judge's
    decision what view the judge had reached regarding  [KG]'s  lesbianism.
    His reasons for finding her credible are manifest from the way in which
    he sets out her and [J]'s matching evidence regarding  the  details  of
    their first meeting and subsequent relationship.   The  judge  saw  and
    heard both women give evidence and was plainly in no  doubt  whatsoever
    about his findings in relation to their sexual orientation.   Therefore
    even if we had decided that he left out of account the fact that notice
    of liability to deportation had been served before any  report  to  the
    prison authorities, we are quite satisfied that this would have made no
    difference to the conclusion he had reached having heard and  seen  the
    witnesses give evidence.

12. Regarding [M]'s evidence and the  "outing"  text,  Mr  Harding  rightly
    reminded us that the  quality  of  evidence  which  is  acceptable  and
    regarded as persuasive at an immigration hearing need not be high.   It
    was open to Judge Cohen to accept  [M]'s  written  email  evidence  and
    [KG]'s hearsay evidence of the text and to take it into account  as  he
    did.  He was not wrong to do so nor did he have to specify what  weight
    he had attached to it or make reference in his  decision  to  the  fact
    that it had been untested.  We accept also Mr Harding's submission that
    the "outing" evidence was more  nuanced  and  varied  than  simply  the
    single text.  Mr Harding referred us in this respect to paragraph 11 of
    [KG]'s witness statement and to the full text of the  email  from  [M].
    We are quite satisfied that the judge's conclusions at paragraph 41  of
    his judgment were  well-founded  and  proper  ones  to  reach.   Again,
    despite the brevity, it is plain what conclusion he had reached on  the
    evidence and why.

13. In conclusion therefore  having  considered  the  points  made  by  the
    Secretary of State  we  are  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings in relation to the protection claim  did  not  contain
    any error of law  and  were  adequately  reasoned  and  we  decline  to
    interfere with his conclusions.  The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 17 August 2017

Mrs Justice May


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Mrs Justice May
