
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01784/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15th November 2018                   |On 21st December 2018               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                          VICE PRESIDENT M OCKELTON
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                    m a m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hodgetts of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 30th November 1986 is a citizen of Ethiopia.  The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Hodgetts of  Counsel.   The  Respondent
    was represented by Mr Howells, a Senior Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom on 25th June  2016  and
    claimed asylum on 20th July  2016.   The  Respondent  had  refused  the
    Appellant's application for asylum.  The Appellant  had  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal had been  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Fowell sitting at Newport on 21st April 2017.  The  judge  had
    dismissed his appeal on all grounds.   Application  for  permission  to
    appeal was made and such application was granted on 5th September  2017
    on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge  had  rejected  core
    elements of the Appellant's claim based upon speculation and had  taken
    into account a mistranslation of an identity card and  had  omitted  to
    consider other potential supportive evidence.

 3. The Upper Tribunal, subject to submissions to the contrary  decided  to
    set aside the decision under appeal and direct a fresh hearing  on  6th
    November 2017.  No objection had been raised by the party and the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision was set aside with the direction the appeal be
    re-determined by the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal on 19th June 2018 before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Boyes sitting at Newport.   The  judge
    had allowed the appeal on protection grounds and under Articles 2 and 3
    of the ECHR.

 5. The Respondent made application for permission to appeal that  decision
    and permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bird  on  12th
    July 2018 on the basis that it was arguable the  judge  had  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for accepting that the Appellant was credible.
     Directions were issued  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  firstly  to  decide
    whether an error of law had been made in this case or not.  The  matter
    came before us in accordance with those directions.

 6. The matter having been considered we have provided below  our  decision
    as given at the hearing.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The Respondent's Grounds of Appeal are dismissed on the  basis  that  a
    proper reading of the judge's decision indicates that having considered
    the evidence in the case he had thereafter  provided  adequate  reasons
    for his conclusions  regarding  the  honesty  and  credibility  of  the
    account provided by the Appellant and accepting the supportive evidence
    of an identity document.  Further he provided an  adequacy  of  reasons
    why he accepted the evidence of an  expert  called  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant namely Dr Berri that was supportive of the evidence  provided
    by the Appellant.

Decision

We do not find a material error of law was made by the judge  in  this  case
and we uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever










