
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01605/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th August 2019                           |On 4th September 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                           mr Ari Mustafa Abdulla
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sharif, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a citizen of Iraq (born 29th March 1995) appeals with the
    permission of the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  a  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Caswell) in which it dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal
    under the Refugee Convention but did allow the appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection/Article 3 grounds.

Background

 2. The Appellant's claim to protection was set out by the FtTJ as follows:



         "4.  He was born in Raniya, near Suleimanya, in the  IKR  of  Iraq.
             He is a Sunni Kurd.  His father was and is a Brigadier in  the
             peshmerga,  and  very  influential.   The  Appellant  had  two
             brothers, Aso and Akar, and a  sister.   His  mother  was  the
             first wife of his father, Mustafa Abdulla, but his father also
             had a second wife, and  a  child  or  children  by  her.   The
             Appellant was educated to Grade 6, and then did some  building
             work.  When he was around 17 years old, his  father  gave  him
             the job of peshmerga in the house,  guarding  him.   This  was
             largely to give him a wage.

         5.   One day in January 2016, early in  the  morning,  an  argument
             developed between  the  Appellant's  two  brothers  and  their
             father.  This was over his treatment of their mother,  failing
             to support her financially.  He was favouring his second  wife
             over her.  The Appellant's father used to  drink  heavily  and
             was prone to rages.  The Appellant was not in the room at  the
             time, but  overheard  the  argument.   He  heard  one  of  his
             brothers insulting the second wife.  Then he heard shots.   He
             ran into the room, and saw his father had  shot  his  brothers
             dead.  His sister, who was not in the room, was  also  injured
             in the shooting, but the Appellant ran away and escaped,  when
             his father appeared to be coming after  him  to  kill  him  as
             well."

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he made his way to an uncle's home.  With
    his  uncle's  assistance  he  left  Iraq  travelling  through   various
    countries including France where he remained for 3-4 months. He arrived
    in the UK clandestinely in July 2016 and made a prompt claim to asylum.
    The basis of his claim was that he feared that if returned to Iraq  his
    father would kill him.

 4. The Respondent refused the claim. The Respondent's case in summary  has
    always been the following:

       . the Appellant's account of the circumstances in which  he  says  he
         was forced to flee Iraq were not credible; and


       . in any event even if credible, his claim did not  fall  within  the
         terms of the Refugee Convention


 5. The Appellant appealed  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 6. The Appellant's case came to  be  considered  by  Judge  Caswell.   The
    Appellant attended and was represented by Counsel.   In  her  decision,
    the judge set out the Appellant's case and noted the Respondent's  case
    as above.  She noted that the central  issue  before  her  was  one  of
    credibility.  The Appellant's case relied  almost  solely  on  his  own
    account  although  the  judge  noted  an  untranslated  copy   document
    apparently showing a news article that the Appellant's father was being
    sought by the authorities for the murders of his two sons [31].  Having
    analysed the Appellant's account, over several lengthy paragraphs,  the
    judge said at [34]:

         "In summary the Appellant gave reasonable explanations for all  the
         points made by the Respondent.  I find  that  his  account  has  in
         general terms been credible, coherent and consistent.  I find  that
         it is supported to some degree by the documents he has put forward.
          Applying the lower standard of proof, I find the Appellant to be a
         credible and reliable witness and I accept his account."

 7. At [36] the judge said the following:

         "I was not addressed on the issue of whether there is a  Convention
         reason in this appeal.  The refusal  letter  claims  that  none  is
         disclosed on the facts of the Appellant's case, and  I  agree.   In
         conclusion, the Appellant is not a refugee, but faces a  real  risk
         of serious harm under the Directive if returned to his country, and
         also of treatment breaching his Article 2 and 3  rights.   I  allow
         the appeal."

 8. She then dismissed the appeal on  asylum  grounds  but  allowed  it  on
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

Onward appeal

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  There
    was one ground only advanced when seeking permission.  It was  asserted
    that the FtTJ had made a material misdirection in her decision  because
    she had failed to give adequate or proper reasons as to why the Refugee
    Convention was not engaged.  It was contended in the grounds  that  the
    Appellant's fear was on account  of  his  membership  of  a  particular
    social group.

10. Permission was refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Appellant
    renewed his  application  for  permission  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    precisely the same grounds as those refused by the First-tier Tribunal.
     Permission was granted in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the family unit is  a  PSG.   The  Appellant's
         claim of fearing his death at the hands  of  his  father,  who  had
         killed other siblings of the Appellant or threatened the  Appellant
         may engage the Refugee Convention, notwithstanding the Respondent's
         view; RFRL 140 - 141.

         The Judge's findings [D30, 35] on the Appellant's  credibility  may
         support the claimed risk the Appellant would  face  from  '...  his
         father or the authorities under his father's direction in  the  IKR
         ...' [D35].

         It is arguable the Judge made  a  material  error  of  law  on  the
         Convention reason [D36]."

11. The Respondent served a Rule  24  response  opposing  the  application.
    Thus the matter comes before me to determine if  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contains such error of law that it requires  to  be
    set aside and remade.





Error of Law Hearing

12. Before me Mr Sharif appeared  for  the  Appellant,  Mr  Avery  for  the
    Respondent.  At the outset of the proceedings  I  asked  Mr  Sharif  to
    address me on [36] of the judge's decision where, as set out above, she
    states that she was not addressed on the issue of whether  there  is  a
    Convention reason in this appeal.  I asked if he  had  any  information
    such as Counsel's note to help explain this.  He was unable  to  assist
    on this point other than to say that the judge had not made an explicit
    finding that this point had been conceded by  the  Appellant.   In  any
    event, permission had been granted  in  response  to  the  grounds  put
    forward.

13. Mr Sharif's submissions in essence relied upon the  grounds.   He  said
    that a family unit is capable of being a particular  social  group  and
    referred me to [30].  Drawing on the grounds,  he  submitted  that  the
    judge had accepted  that  there  was  a  real  risk  of  the  Appellant
    suffering serious harm at the hands  of  his  father  and  had  made  a
    finding that that it was not implausible that  the  Appellant's  father
    might want to kill him to keep him from avenging his brothers'  deaths.
    This, he said, would bring the Appellant into the Refugee Convention as
    a member of a PSG.

14. Mr Avery on behalf of the Respondent referred to the Rule 24  response.
    The Respondent's case had always been that the Refugee  Convention  was
    not made out.  The judge gave adequate reasons for allowing the  appeal
    on humanitarian protection grounds, the Appellant's case being that  he
    fears his father and, as the judge found,  his  lack  of  documentation
    would place him at risk on return  to  Iraq.   The  FtTJ  has  made  no
    material error in agreeing with the Respondent's  position  that  there
    was no Convention reason, as set out in the reasons for refusal letter.
     The decision should stand.

15. At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    reasons.

Consideration

16. I start my consideration from an examination of the grounds which  were
    put forward seeking permission.  The main criticism made of the judge's
    decision centres on saying that she  has  in  some  way  sidelined  the
    Appellant's claim under the Refugee Convention because  she  failed  to
    give reasons why the Appellant did not benefit  from  that  Convention.
    The grounds contend that the Refugee  Convention  was  pleaded  in  the
    original Grounds of Appeal and the skeleton  argument  put  before  the
    FtTJ at the hearing.  In  fact  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refusing
    permission pointed  out  neither  of  these  documents  identified  the
    particular social group of which  it  was  said  the  Appellant  was  a
    member.  In other words at that stage the claim of  membership  of  PSG
    was a generalised one only.

17. The concept that the Appellant's claim is one which arises as a  result
    of an honour killing/blood feud seems to have come about  by  a  remark
    made by the judge at [30].  This reads as follows:

         "It is correct that the Appellant cannot explain  how  he  came  to
         escape from his father, but his account is that he ran out straight
         away, and that there were neighbours gathering round, having  heard
         the shots.  It is not implausible that his father would  have  less
         opportunity to shoot him than he had to shoot his brothers. Mr Hunt-
         Jackson [HOPO] has argued that the Appellant has not shown why  his
         father would want to kill him, since he was  not  a  party  to  the
         argument.  The Appellant explained that  his  father  was  a  heavy
         drinker, and that he had rages when drunk. Further, as  Mr  Hussain
         [Counsel for the Appellant] has pointed out, there is a culture  of
         blood feud and honour crimes in the IKR.  Given  this,  it  is  not
         implausible that the Appellant's father  might  want  to  kill  the
         Appellant, to keep him from avenging his brothers' murders."

18. It appears to me that, only once the grounds  seeking  permission  were
    drafted, did it emerge that what is now being detailed  and  argued  on
    the Appellant's behalf is that the Appellant is a potential  victim  of
    an honour killing/blood feud.  A number of points arise from this.

19. As I read the relevant part of [30] it appears that  somewhere  in  his
    submissions, Mr Hussain has introduced the  concept  that  there  is  a
    culture of blood feud and honour crimes in the IKR.  There then follows
    the next sentence which says, "Given this, it is not  implausible  that
    the Appellant's father might want to kill the Appellant,  to  keep  him
    from avenging his brothers' murders."  I find it unclear from that text
    whether the judge was simply recording a further statement made  by  Mr
    Hussain, which she was willing to accept, or if she was  expressing  an
    opinion of her own.  In any event, the statement is highly speculative,
    being based on  supposition  and  not  on  any  identifiable  piece  of
    evidence.  As such I find that it cannot be taken to constitute a clear
    judicial finding.

20. The evidence does not show that the Appellant had, up to the  point  of
    the FtT hearing, advanced a claim that he was the  victim  of  a  blood
    feud or an honour crime. Moreover as far as I can  see,  the  Appellant
    has never expressed a claim that he thought his father  might  want  to
    kill him in order to prevent him avenging his brothers' deaths.

21. The circumstances of this case bear none of the hallmarks  of  a  blood
    feud or honour crime. The evidence contained in the  Appellant's  claim
    surrounding the deaths of his two brothers signifies a loss of  control
    on the part of his father during a family argument.   Horrific  as  the
    events are, they arise from an intra-family argument  which  enraged  a
    man  capable  of  killing  his  own  sons.   It  has  always  been  the
    Appellant's claim that he feared his father for the same reason.

22. Even if evidence were to be adduced to show that the Appellant's father
    feared that the Appellant wanted to avenge his brothers' murders,  this
    would still not demonstrate a blood feud or honour crime. If he  wanted
    to kill the Appellant as a result, his motivation would be that of self-
    preservation rather than as a result of a blood feud.

23. Mr Sharif submitted that  the  Appellant  could  be  brought  into  the
    Refugee Convention as a member of a PSG, as a result of being a  member
    of his family unit.  However the evidence in  this  case  is  that  any
    conflict that exists lies between two individuals  (the  Appellant  and
    his father) as a result of exceptional circumstances  (the  Appellant's
    witnessing his brothers' murders).  I find that this cannot  amount  to
    membership of a PSG.

24. It follows therefore that I am satisfied that the FtTJ was  correct  in
    her conclusion that the Appellant did not fall within the terms of  the
    Refugee Convention. That is the only matter which was in  issue  before
    me.  The Respondent accepts that  the  FtTJ's  decision  gave  adequate
    reasons for her findings leading to her decision to allow the appeal on
    Humanitarian Protection grounds.  It follows that for the above reasons
    the Appellant's appeal is dismissed. The decision of the FtTJ stands.

Notice of Decision

This  appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal
promulgated on 28th March 2019 stands.

No anonymity direction is made.  I was not asked to make one.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     01 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
