

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/01608/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester (Piccadilly)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th  August 2017                      |On 4th October 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     GU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Hashmi, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.

 2. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.   I
    make an anonymity direction  as  this  case  concerns  minor  children.
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him, his spouse or  the  children.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The procedural history and background:

 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Birrell) who, in a determination promulgated
    on the 30th December 2016 dismissed his appeal against the decision  of
    the respondent to refuse his  protection  claim  and  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8).

 4. The Appellant's immigration history and the basis of his claim  is  set
    out within the determination at paragraph 12 of the  FTT  determination
    and in the decision letter issued by the Secretary of State.  It can be
    summarised briefly as follows.

 5. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria. On 14  December  2008  he  left
    Nigeria for the United Kingdom having applied for  a  multi-visit  Visa
    valid until 3 June 2009. He arrived in United Kingdom on the same day.

 6. On a date in May 2015, he was arrested and detained by the  police.  He
    had fraudulently used the documentation of a friend to gain employment.
    As  a  result  he  was  charged  with  fraud  and  also   served   with
    documentation as an "over stayer". He appeared before the  Crown  Court
    and was convicted of fraud and sentenced eight months imprisonment.

 7. On 12 August 2015 he submitted a human rights "leave to remain" Article
    8 application on the basis of his relationship with  his  partner,  and
    his daughter A and stepdaughter O. On 17 November 2015 the  application
    was refused as it was not accepted that he had a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with his partner or children.

 8. On 24 November  2015  he  claimed  asylum  and  completed  a  screening
    interview and also a substantive asylum interview. This resulted  in  a
    decision to refuse his protection claim on 1 February 2016.

 9. The appeal came before the First- Tier Tribunal (Judge  Birrell)  at  a
    hearing on the 14th December 2016. In a  determination  promulgated  on
    the 30th December 2016 she dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  on  both
    asylum and on human rights grounds. In relation to  his  asylum  claim,
    the judge set out her findings at paragraph 35 to 44 and  rejected  his
    claim entirely that he or his family members in  Nigeria  were  at  the
    subject of any interest by the xxxxx supporters and expressly  rejected
    his account that at any stage he was assaulted  by  them  or  that  his
    brother was killed or that his mother's disappearance had  anything  to
    do with those individuals in question.

10. In respect of the human rights claim, are set at paragraph 45,  it  was
    not advanced on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  he  could  meet  the
    requirements of either Appendix FM or paragraph 276 ADE  (dealing  with
    private life). His claim was advanced on Article 8 grounds  outside  of
    the rules. The judge considered the relationship between the  appellant
    and his partner. She found that their evidence  that  the  relationship
    began in August 2013 when they started  living  together  at  the  same
    address, was not supported either in the documentary evidence  or  from
    the evidence of the appellant's partner in  previous  proceedings.  The
    judge considered at paragraph 47 the  documentary  evidence  which  she
    found to be  inconsistent  with  that  claim  and  in  particular  made
    reference to  a  statement  made  by  his  partner  in  support  of  an
    application for leave to remain in the UK in a statement  describing  a
    "durable relationship" with another male who was  described  as  having
    almost daily contact with her and their  child  with  a  view  to  them
    living  together.  The  judge  found  that  be  inconsistent  with  the
    appellant's evidence that he only came to the house  where  they  lived
    twice in 2013. Notwithstanding that finding, the  judge  accepted  that
    the appellant and  his  partner  together  with  their  three  children
    enjoyed family life in the UK.

11.  As to the issue of proportionality, the judge took  into  account  the
    best interests of the children, the appellant's two biological children
    and his stepdaughter aged 4, 2 and a baby) and found  that  it  was  in
    their best interests to continue to live with those who cared for  them
    namely, their mother and the appellant. The judge took into account the
    children's circumstances (their ages and length of residence and  their
    respective   nationalities.   She   applied   the    public    interest
    considerations under S117 including  the  aspects  of  the  applicant's
    immigration history. She reached the  conclusion  after  balancing  the
    identified factors that "none of the facts underpinning the appellant's
    life and in the United Kingdom taken either singularly or  cumulatively
    outweigh the legitimate purpose of the appellant's removal."

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Froom) on the 24th  March
    2017. He refused permission in respect of grounds three and four  which
    related to the FTT J's assessment of the protection claim. Judge  Froom
    reached the conclusion that the judge's assessment of the evidence  was
    adequate and the decision was fully reasoned. He went on to state:

    "However, I grant permission to argue the FTTJ may have  erred  in  her
    assessment of the reasonableness  question  posed  by  S117B  (6).  She
    correctly directed herself in line with MA (Pakistan). However she  did
    not have the benefit of the more  recent  decision  in  SF  and  others
    (guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2027] UKUT 00120, which  highlighted
    the respondent's IDI on the issue of when it is reasonable to expect  a
    British child to leave  the  UK.  The  FTTJ  in  this  case  noted  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his
    British stepdaughter. It is arguable that, had the FT TJ considered the
    IDI,  she  might  have  come  to  a   different   conclusion   on   the
    reasonableness question."

13. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper Tribunal.

The submissions:

14. Ms Hashmi made the following submissions. The grant of permission  made
    reference to the guidance and the judge did not have the benefit of the
    decision in SF (as cited) as the grant of  permission  sets  out.  This
    changes the position and the guidance has not been updated.  This  case
    the effect of the decision would be to force the  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. She submitted that when looking at the guidance, it did
    make reference to criminality and conduct  but  in  this  case  in  the
    appellant's bundle at page 34 onwards,  there  was  evidence  from  the
    probation officer who had supervised  him  following  his  sentence  of
    imprisonment. Those letters demonstrated and that he had  attended  all
    appointments and had complied with the requirements to supervision.  It
    made reference also to him caring for his daughter whilst was his  wife
    worked.

15. Miss Hashmi submitted that his criminality did not reach the  threshold
    as his term of imprisonment with less than one year and also the aspect
    of his criminality was not a live issue at the time of the  hearing  in
    light of  the  evidence  which  related  to  his  compliance  with  the
    supervision carried out by the probation service.  She  submitted  that
    the appellant should be afforded the benefit of the IDI  and  that  had
    the judge considered the guidance the outcome  of  the  decision  would
    have been different. Thus she invited the Tribunal to find an error  of
    law and to remit the matter.

16. Mr McVeety on behalf of the Respondent relied upon the Rule 24 response
    in which it was stated that it was for the appellant  to  put  the  IDI
    before the Tribunal and  in  any  event  it  was  not  binding  on  the
    Tribunal. He submitted that the judge  correctly  directed  herself  in
    accordance with the decision in MA (Pakistan) and  considered  all  the
    relevant factors.

17. In  his  oral  submissions,  whilst  there  was  no  reference  to  the
    appellant's criminality it would not mean that his appeal would succeed
    in the light of the appellants offending history for which he  received
    a sentence of eight months imprisonment.  This  was  reflected  in  the
    findings at paragraph 43 of the judge. Thus he submitted if  there  was
    an error it would not be material.

18. In the alternative, he submitted that there was  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's finding that it would be proportionate to require the Appellant
    to seek entry clearance from abroad. As the judge found at paragraph 56
    the Appellant's wife could remain in the United Kingdom  looking  after
    the children as she did whilst he was in prison. Thus he submitted  the
    judge would not have reached a different conclusion.

19. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.

Discussion:

20. Whilst the grounds made reference to the findings on the asylum  aspect
    of this appeal, permission was not granted in respect of those grounds.
    No application was made to  reconsider  that  decision  in  writing  or
    otherwise before the Upper Tribunal and I  have  heard  no  submissions
    concerning this. The grounds upon which permission were granted  relate
    to whether the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in her assessment of the
    question of reasonableness imposed by S117B (6)  by  reference  to  the
    guidance.

21. To consider this my submission, it is necessary to have regard  to  the
    decision of FTT Judge Birrell and the  evidence  that  was  before  the
    Tribunal.

22. Appendix FM, "Family Members", begins with a  general  statement  which
    explains that it sets out the requirements to be met by  those  seeking
    to enter or remain in the UK on the basis of their family life  with  a
    person who is a British citizen, is settled in the UK, or is in the  UK
    with  limited  leave  as  a  refugee  or  person  granted  humanitarian
    protection (para GEN.1.1). It is said to reflect how, under Article  8,
    the balance will be struck between the right to respect for private and
    family life and  the  legitimate  aims  listed  in  article  8(2).  The
    Appendix nevertheless contemplates that the Rules will  not  cover  all
    the circumstances in which a person may have a valid claim to enter  or
    remain in the UK as a result of his or her Article 8 rights. Paragraphs
    GEN.1.10 and GEN.1.11 both make  provision  for  situations  "where  an
    applicant does not meet the requirements of this Appendix as a  partner
    or parent but the decision-maker grants entry  clearance  or  leave  to
    enter or remain outside the Rules on Article 8 grounds".

23. In this case, the appellant, by virtue  of  his  partner  not  being  a
    British Citizen  or  being  settled  in  the  UK  could  not  meet  the
    requirements under the Rules and as the judge set out at  paragraph  45
    no argument was put to counter the respondent's submission that at  the
    time of the application the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM or Paragraph 276ADE.

24. In her analysis the judge went on to consider whether the circumstances
    of this case would engage Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules.  It
    is not disputed that the appellant has a  partner  and  they  have  two
    children together  aged  2  and  a  baby  (none  of  whom  are  British
    nationals) and a child from her previous relationship who is a  British
    Citizen (aged 4 at time of FTT hearing) and that he had a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with  all  the  children.   The  judge
    properly concluded that removal of the appellant in consequence of  the
    decision was likely to interfere with his family and private life in  a
    sufficiently grave way to engage the operation of Article 8 (points (i)
    & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]
    INLR  349)  (see  paragraphs  46-49)  and  that  the  decision  was  in
    accordance with the law- his removal will be for the legitimate aim  of
    effective immigration control.

25. Consequently the issue related to that of proportionality and it
    required a fair balance to be struck between the public interest and
    the rights and interests of the Appellant and others protected by
    Article 8 (1) (see Razgar at [20]) which includes the Appellant's
    partner and children (see   R (MM and others) (Lebanon) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 10, the Supreme Court at
    [43].

26. When assessing the proportionality of the removal decision the judge
    was obliged to consider the best interests of the children who are
    affected by the decision. The judge  considered  the best interests of
    the appellant's children and in  assessing the best interests of the
    child took into account the statutory guidance "UKBA Every Child
    Matters: Change for Children" (November 2009), which gives further
    detail about the duties owed to children under section 55. In that
    guidance the UKBA acknowledges the importance of a number of
    international instruments relating to human rights including the UN
    Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and took into account the
    decision in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 ( see paragraphs 52-54).
    There was no dispute on the evidence before the judge that the
    Appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the
    children and indeed on the evidence before her demonstrated that he
    shared the care of the children with his wife.

27. The judge found that it was in the best interests of the children to
    continue living with those who cared for them, both the appellant and
    their mother.

28.  The fact that the appellant's step daughter is a British citizen was
    recognised and given weight by the judge.  However, at this stage she
    was still a young child and the judge found that she had started
    nursery but was not yet in formal education and that the children's
    lives still revolved very much around their parents. The judge found
    that they were of an age where they would be able to adapt to a new
    living situation.

29. In the assessment under Article 8, the best interests of the child must
    be a primary consideration.  That meant that they must be considered
    first.  They could, of course, be outweighed by the cumulative effect
    of other considerations.

30. In carrying out the  balancing  exercise  and  reaching  a  finding  on
    proportionality, the Tribunal must "have regard" to the  considerations
    set out in section 117B of the Nationality, immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (section 117A). Section 117A (2) of the  2002  Act  provides  that
    where a Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under
    the Immigration Acts would be unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 it must, in considering 'the public interest question',
    have regard in all cases to the considerations listed in section117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014).  Section  117  (3)  provides  that  the  'public
    interest question' means the question of whether an interference with a
    person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified
    under Article 8(2).



31. S117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
    cases:
    (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.

    (2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English,
    because persons who can speak English-

    (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent,
    because such persons-

    (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)Little weight should be given to-

    (a)a private life, or

    (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

    that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

    (6)In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
    interest does not require the person's removal where-

    (a)the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
    qualifying child, and

    (b)it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
    Kingdom.



32. The judge properly identified that in this appeal and against the
    background in which it was accepted that the Appellant had a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his partner and with the children, one
    of whom is a British citizen that S117B(6) provides that in the case of
    a person who is not liable to deportation, the public interest does not
    require the person's removal where, (a) the person has a genuine and
    subsisting  parental relationship with a qualifying child, and (b) it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
    Kingdom.

33. As to the issue of proportionality, the judge  took  into  account  the
    best interests of the children, the appellant's two biological children
    and his stepdaughter aged 4, 2 and a baby) and found  that  it  was  in
    their best interests to continue to live with those who cared for  them
    namely, their mother and the appellant. When considering  the  children
    circumstances, she considered their ages and the stage  that  they  had
    reached in their education, namely they were preschool or  nursery  and
    that if the family were to choose to return to Nigeria,  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that it would not be the children's best  interests
    as they could access education and healthcare that would  be  available
    (paragraph 54). The  judge  took  into  account  that  the  appellant's
    stepdaughter was a British national and that the child had  no  contact
    with her natural father.

34. The judge applied the public interest considerations under section  117
    and in particular S117B (6) on the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his stepdaughter,  who  was  a
    British citizen. In the light of her findings of fact, she reached  the
    conclusion that it would be reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom with her mother, who only had limited leave  to  remain,
    and her stepfather and siblings. She stated at paragraph 56 that  there
    was no evidence to suggest that the appellant's  stepdaughter  had  any
    contact with her father or that her best  interests  lay  in  remaining
    anywhere other than with her mother.

35. At paragraph 56, the judge found that that was not the only option  and
    that the appellant could leave the United Kingdom so that he could make
    an  application  for  entry  clearance  and  thus  removal   in   those
    circumstances may be proportionate. In this context she noted that  the
    children his partner  had  already  had  to  cope  with  the  temporary
    separation when he was sent to prison for his criminal  offending.  She
    was able to provide care arrangements  the  children  and  to  continue
    working and thus could do so during any future separation. She  applied
    the decision in R (on the application of  Chen  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM-
    Chikwamba-temporary separation-proportionality) IJR [2015]  UKUT  00189
    and that it would be  for  the  individual  to  demonstrate  that  such
    temporary separation would interfere disproportionately with  protected
    rights. In this case there was no evidence such as separation would  be
    disproportionate.

36. Furthermore, the judge applied the decision in MA  (Pakistan)  and  had
    regard to the wider public interest  in  reaching  a  decision  on  the
    question of reasonableness of return. She placed in  the  balance  that
    the appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    either for asylum or for leave on the basis of family and private life.
    She found that the private life and  any  family  life  that  had  been
    established occurred whilst his status  was  either  "illegal  or  very
    briefly precarious". Earlier in the determination at paragraph  43  she
    had made reference to his criminal offending which had resulted  in  an
    immediate sentence of imprisonment of eight months. She found that  the
    circumstances of the offending were "particularly troubling" that  "the
    job that the appellant was able to secure using a  false  identity  was
    that of a nursing assistant in the NHS". She found  that  it  seriously
    undermined his credibility that he sought and  obtained  employment  in
    the sphere when  knowledge  of  his  true  identity  would  enable  the
    hospital to check his suitability for a post which has an impact on the
    health and safety of the public.

37. Having taken all those  facts  into  account,  the  judge  reached  the
    conclusion that "none of the facts underpinning  the  appellant's  life
    and United Kingdom taken either singularly or cumulatively outweigh the
    legitimate purpose of the appellant's removal."

38. The written grounds at paragraph 3 mis-state the factual background  of
    the parties and make reference to the child A as a British citizen  and
    has been living in the UK for 5 years. The grounds also make  reference
    to the significance of seven  years  residence.  A  is  not  a  British
    citizen and has not lived in the UK for five years. I  can  only  think
    that the  grounds  at  paragraph  3  are  referring  to  child  O,  the
    appellant's stepdaughter who was a British  citizen  but  who  has  not
    lived in the UK for seven years but is a qualifying child by reason  of
    her nationality. At paragraph  5  of  the  written  grounds,  it  again
    mistakenly refers to A and that it is questionable about what  type  of
    education she would have access to if relocated. It is right to observe
    that there was no material submitted on behalf  of  the  appellant  and
    importantly the children concerning this aspect  of  relocation.  After
    paragraph  6  of  the  written  grounds,   they   also   misstate   the
    reasonableness question as should be determined "without  reference  to
    the public interest factors". However as the grant permission sets out,
    the judge properly directed herself in accordance with the decision  in
    MA (Pakistan) in this regard.

39. However the grant of permission (although not the written grounds)  did
    identify a specific issue relating to the judge's assessment of section
    117B (6) that she did not have the benefit of the decision  in  SF  (as
    cited)  which  highlighted  the  respondents  IDI  and  that  had   she
    considered this, she might have come to a different conclusion  on  the
    reasonableness question.

40. Consequently Miss Hashmi in her submissions has advanced the ground  as
    set out in the grant of permission. She submitted that as the judge did
    not have the benefit of the decision in  SF  (as  cited)  and  that  it
    changed the position and the conclusion the judge reached when  dealing
    with the second issue relevant to  the  reasonableness  test.  In  this
    context she made  reference  to  the  guidance.  Neither  advocate  has
    produced to the Tribunal a copy of the guidance. Miss  Hashmi  referred
    to a copy that she had on her computer and submitted that the  guidance
    had not changed since that  referred  to  in  the  decision  of  SF.  I
    therefore set out the guidance relied upon by the advocates  before  me
    as follows:

The guidance:

41. The Home Office IDI of August 2015, headed "Family Life as a Partner or
    Parent and Private Life, 10 year Routes", gives guidance to caseworkers
    - in cases not involving serious criminality -  on  when  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect a British child to leave the  UK,  in  terms  of
    EX.1(a) of HC 395.



42. At [9.1] of the document under the heading "Exceptional Circumstances",
    the Respondent notes that the best interests of the child remain
    relevant in determining whether there are exceptional circumstances to
    justify a grant of leave outside the Rules and that this entails
    consideration of section 11 of the guidance.


43. The guidance makes a distinction between qualifying children who have
    been continuously resident in the UK for a period of seven years and
    British children. This reflects the different rights that might arise
    from British citizenship in terms of immigration status, and in
    particular, under European law. The relevant section of the policy
    guidance relating to British children at Section 11 which then deals
    with the best interests of children affected by the relevant decision
    and at [11.2.3] deals with the position of British citizen children
    under the heading "Would it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen
    child to leave the UK?" Having made reference to the ECJ judgment in
    Zambrano, the guidance says this:-

    "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
    primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case must
    always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect
    a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent or primary
    carer.

    In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
    parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with the
    child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship.
    It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
    conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations of
    such weight as to justify separation, if the child could otherwise stay
    with another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK or in the
    EU.

    The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:
    Criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph 398 of
    the Immigration Rules;
    a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
    repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

    In considering whether refusal may be appropriate the decision maker
    must consider the impact on the child of any separation. If the
    decision maker is minded to refuse, in circumstances where separation
    would be the result, this decision should normally be discussed with a
    senior caseworker and, where appropriate, advice may be sought from the
    Office of the Children's Champion on the implications for the welfare
    of the child, in order to inform the decision.

    Where the applicant has made an application under the family and/or
    private life Immigration Rules, the application must:
    a) be considered under those Immigration Rules First;
    b) where the applicant falls for refusal, the decision maker must go on
    to consider whether there are any exceptional circumstances that would
    warrant a grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules; and
    c) where the applicant falls for refusal under the Immigration Rules
    and there are no exceptional circumstances, and where satisfactory
    evidence has been provided that all of the following criteria are met,
    the case must be referred to European Casework for review:
    i) the child is under the age of 18; and
    ii) the child is a British Citizen; and
    iii) the primary carer?. of the child is a non-EEA national in the UK;
    and
    iv) there is no other parent/guardian/carer upon whom the child is
    dependent or who could care for the child if the primary carer left the
    UK to go to a country outside the EU."


44. The guidance does explain that the effect of the parent's removal must
    not be to force the British child to leave the EU and has been
    interpreted in that way by the Upper Tribunal (see SF and others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC) a Vice-Presidential
    panel applied this guidance when deciding that it would be unreasonable
    to expect a British child to leave the UK with his mother and
    siblings). The facts are different to the present case. The policy
    applies in circumstances where the effect of the decision is to force
    the parent or primary carer of the British child to leave the EU. In
    this case the appellant's step child is a British citizen. She cannot
    be removed. Contrary to Miss Hashmi's submissions, there is no evidence
    to suggest that the appellant's partner would be forced to leave the UK
    if he is removed. She may choose to do so if she wishes to continue
    their family life together, but she is not forced to do so.


45. The guidance goes on to recognise that weighty public interest
    considerations would be needed to justify the separation. The
    circumstances outlined in the policy guidance are not exhaustive, but
    indicate that significant public interest considerations such as
    criminality or a very poor immigration history might be sufficient to
    justify such a decision.


46. MA (Pakistan) concludes that the reasonableness test in this context is
    wide ranging, effectively bringing back into play all potentially
    relevant public interest considerations, including the matters
    identified in section 117B. Accordingly, when considering the
    reasonableness of the children leaving the UK, a relevant factor is
    that the Appellant had entered into the UK unlawfully and had so
    remained for a significant period and he established a family life in
    the knowledge that he had no right to remain and this strengthens the
    public interest in his removal.

47. Furthermore, he engaged in criminal activity. Miss Hashmi submitted
    that the judge at paragraph 43 had found the appellant's credibility
    to be significantly undermined however, she submitted that there was
    material in the bundle which demonstrated that his criminality should
    be considered in a different light. The material in the bundle made
    reference to the appellant's conduct after his sentence had finished
    and at a time when he was subject to supervision in the community. That
    material, in summary, made reference to having complied well with the
    supervision element, having attended all appointments following his
    release and whilst subject to supervision (pages 35 - 36 of the
    bundle).

48. Miss Hashmi also submitted that the criminality threshold referred to
    in the guidance was not met by the appellant's conduct and that the
    judge did not consider this in the proportionality assessment.

49. The determination must be read as a whole. At paragraph 43 of the
    determination the judge made reference to the appellant's conduct in
    the following way:

    "I also note the appellant only claimed asylum after he was arrested
    for using false documents in order to work in the UK. I find his
    credibility significantly undermined by his conviction for an offence
    of dishonesty of this nature and which was clearly viewed so seriously
    by the criminal court that it had resulted in an immediate sentence of
    imprisonment. I find it particularly troubling that the job that the
    appellant was able to secure using a false identity was that of a
    nursing assistant in the NHS: I find it seriously undermined his
    credibility that he sought and obtained employment in a sphere when
    knowledge of his true identity would have enabled the hospital to check
    his suitability for a post which has an impact on the health and safety
    of the public."

50. Contrary to the submission made by Miss Hashmi, the IDI does not set
    out any threshold of criminality to be met and makes reference to
    conduct falling below the threshold set out in paragraph 398 of the
    immigration rules. Nor is it exhaustive as the language makes plain. It
    does make reference to "criminality falling below the threshold set out
    in paragraph 398 of immigration rules and a very poor immigration
    history such as where the person has repeatedly and deliberately
    breached the immigration rules. In this case, the only threshold
    required is that which the appellant does potentially fall into as a
    result of his criminal offending.

51. I also observe that the circumstances in SF (as cited) are different
    from the present appeal. In SF it was accepted by the Secretary of
    State and the Tribunal at [8] that it was a case that did not involve
    criminality and whilst there may have been a grandmother in the United
    Kingdom, the Secretary of State had not taken the view that there was
    an alternative carer unlike this appeal.

52. It is also right to observe that the judge made clear findings on the
    issue of the appellant's conduct including his criminality at paragraph
    43 as set out above. At paragraph 57 she applied the decision in MA
    (Pakistan) and thus applied the public interest considerations as
    required. Whilst it was submitted that it is wrong to blame the
    children for the parents conduct (as stated in MA (Pakistan), there is
    no suggestion in the analysis made by the judge that she did so.

53. In her assessment at [57] the judge placed weight on a number of
    matters- that he had made a claim for asylum in the circumstances
    described at paragraph 43 which the judge had rejected, he could not
    meet the rules and that any family or private life had been established
    at a time when his residence was unlawful or precarious and that there
    was no evidence that he was financially independent other than when he
    was working illegally. A reference to having worked illegally in the UK
    is what the judge had found to be significant and "troubling "in her
    assessment earlier at paragraph 43.

54.  I am satisfied that it was open to the judge to have reached the
    conclusion that it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave
    the UK.  Whilst the Respondent's own guidance recognises that it would
    not normally be reasonable to expect a child who is a British citizen
    to leave the UK, that guidance makes reference to the circumstances
    whereby it would be appropriate to refuse to grant leave. The judge's
    findings are to the effect that a British Citizen child cannot be
    required to leave the United Kingdom, but she found that the child and
    the child's mother would not be forced to leave the United Kingdom but
    may choose to do so if she wishes to continue family life together. She
    has limited leave to remain but is not " settled " in the UK and is a
    national of Nigeria as is the Appellant and their 2 children.
    Consequently the fact that the judge made no express reference to the
    guidance makes no material difference to the outcome.

55.  There is an additional point which arises from the guidance whereby it
    indicates that the conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to
    considerations of such weight as to justify separation. The
    circumstances envisaged cover criminality falling below the threshold
    set out in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules and a very poor
    immigration history, such as where the person has repeatedly and
    deliberately breached the immigration rules.

56. When applied to the facts of this case, the judge took into account
    that the appellant entered the UK in 2008 with entry clearance as a
    visitor and remained thereafter unlawfully until in 2015 when he made
    claim for asylum which the judge rejected. There were a number of
    aspects of the appellant's immigration history that gave weight to
    public interest issues. The judge's assessment is at paragraph 43 and
    57 as set out above. These are negative findings that give significant
    weight to the public interest in removal.

57. When applied to the facts of this case, whilst the Appellant entered
    the UK for a limited period as a visitor and he remained for a
    significant period thereafter establishing family life in the knowledge
    that he had no right to remain. The evidence before the judge was that
    appellant and his partner both knew of his lack of status (see
    paragraph 13 (e)).

58.  In my judgement, this conduct would fall within those two limbs- he
    has breached the Immigration Rules and there was evidence of him having
    committed criminality which the judge made reference to a paragraph 43.



59. Thus, in the alternative,  I am satisfied that even if the judge had
    regard to the Guidance which is the basis of the grounds, she would
    have applied her findings at  paragraphs 43 and reached the conclusion
    that he does fall within the envisaged exclusion categories . In the
    light of the factual circumstances and the judge's strong findings as
    to his criminality and how this affected the weight given to the public
    interest, even if the judge had taken the guidance into account, it has
    not been demonstrated that she would have reached any different
    decision than the one she reached.

60.  Therefore taking the circumstances as a whole, as I have set out
    above, I am satisfied that it was open to the judge to reach the
    conclusion on the evidence that was before her that the Appellant's
    removal was proportionate having regard to all of those circumstances.
    The judge took into account the best interests of the children which
    are a primary consideration and the public interest in effective
    immigration control which is engaged in this case and the public
    interest as it is expressed in the S117 considerations. The judge did
    not find that the circumstances were such that they were outweighed by
    the public interest considerations that she had identified.
    Consequently it was open to the judge to reach the conclusion that
    there were no "compelling" circumstances that produced unjustifiably
    harsh consequences to outweigh the public interest in effective
    immigration control in the light of the Appellant's individual
    circumstances and that of his family members.

61. Consequently the appeal is dismissed; the decision of the FTT does not
    disclose the making of an error on a point of law.




    Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  The direction applies both to the Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
[pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Reeds
                 Date: 26/9/2017

