
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01019/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Combine Court      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 18 June 2019                      |On 24 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  SANGO [J]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge AK Hussain promulgated on 26 March 2019 in which the
        Judge found there was no extant appeal before him.






Background


     2. The Judge found the only issue before the First-Tier  Tribunal  was
        that relating to  the  question  of  entitlement  to  international
        protection.   The   Judge   records   at   [3]   drawing   to   the
        representative's attention at the outset of the hearing the content
        of [85] of the refusal letter. In that the decision maker writes:

             "85.     It is concluded that your further submissions have no
                  realistic prospects  of  success  because  the  supporting
                  statements  and  documents  you  have  submitted  do   not
                  establish your claim that you personally are  at  risk  of
                  being persecuted or killed by the authorities in Angola on
                  account of your membership of Apareco  and  your  protests
                  against the government of DRC for the reasons given above.
                  It is considered that  your  submissions  have  failed  to
                  change the findings of the previous Immigration Judge  and
                  therefore are not considered to have a realistic  prospect
                  of success before another Immigration Judge."

     3. The Judge  records  that  both  advocates  agreed  that  the  above
        amounted to a  conclusion  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
        appellant's further submissions did not amount to  a  fresh  claim.
        The Judge therefore raised the question whether he had jurisdiction
        to hear the appeal stating  the  letter  made  it  plain  that  the
        application was considered under paragraph 353 of  the  Immigration
        Rules and used the language applicable in that paragraph. The Judge
        at [5] states: ".. I am satisfied that  rather  than  being  a  new
        decision amenable to  appeal,  it  was  a  decision  rejecting  the
        further submissions as a fresh claim".
     4. The Judge therefore concluded that the respondent's  decision  does
        not amount to a decision that is  appealable  pursuant  to  section
        82(1) of the 2002 Act.
     5. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal. The  operative  parts  of
        the grant being in the following terms:

             "2.  The relevant history is set out in the judge's  decision.
                  In summary, however, the appellant  had  made  a  previous
                  protection claim which had been refused and appeal against
                  that refusal  had  been  dismissed  by  Judge  Moxon.  The
                  appellant made further  submissions,  relying  on  various
                  items of additional evidence, including a letter from  the
                  UNHCR.


             3.   The respondent was obliged, as a result of the chronology
                  I have set out above, to  perform  the  task  set  out  by
                  paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  recently
                  considered by the Supreme Court in  Robinson  [2019]  UKSC
                  11; [2019] 2 WLR 897. He was obliged, in other  words,  to
                  decide  whether  the   appellant's   further   submissions
                  amounted to a fresh  claim.  Sadly,  despite  the  obvious
                  importance of that decision, the respondent's letter of  8
                  January 2019  is  wholly  unclear  as  to  the  conclusion
                  reached under paragraph 353. On the  one  hand,  as  Judge
                  Hussain noted, [85] of that letter  use  the  language  of
                  paragraph 353 in concluding that the  appellant's  further
                  submissions did not have 'a realistic prospect of  success
                  before another Immigration  Judge  [sic]'.  On  the  other
                  hand, the latter expressly stated that the  appellant  was
                  entitled  to  appeal   to   the   FtT   and,   potentially
                  significantly,  made  no  reference  to  the  tests  under
                  paragraph 353 when it came to considering the  appellant's
                  human rights claim.


             4.   In light of the above, it is at least arguable that Judge
                  Hussain erred in law in concluding that  this  was  not  a
                  case like Sheidu [2016]  UKUT  412  (IAC),  in  which  the
                  proper reading of the refusal letter was that there was  a
                  fresh claim, the refusal of which resulted  in  a  further
                  right of appeal. It is arguable that Judge  Hussain  erred
                  in failing to turn his mind to the parts  of  the  refusal
                  letter which militated in favour of that  conclusion,  and
                  focused entirely on those  which  supported  the  position
                  belatedly adopted by the respondent at the hearing.


             5.   Permission to  appeal  is  accordingly  granted  and  the
                  grounds may be argued in their entirety."


        In relation to Paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules; when a human
        rights or protection claim has been refused or withdrawn or treated
        as withdrawn under paragraph 333C of these  Rules  and  any  appeal
        relating to that claim is no longer  pending,  the  decision  maker
        will consider any further submissions and, if rejected,  will  then
        determine whether they amount to a  fresh  claim.  The  submissions
        will amount to a fresh claim if they  are  significantly  different
        from  the  material  that  has  previously  been  considered.   The
        submissions will only be significantly different if the content:


         (i)  had not already been considered; and


         (ii)  taken  together  with  the  previously  considered  material,
         created  a  realistic  prospect  of  success,  notwithstanding  its
         rejection.

     6. It is not disputed that a previous application had been made and an
        appeal against the refusal dismissed by  Judge  Moxon.  It  is  not
        disputed that  the  wording  in  [85]  reflects  that  in  (ii)  of
        paragraph 353 set out above but the Judge was required to  consider
        more than just the wording  of  that  paragraph  contained  in  the
        section of the decision headed 'Annex A Reasons for the  Decision'.
        The actual asylum decision appears  in  the  initial  part  of  the
        letter of 8 January 2019 which is in the following terms:

             "Asylum Decision


             You have applied for asylum in the United Kingdom and asked to
             be recognised as a refugee. You claim to have  a  well-founded
             fear of persecution in Angola on the basis of  your  political
             opinion.


             I have considered your claim on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
             State.


             I have also considered whether you  qualify  for  a  grant  of
             Humanitarian Protection in line with  paragraph  339C  of  the
             Immigration Rules.


             In the light of all the evidence  available,  I  have  decided
             that  you  have  not  established  a  well-founded   fear   of
             persecution so you do not  qualify  for  asylum.  Your  asylum
             claim is therefore refused under paragraph 336 and 339M of  HC
             395 (as amended).


             I have also decided that you have not  shown  that  there  are
             substantial grounds for believing that you face a real risk of
             suffering serious harm on return from the UK  so  you  do  not
             qualify for Humanitarian protection.


             Under paragraph 339F and 339M of the Immigration Rules.


             I have also considered whether the circumstances of your  case
             mean that your removal from the UK would breach your right  to
             respect for family and private life under  Article  8  of  the
             European Convention on Human Rights.  This  consideration  has
             been determined in accordance with Appendix  FM  to  paragraph
             276ADE(1) to 276 CE of the Immigration  Rules,  by  virtue  of
             paragraph 326B of the Immigration Rules.


             I have decided that you do not qualify for leave on the  basis
             of your family or private life in the UK. Your application  is
             refused under D-LTRP.1.3/D-LTRPT.1.3 and 276CE.


             I have also considered whether you may be eligible for a grant
             of limited or indefinite leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom in accordance with the  published  Home  Office
             Asylum Policy Instruction on Discretionary Leave  and  whether
             there would be a breach of your Human Rights under ECHR.


             I have decided you do not qualify for Discretionary Leave.


             Your claim has been recorded as determined on 8 January 2019.


             Further details are contained in the attached Annex A.


             Section 55


             Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 requires the  Home  Office  to  carry  out  its  existing
             functions in a  way  that  takes  into  account  the  need  to
             safeguard and promote the welfare of children in  the  UK.  In
             dealing with your application, I have taken this into account.


             Next Steps


             Right of Appeal


             You have 14 calendar days from the date of this  decision  was
             sent to appeal. Information  on  how  to  appeal,  the  appeal
             process and the fees payable (if applicable) are all available
             online at ..."

     7. At no time in the decision  under  challenge  does  the  respondent
        state that the further submissions are rejected as not amounting to
        a fresh claim pursuant to paragraph 353 of the  Immigration  Rules.
        Whilst the language used at [85] is similar  to  that  set  out  in
        paragraph 353 the Judge arguably errs in law when findings [85] can
        be interpreted as a decision that the further submissions  did  not
        amount to a fresh claim. Not only is  there  no  reference  to  the
        claim not being  accepted  as  a  fresh  claim  there  is  specific
        reference to various paragraphs  of  the  Immigration  Rules  under
        which the appellant's application has been rejected. The claim will
        only be considered on its merits and a right of appeal granted,  if
        rejected, if it is accepted as a fresh claim.
     8. I therefore find the Judge has erred in law in a manner material to
        the decision under challenge when stating that the  consequence  of
        [85] are that the matter had not been accepted as a fresh claim and
        as such did not generate a  right  of  appeal;  meaning  there  was
        nothing extant before the First-Tier Tribunal.
     9. In light of the fact the appellant has not had his appeal  properly
        considered the only option is for the appeal to be remitted to  the
        First-Tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford to  be  heard  by  a  judge
        other than Judge Hussain nominated by the Resident  Judge  of  that
        hearing centre. Further directions shall be given upon  receipt  of
        the file in accordance with operational requirements.


Decision

    10. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge.  I  remit  the  appeal  to  the
        Bradford Hearing Centre to be heard by a  judge  other  than  Judge
        Hussain.

   Anonymity.


    11. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18 June 2019

