
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01144/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2017                              |On 05 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                    mr AI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero, Counsel instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 14 November  2016
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Grice which refused AI's asylum and  human
    rights claims.

 3. The background to this matter is that  the  appellant  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 29 July 2015 and claimed asylum on 30 July 2015.  The
    respondent refused his asylum claim in a decision dated 27 January 2016
    and the appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 1 November 2016.
     As above, the appeal was refused  on  all  grounds.   The  applicant's
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  refused
    by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision dated 7  February  2016.   The
    application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and in a  decision  dated
    23 January 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman granted  permission.   The
    grant of permission refused grounds 2  and  3  and  granted  permission
    limited only to ground 1.

 4. Ground 1 stated as follows:

         "4.  The Judge did not accept the appellant's account as  truthful.
             For reasons set out  below,  her  reasons  for  reaching  that
             conclusion are unsustainable.

         5.   First, the Judge says this about the  appellant's  involvement
             with the OLF [52]:

                  'In interview the appellant did not  mention  his  support
                  for the OLF as a reason for his  asylum  claim  until  the
                  subject was introduced by the  interviewing  officer  some
                  way through  the  interview.   He  states  that  this  was
                  because he had not been asked about  the  OLF  until  that
                  point.  Given that the appellant's support for the OLFA is
                  a central plank of his claim I find  this  a  particularly
                  unconvincing explanation'.

         6.   However, towards the end of her decision, the Judge says [59]:

                  'Nor is it ostensibly part of the appellant's  claim  that
                  he was identified and detained because he  was  a  pro-OLF
                  supporter or involved in  a  pro-OLF  rally.   Rather,  he
                  asserts that he was detained because he was at  the  front
                  of the crowd chanting slogans'.

         7.   Those two findings are inconsistent.  The  Judge  first  finds
             that the appellant's support for the OLF is a 'central  plank'
             of his claim, but  then  finds  that  his  support  is  merely
             incidental to the problems he faced.

         8.   In making  contradictory  findings  on  a  matter  of  central
             importance to her assessment of credibility, the  Judge  erred
             in law."

 5. It is not my view that this ground discloses a material  error  of  law
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set  aside.
    The applicant's asylum claim was  that  on  28  to  30  April  2014  he
    attended demonstrations by large numbers of Oromo people  in  Ethiopia.
    His claim is that because he was at the  front  of  the  crowd  he  was
    arrested and detained and kept in  detention  for  four  months  during
    which time he was seriously mistreated.  This  was  the  claim  he  put
    forward to the respondent in interview.

 6.  As  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grice  indicates  at  [52]   of   the
    determination, the appellant did not mention  that  he  was  an  active
    supporter of the OLF as another  reason  for  fearing  mistreatment  on
    return  until  a  considerable  way  through  his   asylum   interview.
    Specifically, he did not mention the OLF until his response to question
    126 of the asylum interview and did so then only because he  was  asked
    by the interviewing officer whether he was a member or supporter of the
    OLF.  He stated that he was a supporter.  There is no challenge  before
    me to the finding at [52] that this was an aspect of the evidence  that
    undermined the appellant's credibility.

 7. The appellant therefore had two heads to his claim, firstly that he was
    detained in April 2014 at the Oromo demonstration and was or  would  be
    known as somebody who had been detained on return.   Secondly,  he  was
    and is an active supporter of the OLF.

 8. In [52] of the determination, the judge is stating that the appellant's
    claim that he was an active supporter  of  the  OLF  was  not  credible
    because of his failure to mention it earlier in the  interview  record.
    That was not the only reason the judge made this finding.  At [51]  the
    judge found that the appellant had not provided credible evidence as to
    who in the OLF  provided  him  with  leaflets  to  distribute  and  had
    provided "scant" information about how he came to  form  a  cell  after
    being introduced to members of the OLF.  At [53] the appellant's  claim
    to be a supporter of the OLF was further found to have been  undermined
    by the fact that he did not know details of the Ethiopian  Government's
    "Master Plan".  At [56] the judge gave reasons  for  finding  that  the
    letter from the Chairman of the UK OLF Committee did not attract weight
    and there is no challenge to that finding before me.

 9. In addition to finding that the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been  an
    active supporter of the OLF was not  credible,  the  judge  also  found
    other aspects of the claim to be unreliable, at [54]  finding  that  it
    was not credible that his aunt, who visited him during detention, would
    not have informed his family as to what had happened to  him.   It  was
    also found at [55] that it was not credible that he had  not  attempted
    to contact his family in Ethiopia and been able to do so for  over  two
    years.  At [57] the judge found the absence of medical  evidence  where
    the appellant maintained that he had significant injuries following his
    detention in Ethiopia was not credible.

10. The appellant submits that the statement at [52] about OLF  involvement
    being a "central plank" is inconsistent with what is said  at  [59]  of
    the decision. That paragraph states:

         "59. Taking the appellant's claim at  its  highest,  and  accepting
         (which I do not) that he did take part in a demonstration in  April
         2014 and was subsequently detained, he is not asserting  that  this
         demonstration was a specific pro-OLF demonstration, but rather  was
         an uprising  of  three  thousand  Oromo  against  the  Government's
         Master Plan.  On his own account he had had previous involvement in
         any demonstrations and had not previously come to the attention  of
         the authorities.  Nor is it  ostensibly  part  of  the  appellant's
         claim that he was identified and detained because he was a  pro-OLF
         supporter or involved in a pro-OLF rally.  Rather, he asserts  that
         he was detained because he was at the front of the  crowd  chanting
         slogans.  The background evidence  suggests  he  was  one  of  many
         thousands who were detained  in  2014.   It  is  open  to  question
         whether the factual matrix as he claims it to be would place him at
         real risk on return and thus bring him within MB [Country  guidance
         on Ethiopia]."

11. My reading of the  decision  is  that,  having  made  the  findings  on
    credibility in [51] to [57], the judge then went on at [59]  to  assess
    the claim  to  be  at  risk  because  of  the  2014  detention  in  the
    alternative at its highest.  He  was  not  making  further  credibility
    findings in [59] and so cannot  be  said  to  have  made  a  materially
    contradictory finding as to the basis of the appellant's claim and  his
    credibility.  Secondly, the statement of the appellant's claim in  [59]
    is not incorrect.  It was not part of the appellant's claim that he had
    attended  a  specifically  OLF  demonstration  or  that  he  was   ever
    identified by the Ethiopian authorities as an OLF supporter.

12. It is my conclusion, therefore, that the  decision  does  not  disclose
    error, certainly not material error and that the grounds of appeal  are
    not made out.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.





Signed   [pic]                               Date: 27 April 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


