
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01279/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 March 2021                      |On 15 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    e s c
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M West, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the re-making of  the  decision  in  this  case  following  the
    earlier decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Allen, promulgated on 16  July
    2020, that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law when dismissing the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal of  his  protection
    and human rights claims. Judge  Allen  concluded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision should be set aside and the case  reheard  a  fresh
    with no preserved findings of fact.

 2. This appeal has a  protracted  procedural  history.  The  appellant,  a
    citizen of Gambia, arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2010 as  a
    visitor. He overstayed and was encountered in 2014. He  then  absconded
    and, in 2017, he made an asylum claim (amounting to a protection  claim
    with an accompanying human rights  claim).  The  protection  claim  had
    three basic elements to it: first, that he  had  been  employed  as  an
    immigration officer and had been accused of issuing a false passport to
    an individual; second, that he feared the government as a supporter  of
    the former  regime  (the  Alliance  for  Patriotic  Re-orientation  and
    Construction - "APRC"); third, that his uncle was killed by  troops  in
    June 2017 and  that  the  appellant  had  subsequently  criticised  the
    current government via a  WhatsApp  audio  message,  with  the  adverse
    consequences this would bring on return.

 3. The claims were refused by a decision dated 10 January 2018. His appeal
    was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal. This decision  was  then  set
    aside by the First-tier Tribunal itself. The appeal  was  then  reheard
    and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan on 19 July 2018. By
    a decision promulgated on 4  June  2019,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb
    concluded that Judge Sullivan had  erred  in  law,  that  her  decision
    should be set aside, and that the  appeal  be  remitted.  The  remitted
    appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott-Baker.  She  too
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.  This  decision  was  successfully
    challenged in the Upper Tribunal.

 4. Judge Allen's error of law decision is brief and the relevant  passages
    state as follows:

         "1. ... The appeal was dismissed and the appellant sought  and  was
         granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis
         that it was arguable that the judge had failed to make any findings
         on the expert report, and that it was arguably unfair to have taken
         issue with there being no physical recording of  a  WhatsApp  audio
         when it had been transcribed and the typed record was available.

         ...

         3. The matter can be addressed  fairly  briefly  in  light  of  the
         response of the Secretary of State of 29 April 2020. In the  letter
         of that date the respondent accepts that the decision of the First-
         tier Judge contains material errors of law in  failing  to  address
         adequately the expert report and failing to give  adequate  reasons
         for material credibility findings. As a consequence, it  is  agreed
         that the decision should be set aside it is suggested on behalf  of
         the Secretary of  State  that  since  there  has  been  a  previous
         remittal the matter should be reheard in the Upper Tribunal.

         4. I agree with the submissions.  It  is  clear  that  the  judge's
         decision is flawed by material errors of law as  contended  in  the
         grounds and as set out in the grant of  permission.  I  also  agree
         that in light of the earlier remittal it will  be  appropriate  for
         the matter to be reheard in the Upper Tribunal. The matter will  be
         listed accordingly."

 5. A resumed hearing was listed for 24  November  2020.  However,  due  to
    Internet connection problems that hearing had to be adjourned.  A  case
    management review hearing was conducted on 20  January  2021.  At  that
    point, additional evidence from the appellant was admitted.

 6. In this way, the appeal came before me.

The evidence

 7. Perhaps unsurprisingly, there has been an accumulation of evidence over
    the course of  time.  Unfortunately,  for  one  reason  or  another  no
    consolidated bundle had been prepared for the hearing. This  led  to  a
    good deal of time being wasted on the day  in  order  for  the  correct
    evidence to be marshalled. That evidence consists of:

          a) the respondent's original appeal bundle;

          b) the appellant's bundle, comprising an  initial  bundle  and  a
             supplementary  bundle.  In  total,  the  relevant   pages   of
             subjective evidence run from 1 to 164, whilst 195-376 consists
             of country information. The bundle includes an  expert  report
             from Dr Pamela Kea, a Senior Lecturer  in  the  Department  of
             Anthropology at the University of Sussex;

          c) five witness statements from the appellant (three of which are
             contained in the bundle) dated, 1 February 2018,  15  February
             2018, 12 June 2018, 3 October 2019, and 12 January 2021;

          d) a What's On -  Gambia  message  relating  to  the  appellant's
             daughter;

          e) a photograph relating to  the  appellant's  daughters  claimed
             abduction;

          f)  two  certificates  relating  to   the   appellant's   claimed
             employment as an immigration officer;

          g) an Internet article on the use of WhatsApp in Africa;

          h) 8 original photographs of the appellant in his claimed role as
             an immigration officer;

          i) A "Certificate of  Appointment"  in  respect  of  the  claimed
             employment;

          j) two video clips, the first from Gambian television (a  channel
             entitled  QTV)  relating  to  the  claimed  abduction  of  the
             appellant's daughter and the second containing  footage  of  a
             window said to belong to the house of the appellant's  ex-wife
             (this evidence was viewed on a laptop during the hearing  with
             the agreement of both parties;

          k) oral evidence from the appellant.

 8. The hearing was lengthy. I do not propose to summarise the  appellant's
    oral evidence here. A full record of proceedings is on  file  and  both
    representatives will have maintained their own note of what was said.

 9. Suffice it to say that the appellant continued to  rely  on  the  three
    basic elements of his claim as set out earlier in  this  decision.  His
    oral evidence expanded on these  themes.  In  addition,  the  appellant
    stated that his daughter had been abducted in  November  2020  and  was
    found approximately three weeks later. A couple of days after this, the
    appellant's ex-wife's home was broken  into  by  unknown  persons.  The
    appellant believed that these events were linked to  his  criticism  of
    the current government through the WhatsApp audio message  put  out  in
    June 2017.

Submissions

10. Mr Lindsay relied  on  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  and,  as  an
    overarching submission, asserted that the appellant had been untruthful
    and that the documentary evidence was unreliable.

11. The delay in the appellant's claimed asylum was significant. If he  had
    been informed of the false allegations against him in 2011, why was the
    claim not made  until  2017?  In  addition,  there  was  no  supporting
    evidence in respect of the false passport issue.  Mr  Lindsay  did  not
    accept that the appellant had even been  an  immigration  officer.  The
    expert report did not assist because the author was not  an  expert  on
    documents such as those being relied on in this case.  Certain  aspects
    of Dr Kea's report were unclear. Even if  the  appellant  had  been  an
    immigration officer, the rest of the claim was  untrue.  If  there  had
    been false allegations in 2011 it is highly  likely  that  there  would
    have been some follow-up since then.  There  was  no  evidence  of  any
    proceedings against the appellant.

12. In respect of the WhatsApp audio message,  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that
    that there was no chain of custody regarding the recording  itself.  It
    was unclear whether a CD had been given to the translation company  and
    there was no evidence to show that this company had  in  fact  produced
    the transcript. In any event, Mr Lindsay noted an inconsistency in  the
    transcript: it stated that the message had been "written" when  it  was
    supposed to have been an audio message. Mr Lindsay submitted  that  the
    message was never made or transmitted. There was no evidence in respect
    of the WhatsApp group which had allegedly received it.  In  any  event,
    the group appeared to be supportive of  the  APRC.  The  appellant  had
    identified himself in the message simply in order to try and  create  a
    risk for himself. He had acted in bad faith.  If  his  uncle  had  been
    killed (which was denied), it was a random incident and  the  appellant
    had tried to use it in an opportunistic manner.

13. In respect of the alleged abduction of  the  appellant's  daughter,  Mr
    Lindsay submitted that indicated she had suffered  from  mental  health
    problems previously and this may  have  been  an  explanation  for  her
    disappearance. The appellant's explanation was incredible. His evidence
    on the details of what happened was  also  inconsistent.  Even  if  the
    event  had  occurred,  it  was  a  criminal  act  and  the  police  had
    investigated. There was no link to  this  incident  and  anything  done
    previously by the appellant. As to the alleged break-in,  the  incident
    had not been proved. Even if it did take place, there  was  nothing  to
    link it to the appellant. At its highest, the appellant might have been
    a supporter of the APRC.

14. On Article 8, Mr Lindsay noted that the appellant had made  no  mention
    of any relationship in the United Kingdom since June 2018 and there had
    been no adequate explanation for this omission. This evidential problem
    went to undermine the appellant's overall credibility.

15. Mr West relied on his skeleton  argument,  dated  9  October  2019.  He
    confirmed that there was no family life in the United Kingdom and  that
    any private life claim being put forward effectively  depended  on  the
    success of the protection claim. He also confirmed that  there  was  no
    free-standing claim in respect of the appellant's ethnicity.

16. Mr West emphasised the lower standard of proof and that  there  was  no
    requirement for corroborative evidence. The appellant had done  all  he
    could to provide supporting evidence. It was said  that  the  appellant
    had been "in the dark" about details of the allegations  made  in  2011
    and this explained  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum.  There  was  good
    evidence to show that the appellant had been an immigration officer. An
    email from the relevant authority was noted. The expert  report  should
    be afforded due weight. The fact of his previous appointment raised the
    appellant's overall profile.

17. There was no delay by the appellant following the death of his uncle in
    June 2017. The WhatsApp audio message was sent  out  a  day  after  the
    incident and only about four months before the appellant  was  detained
    in October 2017. It was submitted  that  the  audio  message  had  been
    shared amongst various  groups  and  it  was  made  known  to  a  wider
    audience. The misuse of WhatsApp was documented in country information.
    There was evidence to show that the authorities had come to know of the
    message.

18. The clip of the television broadcast viewed at the hearing was said  to
    reliably show that the appellant's daughter had  been  abducted.  There
    was a  link  between  that  abduction  and  the  appellant.  Given  the
    proximity of the subsequent break-in, there was  also  a  link  between
    that incident and the appellant.

19. The country information and expert report showed that opponents of  the
    current government might  be  targeted.  Ill-treatment  took  place  in
    detention.

20. Finally, Mr West  emphasised  the  fact  of  the  appellant's  previous
    employment in Gambia. He had had a good job and there was no reason for
    him to have come to the  United  Kingdom  and  fabricate  a  protection
    claim.

21. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Findings of fact

22. My findings of fact have been arrived at after a holistic assessment of
    the  evidence.  That  assessment  has  been  carried  out  against  the
    applicable prism of the lower standard of proof. Internal and  external
    consistency, together with plausibility, are integral elements  of  the
    evaluation of whether the appellant has  told  the  truth  or  not.  In
    respect of plausibility, I have taken care not to  judge  matters  from
    the perspective of what may or may not be a common  experience  in  the
    United Kingdom: the claimed events took place in  Gambia.  Having  said
    that, a degree of common sense is relevant to the equation.

23. In setting out my findings I have sought to take the relevant  elements
    of the appellant's claim in chronological order for  ease  of  reading.
    This does not of course mean  that  I  have  view  them  in  artificial
    isolation. A structure of some sort is required.

The appellant's claimed employment

24. The appellant  has  consistently  stated  that  he  had  worked  as  an
    immigration officer in Gambia, claiming that this employment  ran  from
    2001 until 2010 (in his statement of  1  February  2018  the  appellant
    claims that his employment ceased on the day he left Gambia).

25. In support of his claim the appellant has produced two training  course
    certificates, a Certificate of Appointment, and 8 original photographs.
    In addition, the expert report from Dr Kea purports to confirm that the
    Certificate of Appointment document is "genuine"; the layout and  stamp
    being "typical" of Gambian identity cards. She also  asserts  that  the
    two training certificates are "genuine documents".

26. I have concerns over certain aspects of the  evidence  on  this  issue.
    First, it is not immediately apparent to me that Dr  Kea  has  specific
    expertise as to the genuineness of documents such as those provided  by
    the appellant. Second, whilst the Certificate of  Appointment  is  date
    stamped 2 April 2001,  there  is  another  oval  shaped  stamp  on  the
    certificate dated 5 May 2009. This has not been explained.  Third,  the
    appellant's claim to have been employed as an immigration officer  from
    2001 does not appear to  sit  happily  with  the  two  training  course
    certificates,  which  purport  to  confirm  that  he  undertook  "basic
    training" between 2004 and 2005. It seems incongruent  that  employment
    could have been commenced without any "basic training"  and  that  such
    training did not occur until three years later.

27. Against this, I accept that Dr Kea is an experienced  academic  with  a
    specialism in Gambian and Senegalese culture and political  economy.  I
    accept that she has indeed written many expert reports over the  course
    of almost two decades. It is not in dispute that she was a  contributor
    to a COI report in 2011. Overall, I am prepared to accept that she  has
    experience and knowledge of the Gambian authorities and,  at  least  in
    general terms, the type of documents issued by them. The fact that  she
    is not specifically a document expert does not  entirely  detract  from
    her ability to provide expert opinion on  the  documents.  I  therefore
    attach appropriate weight to this aspect of her report.

28. As to the two  training  course  certificates,  I  have  now  seen  the
    originals (which were laminated). This counts for something, at  least.
    It is certainly problematic that the certificates indicate  that  basic
    training only occurred some years after employment commenced.  However,
    I bear in mind the contextual nature of plausibility  assessments.  The
    way things are done in Gambia may well not approximate to procedures in
    the United Kingdom.

29. The Certificate of Appointment is in original form. The initial date on
    the document corresponds with the appellant's consistent evidence as to
    the start of his employment. The other date stamp remains  unexplained,
    but in my view this is not fatal to the document's reliability. If  the
    document had been forged  it  is  perhaps  unlikely  that  an  entirely
    incongruent date stamp would have been applied to it.

30. The original photographs are, in my view, supportive of the appellant's
    claim. There is no dispute that these show the  appellant  himself.  He
    appears in uniform, both alone and with others. In certain photographs,
    the emblem on the shirt corresponds with that  on  the  Certificate  of
    Appointment. One particular photograph  shows  the  appellant  together
    with  what  would  appear  to  be  to  more  senior  members   of   the
    department/unit.

31. There are also a series of emails by an individual called Saidou Manga,
    who appears to be  (or  have  been)  the  Deputy  Commissioner  of  the
    Passport Control Unit within the Immigration Department  in  Gambia.  I
    will refer to this evidence again, below, but for present purposes  the
    email exchanges include details from this individual which are  clearly
    supportive of the claim that the appellant  had  been  employed  as  an
    immigration officer.

32. Taking all the evidence into account, I am prepared to accept,  on  the
    lower standard  of  proof,  that  the  appellant  was  employed  as  an
    immigration officer.

The claimed false allegations in 2011

33. My acceptance of the first aspect of the appellant's claim does not  of
    course mean that  I  am  bound  to  accept  his  assertion  that  false
    allegations were made against him in  2011,  although  that  favourable
    finding is a relevant consideration.

34. The appellant's case is that he was falsely accused  of  having  issued
    (or being complicit in the issuance of) a passport to an individual who
    was not entitled to it. As result of this activity being detected,  the
    appellant has maintained his claim that he will be arrested  on  return
    to Gambia.

35. The evidential problems with this aspect of his claim are significant.

36. No mention of this claimed problem was made in the screening interview.
    The brief description of the asylum claim referred only to the  alleged
    criticism of the government following  the  death  of  the  appellant's
    uncle in 2017. Screening interviews  are  by  their  nature  relatively
    superficial. However, basic aspects of a claim can be  expected  to  be
    stated at that point in time, absent particular circumstances such  as,
    for example, mental health problems or fear of disclosure due to  shame
    or fear. No such circumstances exist here.

37. The appellant accepts that he was made aware of the false allegation in
    2011. Yet he did not make his asylum claim until after he was  detained
    in this country in 2017. I find that the explanation for this delay  is
    wholly unsatisfactory. The appellant knew full well of the  ability  to
    claim asylum in this country.  He  has  asserted  that  he  was  unsure
    whether the false allegations had in fact been  made.  It  is  striking
    that, even on the appellant's own evidence, he appears to have made  no
    real effort to obtain any information from anyone in Gambia  about  any
    legal proceedings against him in respect of the allegation.  I  do  not
    accept the briefly stated assertion in the statement of 1 February 2018
    that he tried to make telephone calls, but these went unanswered.  Even
    if he had made some attempts, this in no way goes to adequately explain
    the very  lengthy  delay  in  making  the  asylum  claim.  It  is  also
    noteworthy that the false allegation issue is not  dealt  with  in  any
    detail in the numerous witness statements made over the course of time.

38. Dr Kea's report does not offer any material support in respect  of  the
    specific assertion that a false allegation had been  made  against  the
    appellant.

39. There is no evidence from the immigration authorities in Gambia to  the
    effect that an allegation (which they may have regarded as correct) had
    been made, or even  that  he  had  been  formally  dismissed  from  his
    employment as a result. I have not been referred to any  evidence  that
    any formal notification was provided either to the appellant himself or
    anyone else with whom he has had contact over  the  intervening  years.
    Corroborative evidence is not a requirement, but  its  absence  can  be
    relevant where the evidence of the individual is found wanting,  as  it
    is here.

40. As mentioned  previously,  the  appellant  relies  on  email  exchanges
    between him and Saidou Manga. The emails date back to the period  June-
    August 2019. Whilst Mr Manga does appear  to  support  the  appellant's
    claim to have been employed as an immigration officer, nothing is  said
    about any allegations against him in  respect  of  the  issuance  of  a
    passport. This poses two problems for the appellant. First, in my  view
    it is implausible that a high  ranking  official  within  the  relevant
    department would be conversing (using what appears to be  his  official
    email account) with an individual (the appellant)  who  had  apparently
    been  accused  of  a  serious  offence  in  the   past.   Second,   and
    alternatively, if Mr Manga was well-disposed to the  appellant,  it  is
    damaging to the appellant's  case  that  no  mention  is  made  of  any
    outstanding allegations and/or proceedings  against  the  appellant  in
    respect of the passport issue. It goes to show that either there was no
    allegation in the first place,  or,  if  there  was,  that  no  further
    interest continued to exist as of 2019 at the latest.

41. Again, corroborative evidence is not a requirement. Again  though,  its
    absence can be relevant where the  appellant's  evidence  suffers  from
    significant problems, as it does here.

42. Taking the evidence as a whole, I do not accept that it  is  reasonably
    likely that the  appellant  was  ever  falsely  accused  of  issuing  a
    passport to an individual who was not entitled to it. The appellant has
    been untruthful in this respect. In my judgment, the  reality  is  that
    the appellant has sought to bolt on this element of his  claim  to  the
    fact of his previous employment as an immigration officer.

43. This has an adverse impact on the appellant's overall  credibility,  as
    does the lengthy delay in him making the asylum  claim  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

The appellant's support for APRC

44. I am willing to accept that the appellant was a low-level supporter  of
    the APRC. The card and letter from the organisation were regarded by Dr
    Kea as genuine documents. The appellant has been consistent  about  his
    support  for  this  party.  Having  said  that,  his  evidence  on  his
    involvement is sparse. He accepts that he never had a  particular  role
    in the party and the APRC letter does not assert otherwise. I find that
    to be the case. I do  not  accept  that  he  has  been  active  in  any
    meaningful sense, either in Gambia or the United Kingdom.

45.  I  have  factored  in  the  appellant's  support  for  the  APRC  when
    considering all other aspects of his  claim.  The  country  information
    does indicate that  political  opponents  may  be  subject  to  adverse
    attention by the current regime, depending on their circumstances.  The
    implications of this are of course highly fact-specific. A  generalised
    background support emanating from  country  information  does  not,  of
    itself, show that the appellant has been telling the  truth  about  his
    particular history.

The uncle's death in June 2017

46. The appellant's case is that his uncle, HJ, a supporter  of  the  APRC,
    was killed whilst attending a demonstration on 3 June  2017.  According
    to the appellant's statement of 1 February 2018, the demonstration  was
    against the presence of ECOMIG troops in the country.  This  force  had
    been allowed in to ensure the transition of power from former president
    Jammeh to the  incumbent,  Adama  Barrow.  As  time  went  on,  certain
    sections of the population felt aggrieved by their  continued  presence
    in the  country.  The  appellant's  evidence  is  that  his  uncle  was
    "possibly" shot by ECOMIG troops.

47. In addition to the appellant's own consistent evidence on  this  issue,
    there is a fair amount of documentary evidence connecting HJ to him  by
    way of an uncle/nephew relationship. I am prepared to find that the two
    were related as claimed.

48. The claim that HJ was  killed  at  the  demonstration  in  question  is
    supported by Dr Kea's report. She cites a media article confirming that
    an individual did die, naming him as HJ (the full name is used  in  the
    report).  The  death  certificate  is  not  without  its  difficulties,
    specifically the apparent fact that the death was not registered  until
    a year after the event itself. However,  taking  the  evidence  in  the
    round,  I  accept  that  HJ  was  in  fact  shot  and  killed  at   the
    demonstration on 3 June 2017. The evidence shows that the  killing  was
    not targeted, but occurred as a result of ECOMIG troops opening fire on
    peaceful protesters. If it is being said on the appellant's behalf that
    his uncle was singled out, I do not accept that to be the case.

The WhatsApp audio message

49. Along with other elements of the appellant's case, I find the  evidence
    relating to the WhatsApp audio message to be significantly problematic.

50. The appellant asserts that the day after his uncle's death he  recorded
    and then sent a WhatsApp audio message to his "group", which  contained
    between 300 and 500 recipients. The message was in strident  terms  and
    displayed what he says was his anger  at  the  actions  of  the  ECOMIG
    troops. It is the consequences of this audio message that  underpins  a
    central plank of the appellant's protection claim.

51. It is somewhat strange that the appellant's estimate of the numbers  in
    his WhatsApp group ranged so widely from 300 to  500  people.  However,
    this concern does not play a material part in my consideration.

52. I am satisfied that  a  recording  of  a  WhatsApp  audio  message  was
    obtained by the appellant. However, the recording  did  not  come  from
    WhatsApp itself, but,  according  to  a  letter  from  the  appellant's
    brother dated 5 February 2018, apparently  from  an  unidentified  "UTG
    student" who is said to have downloaded the message onto a  laptop.  It
    is of note that, notwithstanding the claimed  initial  receipt  of  the
    audio message by between 300 and 500 people, the only recording of  the
    message was obtained from a single individual  about  whom  nothing  is
    said (even whether he was a member of the appellant's WhatsApp group).

53. I am satisfied that  a  recording  of  a  WhatsApp  audio  message  was
    provided to the Language Factory on 19 February 2018, as  confirmed  by
    their letter of 8 March 2018. However, there is  no  reliable  evidence
    that either: (a) the  audio  message  provided  was  the  same  message
    allegedly recorded by the appellant on 4 June 2017; or (b) the  message
    was in fact that downloaded from the unidentified student's laptop. The
    letters from various individuals (including  the  appellant's  brother)
    contained in the bundle do not shed any reliable light on the chain  of
    custody issue.

54. I have been unable to find any credible explanation from the  appellant
    as to why he himself did not have a recording of his own WhatsApp audio
    message, or indeed any proof that any message was ever posted.  I  find
    his claim that the mobile telephone on which  the  message  was  stored
    broke after falling into the toilet to be  highly  convenient  and,  in
    light of the evidence as a whole, untruthful.

55. In reaching these findings, I in no way seek to impugn the integrity of
    the appellant's legal representatives or  the  professionalism  of  the
    translation company.

56. In respect of the translation itself, I find  that  the  audio  message
    provided to the translation company had two parts to it: the  first  in
    the Joola language; the second in Mandingo. It is  the  case  that  the
    Joola section starts off by stating  that,  "this  message  is  written
    today through WhatsApp...". The use of the word "written" is odd, given
    the apparent nature of the message. In  oral  evidence,  the  appellant
    appeared to say that there was an  error  in  the  transcription.  This
    really does his general credibility no favours. There is no evidence of
    any approaches to the Language Factory to correct any  alleged  "error"
    by them.

57. The content of the message gives  rise  to  significant  concerns.  The
    message is directed at the current government. The word "you"  is  used
    repeatedly when criticisms are stated in relation to the uncle's death.
    However, on the appellant's evidence, he sent the  message  only  to  a
    WhatsApp consisting of  those  with  a  similar  political  persuasion,
    namely broad support for the previous government of the  APRC.  I  find
    that to be materially problematic.  If  an  individual  is  seeking  to
    openly criticise a government, they would, I find, seek to do so  in  a
    direct fashion. In other words, they would take steps  to  ensure  that
    the message went to those supportive of the  government  or  to  use  a
    social media or some other platform in order  to  make  the  criticisms
    heard by the intended audience. In oral evidence, the appellant  stated
    that members of his WhatsApp group could have shared it with other pro-
    government individuals or groups. That may in theory be so. However, at
    no stage has he said that this was in fact his intention. A final point
    is the absence of any adverse messages on WhatsApp emanating from those
    critical of the appellant's actions. The appellant himself has asserted
    that he and his mother were insulted on the social media platform.  Yet
    no  documentary  evidence  of  this  has  been  provided.   As   stated
    previously, corroborative evidence is not  required,  but  its  absence
    leaves the appellant's own evidence to stand alone. In this case,  that
    evidence is damaged in numerous respects.

58. The audio message is replete with fairly base insults directed  towards
    the government (I need not repeat the particular words used  here).  On
    the one hand, it appears to me as  though  the  insulting  language  is
    highly likely to have been used by the appellant in order to attempt to
    ensure an adverse reaction (assuming that the message was heard by  the
    "right"  people,  namely  the  government).  On  the  other  hand,  the
    appellant has said that the message was driven by anger at the loss  of
    his uncle, and this may, to an extent, explain  the  use  of  the  foul
    language. More  importantly,  there  is  real  merit  in  Mr  Lindsay's
    submission that the appellant has gone out of  his  way  to  repeatedly
    identify himself, to name  his  mother,  and  to  state  where  he  was
    residing at the time (the United Kingdom). None of these  details  were
    necessary in any way in order to convey anger and emotion at  the  loss
    of the uncle. The author (or, more  accurately,  the  speaker)  of  the
    message would have been  identifiable  through  the  WhatsApp  platform
    itself (even if the message had  been  forwarded  or  shared  by  group
    members). The place of  his  residence  was  neither  here  nor  there.
    Stating it on two occasions  merely  went  to  inform  the  authorities
    (assuming they got to hear the message) that he  was  probably  seeking
    international protection in the United Kingdom and wanted to  show  the
    authorities here that he would be at risk on return to Gambia. Finally,
    and most significantly, by naming his mother, he was manifestly placing
    her at potential risk. Indeed, in his statement of 1 February 2018, the
    appellant states that people in Gambia were reacting badly to the audio
    message and that his mother was being insulted on WhatsApp.

59. I have already referred to the supporting letters  from  a  variety  of
    individuals in Gambia, which address the issue of the transmission  and
    dissemination of the WhatsApp audio message. The authors of the letters
    all have a vested interest  in  assisting  the  appellant's  protection
    claim. The epithet "self-serving"  must  be  viewed  with  caution:  an
    individual connected in some way with the subject of a protection claim
    can of course be telling the truth in all  material  respects.  In  the
    present case, it is relevant that there is no confirmation  by  a  more
    independent  source  of  the  transmission  and  dissemination  of  the
    message. For example, there is nothing from the APRC, any human  rights
    organisation,  or  other  source,  which  purports   to   support   the
    appellant's assertions. The APRC letter, dated some  six  months  after
    the WhatsApp message was  apparently  sent,  says  nothing  about  this
    issue.

60. The first of the supporting letters comes from the appellant's ex-wife.
    I am bound to say that it is somewhat  incongruous  that  she  actually
    describes herself as "your ex-wife" at the end of  the  document,  when
    her "status" would be entirely obvious to the appellant.  Beyond  that,
    she asserts that she "would not be wrong" if she said that the WhatsApp
    audio message was on "all major" groups including the "UDP, GDC and NRP
    forums." No explanation is given as to how she would have known this to
    be the case. In the next paragraph, she appears to  make  a  connection
    between the appellant and an uncle's former army colleague, a  WhatsApp
    group, and problems encountered from the government. I cannot  see  any
    reference to this from the appellant himself.

61. The second letter comes from a friend, Mr Bojang. He states that a work
    colleague informed him of the appellant's WhatsApp audio message having
    appeared on pro-government groups. As with the first letter,  reference
    is made to the use of WhatsApp by individuals and consequent  problems.
    It is in my view difficult to understand why the author  (who  purports
    to be a friend of the appellant) would need to comment on wider  issues
    relating to the use of WhatsApp in  a  letter  to  the  appellant.  The
    paragraph in question reads more like a submission on the situation  in
    Gambia than a letter to a  friend.  The  author  names  three  WhatsApp
    groups on which it is said the appellant's audio message  had  appeared
    (Gambia Democratic Congress Forum, Better Gambia forum, and No  Retreat
    No Surrender forum). It is not said how the author knew this to be  the
    case, particularly as one of them was said to be "owned  by  soldiers".
    WhatsApp is an end-to-end encrypted platform  and  there  has  been  no
    evidence as to how an "outsider" would know about  the  contents  of  a
    group of which they were not a member.

62. There is no independent evidence that any of the WhatsApp groups/forums
    in fact existed at the time.

63. The third letter was written by Yunus Colley. This begins by addressing
    the manner by which a recording  of  the  WhatsApp  audio  message  was
    obtained in Gambia. However, the bulk of the letter again reads like  a
    submission. It addresses the general  situation  in  Gambia  and  makes
    reference to named individuals who had had problems in part because  of
    audio messages made by them.

64. As to the use (or misuse) of  WhatsApp  throughout  Africa,  the  media
    article does not in my view take the appellant's case any  further.  It
    indicates that certain governments on the continent have been using the
    platform for their own ends and  that  inaccurate  information  can  be
    conveyed  using  this  method.  WhatsApp  is  said  to  be  influencing
    political culture. I am willing to accept that this is the case, as  it
    probably is in many other countries  around  the  world.  However,  the
    appellant's case, in so far as it relates to WhatsApp, involves his use
    of that platform and the consequences of so doing. That is not the same
    as misinformation being spread by the Gambian government.

65. Dr Kea's report does not include  specific  evidence  relating  to  the
    claimed dissemination of the appellant's  WhatsApp  audio  message.  It
    does provide an example of a group of soldiers who  were  arrested  for
    allegedly using WhatsApp to  criticise  the  government  through  audio
    messages. An official statement from the army accused the  soldiers  of
    engaging  in  "mutinous,  defamatory,  scandalous  and  unethical  acts
    against the government". The sources  indicate  that  one  soldier  was
    subjected to serious ill-treatment. This evidence is supportive of  the
    generality of the appellant's claim in so far as the use of WhatsApp to
    criticise the Gambian authorities could  potentially  lead  to  adverse
    interest.

66. Bringing all of the above together, I make the  following  findings  of
    fact in respect of the WhatsApp audio message.

67. In the first instance, I do not accept that the appellant ever  sent  a
    WhatsApp audio message, as claimed.

68. Alternatively, if any such message was sent, I find that it  went  only
    to a specific group of no more than 500 people. I do not accept that it
    was subsequently disseminated  amongst  other  pro-government  WhatsApp
    groups.

69. In the further alternative, if indeed  a  WhatsApp  audio  message  was
    shared and heard more widely, I find that the appellant's actions  were
    carried out in bad faith, with the express intention to create  a  risk
    for himself. This is in light of the use of language  in  the  message;
    the provision of his details and those of his mother; his knowledge (as
    I find it to be) of the use by others  of  WhatsApp  to  criticise  the
    government, with potentially  adverse  consequences;  and  the  overall
    significant problems with the appellant's truthfulness. I do not accept
    that there have been any visits to, or any other form of harassment of,
    family members in Gambia as result of the  WhatsApp  audio  message  (I
    shall deal specifically with the claimed abduction of  the  appellant's
    daughter and the break-in,  below).  These  claims  are,  like  others,
    untrue embellishments.

70. I also find that the  appellant  has  failed  to  show,  on  the  lower
    standard, that the Gambian authorities will see the appellant's actions
    as anything other than what they are, namely an  opportunistic  attempt
    at  creating   a   successful   protection   claim.   The   appellant's
    circumstances can be distinguished  from  the  examples  given  in  the
    country information and expert report regarding others  who  have  used
    WhatsApp audio  messages.  The  appellant  is  clearly  not  a  serving
    soldier, as in the case of example given in Dr Kea's report.  He  would
    not be seen as a traitor or mutineer. Whilst he did  have  an  official
    role as an immigration officer, this apparently ended in late 2010, 6 �
    years before the WhatsApp audio message was posted and there  has  been
    no action taken against him thereafter. The other  example  involved  a
    relatively high profile academic whose position can  again  be  readily
    distinguished from that of the appellant. The appellant was,  at  most,
    the distraught relative of an individual killed  by  ECOMIG  troops  in
    June 2017. He has no material political profile either in Gambia or the
    United Kingdom and close to 4 years have  elapsed  since  any  WhatsApp
    audio message was sent and  (in  this  alternative  scenario)  seen  by
    government-supporting users of that platform. In summary, I  find  that
    the authorities would pay no material attention to him  on  return.  If
    (which I do not accept) he was questioned on return, the most  that  is
    reasonably likely to occur is that the appellant is told to desist from
    sending any further critical  WhatsApp  audio  messages.  There  is  no
    evidence from him to begin to suggest that he would wish  to  send  any
    such messages out of a genuine desire to protest  against  his  uncle's
    death.

The daughter's claimed abduction

71. Having viewed the television video clip and considered  the  What's  On
    Gambia messages, I accept  that  the  appellant's  daughter,  IC,  went
    missing in November 2020.

72. On the evidence before me, I do not accept that she  was  abducted  for
    reasons connected in any way with the appellant. My  reasons  for  this
    finding are as follows.

73. The appellant's evidence on this issue was unsatisfactory and, I  find,
    untrue. On the one hand he  has  claimed  that  the  police  and  other
    authorities in Gambia investigated  her  disappearance  and  took  what
    appear to be all reasonable steps to assist the family. Indeed, in  his
    latest statement, he asserts that the police contacted him  to  provide
    an update on what he describes as the kidnapping. On  the  other  hand,
    the appellant is claiming that the Gambian authorities wish  to  detain
    him and do him harm as a result of the WhatsApp audio message  and  his
    political allegiance. There is an obvious and material tension  on  the
    face of the evidence.

74. In that same statement,  the  appellant  said  that  his  daughter  was
    traumatised and had not been able to talk fully about what happened  to
    her. That statement is dated 12 January 2021.  In  oral  evidence,  the
    appellant proceeded to convey details of what had happened,  apparently
    provided to him by his daughter on 6 December 2020. What is said in the
    statement clearly does not sit consistently with the oral evidence.

75. The appellant told me that IC had not had any "health problems"  before
    6 December 2020 (that being the day that she  was  found).  Mr  Lindsay
    noted the contents of a letter from the appellant's ex-wife,  dated  15
    September 2019, which referred to their  daughter  as  "still  battling
    with her sickness" and being unable to attend school. In a letter dated
    31 January 2019 from a family friend purportedly writing on  behalf  of
    the appellant's mother, it is  said  that  IC  had  developed  symptoms
    "similar  to  schizophrenia".  In  response  to  this,  the   appellant
    suggested that the "sickness" was just malaria and not  a  real  health
    problem. I do not believe the appellant on  this  issue.  Two  sources,
    IC's mother and grandmother, have both in  effect  said  that  she  was
    suffering from some form of a mental health  condition.  Malaria  is  a
    widespread disease in West Africa. It is close  to  being  fanciful  to
    suggest that the daughter's mother and grandmother would have  mistaken
    symptoms of a genuine mental health problem with those of that disease.

76. In turn, there is merit in Mr Lindsay's submission  that  IC  may  well
    have disappeared as a result of a  mental  health  condition,  and  not
    because of an abduction. Strictly speaking, it is not for me to  engage
    with a scenario that has not been put forward by the appellant. My task
    is to assess the truthfulness of what he has said. In this regard,  his
    evidence simply does not stand  up  to  scrutiny,  even  on  the  lower
    standard of proof. Aside from  the  unsatisfactory  evidence  discussed
    above, there is the fact of the passage of time  between  the  WhatsApp
    audio message in mid-2017 and  the  daughter's  disappearance  in  late
    2020. It is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the  authorities,  if  they
    genuinely wished to do the appellant or those close to him harm,  would
    have refrained from taking any concerted action for over three years.

77. Taking the evidence as a whole, I do not accept that IC had experienced
    problems at school because of the appellant's actions.

78. If the appellant's daughter was indeed abducted, it is in  my  judgment
    not reasonably likely that this had any connection to  the  appellant's
    circumstances. It is extremely likely that it  was  purely  a  criminal
    act.

The claimed break-in

79. I accept that the second video clip shows footage  of  a  metal  grille
    across the window of a house. It appears as though the grille has  been
    forced on one side. Neither the video nor any other evidence aside from
    that emanating from the appellant links the footage to the  appellant's
    ex-wife, or that IC resided there at any time. There is no  independent
    evidence such as a police report relating to the claimed break-in.

80. As to the appellant's own evidence on this  issue,  he  is  once  again
    relying on the 2017 WhatsApp audio message to link the claimed break-in
    to a desire on the part of the Gambian  authorities  to  do  him  harm,
    directly or otherwise. As  will  be  apparent  from  a  reading  of  my
    decision thus far, the appellant's evidence is, to a very large extent,
    untruthful.

81. I do not accept that there was a break-in on 8 December 2020. If  there
    was, I do not accept that it was in any way related to the  appellant's
    circumstances. On the appellant's witness statement evidence, items  of
    some value were taken, indicating that the intrusion was a burglary and
    not an act of persons connected to the authorities.  I  do  not  accept
    that its timing was anything other than a coincidence.

Conclusions

82. I now apply my findings of fact to the issue of whether  the  appellant
    is at risk on return to Gambia.

83. I appreciate that my findings have included alternative  scenarios.  In
    the particular circumstances of this case, I have  deemed  this  to  be
    appropriate. I have borne in mind that opportunistic attempts to create
    a risk are not necessarily fatal to  the  existence  of  such.  In  the
    present case, I  have  made  findings  on  the  views  of  the  Gambian
    authorities on the alternative basis that  a  critical  WhatsApp  audio
    message was sent and disseminated.

84. On all of the factual scenarios set out above, the appellant has failed
    to show that he is at risk on return to Gambia for any reason.  He  has
    no relevant political profile and is of no  material  interest  to  the
    authorities. That is the case  even  if  such  interest  existed  on  a
    temporary basis once the WhatsApp audio message was heard in the latter
    part of 2017. There have been no acts  of  harassment  or  any  threats
    perpetrated against the appellant or family members at any time.  There
    were never any force allegations made against the appellant in  respect
    of his role as an immigration officer.

85. Whilst the country information and expert  report  indicate  that  ill-
    treatment of political opponents can occur, each case is fact-specific.
    The appellant cannot show that anyone with any connection to  the  APRC
    is at risk.

86. In light of my findings, no issue arises  under  the  principle  in  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31; [2010] 3 WLR 386. I note  that  the  appellant's
    case has not been argued on this basis in any event.

87. The appellant's appeal fails on protection grounds.

88. Similarly, the Article 8 claim fails. There is no family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom. Any private life established over the course of time is
    thin, to  say  the  least.  It  is  been  established  during  unlawful
    residence in this country. In  light  of  all  relevant  matters,  this
    aspect of the appellant's case is bound to fail.

Anonymity

89. In all the circumstances, it is appropriate to maintain  the  anonymity
    direction made originally by the First-tier Tribunal and  continued  by
    the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

90. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law. That decision has been set aside.

91. I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  12 April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                      Date:  12 April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

