

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01777/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 5 April 2016                               |On 12 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    O.K.
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms A. Patyana of counsel


                                  DECISION

   1. It is not immediately apparent from the documents before me whether an
      anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. For the avoidance
      of any possible doubt, I make an order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting  disclosure
      of any information likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify
      the respondent, Ms O.K.
   2. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal against a
      decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mace  who,  by  a  decision
      promulgated on 18 February 2016, allowed this appeal  against  refusal
      of the asylum claim advanced by Ms O.K. The grounds raise  a  narrowly
      articulated challenge:


           "It is respectfully submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
           has failed to resolve the conflict of fact in  relation  to  the
           appellant's claimed chronology of events and that this  has  led
           to findings of fact that are unsafe."


   3. Although the Secretary of State is  the  appellant  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal and Ms O.K. the respondent, as  I  shall  have  to  reproduce
      extracts from the decision below, it is convenient  to  refer  to  the
      parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal. It is helpful  to
      start by reproducing the succinct summary of the cases advanced by the
      parties. The judge summarised the appellant's case as follows:


           "If returned to Albania she would face mistreatment from  a  man
           called Ibritin who subjected her to trafficking.  The  appellant
           had dated this man who then invited her to work  in  his  hotel.
           She was locked in a room  and  her  passport  and  clothes  were
           taken. She was then taken to a house where she  was  beaten  and
           forced to have sex with men for money. In November 2014 she  was
           taken to Italy. She was stopped by officials and her father came
           to collect her to Albania. Ibritin made threats to harm her  and
           her family so it was decided she would leave."


      The judge then summarised the reasons  given  by  the  respondent  for
      rejecting her asylum claim:


           "The respondent does not accept the account  of  the  appellant.
           She was referred to the National Referral Mechanism to establish
           whether  she  fell  within  the  definition  of  a   victim   of
           trafficking. It was concluded that she does  not.  It  has  also
           been  considered  whether  she   qualifies   for   international
           protection. Her age and nationality are accepted.  There  is  no
           evidence to support the claim that Idritin is powerful and knows
           police officers and politicians and she could not  name  any  of
           these people. Further, she stayed at her  grandmother's  between
           November 2014 and March 2015 during  which  she  experienced  no
           problems. There is no reason to fear Idritin on return.


In any event, there is sufficiency of protection available. She did not
approach the police. Further, the government has made significant efforts
to fight to trafficking. In cooperation with NGOs it has trained anti-
trafficking members. The sentence for trafficking has been increased. There
has been increased identification and referral of victims to appropriate
services. There are a number of NGOs who can potentially assist. There is
one state run shelter and 3 NGO shelters which provide services including
psychological care, legal assistance and medical care."


      The judge then recorded that  she  had  regard  to  the  then  current
      country guidance available and continued:


           "The Conclusive Grounds Consideration Minute notes a  number  of
           inconsistencies in the appellant's account. She has claimed that
           she was forced to work as a prostitute from  August  2014  until
           November 2014 and during  this  time  her  passport  was  taken.
           However, information from the Albanian authorities  shows  that,
           travelling on her own passport, she left Albania with her father
           by bus to Greece on 28th of October 2014 and did not  return  to
           Albania. Further, she has claimed that her father collected  her
           from Italy in November  2014  and  took  her  back  to  Albania.
           However, further information from the authorities shows that her
           father left Albania by bus on 28 October 2014 for Greece,  where
           he stayed until 6th August 2015 August 2015 before returning  to
           Albania. This information  is  based  on  biometric  checks  and
           higher weight is placed on it."


   4. It can be seen from this that the account put forward by the appellant
      was not consistent  with  official  records  of  travel  by  both  the
      appellant and her father. The appellant could not  have  been  working
      under duress as  a  prostitute  in  Albania  between  28  October  and
      November 2014 as she had claimed if she  had  left  Albania  with  her
      father on 28 October 2014 and travelled with him to Greece. Nor  could
      she have been collected by her father from Italy in November 2014  and
      taken back to Albania if the records were correct in stating that  her
      father had left Albania on 28 October 2014  and  travelled  to  Greece
      where he remained until he returned to Albania on 6 August 2015. These
      inconsistencies led the respondent to conclude that the account  given
      by the appellant could not be true. The  judge  found  otherwise.  The
      question in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is whether it  was  open
      to the judge to do so or whether, as the respondent  submits,  it  was
      not reasonably open to her to do so which would mean that  in  failing
      to resolve those inconsistencies adequately she made an error  of  law
      such that her decision cannot stand.


   5. It is important to  recognise  that  permission  to  appeal  has  been
      granted on that basis alone. There  is  no  challenge  raised  in  the
      grounds for seeking permission to appeal in respect of the findings of
      the  judge  concerning  sufficiency  of  protection  for  victims   of
      trafficking nor the  possibility  for  this  particular  appellant  of
      internal relocation in order to avoid the risk of persecution  in  her
      home area.

   6. At paragraph 1(b) of the grounds, the focus of the challenge  is  made
      very clear:

           "It is asserted that the FTTJ has not  adequately  resolved  the
           conflict of fact in that the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been
           trafficked appears to be undermined by the  evidence  suggesting
           that she left Albania with her father and travelled to Greece on
           28th October 2014 without returning. It is also noted  that  the
           appellant travelled at the same time as her father and these two
           facts  appear  to  undermine  the  appellant's  account  in  its
           entirety. It is submitted that the FTTJ has failed to  make  any
           findings or provide  any  reasons  as  to  why  the  appellant's
           credibility is not completely undermined by this evidence."

   7. There can be no doubt at all that the judge was  fully  alert  to  the
      importance the  respondent  placed  upon  the  contradictions  in  the
      evidence. At para 20 she said:


           "What is inconsistent  with  the  appellant's  account  are  the
           records from the  Albanian  immigration  authorities.  From  the
           reasons for refusal letter and the conclusive grounds minute, it
           appears  that  is  the  substantive  reason  for  rejecting  the
           credibility of the appellants account. As detailed above,  those
           records states that a person travelling  on  her  passport  left
           Albania on 28th October 2014 for Greece."

      The judge then addressed this difficulty in the evidence:

           "The appellant has stated that her  father  collected  her  from
           Italy in November 2014. The records are said  to  show  that  he
           left Albania on 28th of October  2014  and  remained  in  Greece
           until 6th August 2015. It has not been made clear how it is that
           the  Albanian  authorities  would  have  a  record   of   person
           travelling from Greece to Italy. It  must  be  stated  that  the
           appellants account is that her father took her back  to  Albania
           to her maternal grandmothers. There is no record of her  or  her
           father re-entering Albania in November 2014. The  appellant  was
           unable to give an explanation for these records. She did produce
           at the  hearing  a  public  statements  taken  before  a  police
           sergeant with a certified translation from her  grandmother.  It
           states that the father of the appellant  brought  her  into  her
           grandmother's house so that" she may offer her hospitality  from
           November 2014 to March 2015 because he would not allow her  into
           his house".

      The judge then made clear  that  she  was  unable  to  reconcile  this
      contradiction and  explained  why,  despite  that,  she  accepted  the
      account advanced by the appellant. She began  by  noting  the  country
      evidence before her that Italy is recognised to be a:


             "...  destination,  transit  and  source  country  for  women,
           children and men subject to sex-trafficking. It also states that
           victims are  subjected  to  this  often  after  accepting  false
           promises of employment."


      Next, she observed, correctly, that:


           "I must consider the records  as  part  of  the  evidence  as  a
           whole..."


      and continued:


           "It is possible  that  the  appellant  has  not  given  a  fully
           accurate account of the movements  that  brought  (her)  to  the
           United Kingdom. I do not dismiss her account  of  travelling  to
           Italy for the reasons given above, and also as I find  there  to
           be very little point in her  embellishing  her  account  with  a
           journey  to  Italy.  I  also  have   the   document   from   her
           grandmother...."


      Repeating that:


           "I have to consider all of the evidence before me..."


      She reached the following conclusions:


           "I have found the appellant to have  given  a  detailed,  highly
           consistent  account  with  is  supported   by   the   background
           information  on  how  individuals  find   themselves   in   such
           circumstances. Her demeanour has been noted, and  while  it  was
           submitted that it  may  simply  be  on  account  of  the  appeal
           proceedings, she has been consistently noted as distressed  from
           the interview. I also bear in mind  that  the  appellant  was  a
           minor on arrival in the United Kingdom."



   8. The judge was reinforced in that conclusion by what evidence there was
      before her concerning the appellant's mental health:


           "A further factor which I take into account when considering the
           appellant's credibility  is  her  psychological  state.  In  her
           interview   she   described   wanting   to   take   tablets   to
           overdose...... I do not have full medical reports before me  and
           therefore there is no specific diagnosis of  any  mental  health
           illness. However, I do have  some  information  before  me.  The
           appellant has been referred to the Baobab Centre which  operates
           to support young survivors. She has been assessed and considered
           appropriate for a program of counselling. By  the  date  of  the
           hearing she had attended four sessions. A letter from the Centre
           is dated 22nd January 2016 and  is  written  by  Sheila  Melzak,
           Consultant Child and Adolescent Psychotherapist. She states that
           on the occasions the appellant has attended the  centre  so  far
           she becomes so agitated and anxious when  she  recounts  certain
           aspects of her narrative  and  her  significant  experiences  of
           sequential abuse that the centre has had to  stop  in  order  to
           focus on helping her to calm herself. The plan  is  for  her  to
           begin weekly psychotherapeutic treatment..."


      That is plainly a careful and cautious assessment by a judge intent on
      seeing a piece of evidence for what it is, no more and  no  less.  The
      judge then explained what she made of it and why:


           "As limited as this evidence is, I do consider it appropriate to
           take account of it... The letter is written  by  an  experienced
           professional who has many years of experience working with young
           people  who  have  experienced  human  rights  abuses.  She  has
           assessed the appellant and considered it appropriate  to  commit
           no doubt  limited  resources  to  her.  The  appellant's  manner
           described t the clinic is another example of distress  shown  by
           her when recounting events. The  letter  cannot  carry  as  much
           weight as a medical report. However, I do consider it supportive
           of the appellant's credibility when considered as  part  of  the
           overall evidence. "

      Drawing all of this together, the judge said, at paragraph 26  of  her
      decision:

           "Having considered all of these factors, and reminding myself of
           the  standard  of  proof,  I  do  find  the  substance  of   the
           appellant's account to be credible. I find that she has been the
           victim of trafficking and sexual  exploitation.  I  also  accept
           that she would be without the support of her immediate family on
           return. I accept that her father has disowned her and  that  her
           uncle and grandmother are in fear and  would  not  offer  her  a
           home."


   9.  Although, given the limited scope of the challenge  advanced  in  the
      grounds for seeking permission  to  appeal  it  may  not  strictly  be
      necessary to do so, I record here also that the judge then  considered
      risk on return on the basis of the facts as she found them to  be  and
      explained both why the appellant could not safely return to  her  home
      area and why, given her own particular circumstances,  she  could  not
      safely  or  reasonably  seek  to  re-establish  herself  elsewhere  in
      Albania.


  10. The respondent is correct to say that the judge did not "resolve"  the
      conflicts of fact concerning  travel  undertaken  by  her  father  and
      herself. But First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrews was wrong  to  say,  in
      granting permission to appeal, that:


           "... it is arguable that in coming to his findings... the  judge
           did not address the conflict of fact ..."


      because, as can be seen from the  extracts  of  his  decision  I  have
      reproduced above, that is precisely what she did. It was for the judge
      to make what she could of the evidence before her  and,  having  heard
      oral evidence from the appellant and having received submissions  from
      both representatives, she was best placed to  do  so.  The  fact  that
      inconsistencies or  conflicts  of  fact  were  not,  on  the  evidence
      available, capable of being resolved  was  not  determinative  of  the
      question of the appellant's credibility. In my judgment  the  approach
      taken by the judge cannot be faulted. It was  for  her  to  weigh  the
      difficulties in the evidence against her assessment of  the  appellant
      as a witness who had given evidence before her. She did not leave  out
      of account any material consideration and explained  clearly  why  she
      reached the conclusion she did.


  11. Mr Wilding submitted that the judge  had  misunderstood  the  evidence
      relied upon by the Secretary of  State  concerning  the  cross  border
      movements of the appellant and  her  father,  and  that  this  further
      undermined the safety of the findings reached. At paragraph 21 of  her
      decision the judge observed that it was not  clear  how  the  Albanian
      authorities would have a record of a person travelling from Greece  to
      Italy. In fact, this evidence was concerned only with records  of  the
      passports of the appellant and her father  being  used  to  facilitate
      entry into and exit from Albania. Mr Wilding is correct  to  say  that
      the judge did fall into  error  in  that  regard  but  I  am  entirely
      satisfied that her error  was  immaterial.  As  was  submitted  by  Ms
      Patyana, the record  of  the  passport  use,  although  impossible  to
      reconcile with the account advanced by the appellant, was a  piece  of
      evidence to be weighed in the light of the evidence as  a  whole.  The
      judge recognised the difficulty  presented  by  the  evidence  of  the
      records of passport usage but has explained  why,  despite  that,  she
      accepted that the appellant  had  given  a  truthful  account  of  her
      experiences.


  12. The determination of the judge must be read as a whole. When it is  it
      is unambiguously clear why the appeal was  allowed.  The  conflict  of
      fact referred to in the  grounds  for  seeking  permission  to  appeal
      remains unresolved but that was not something  that  disqualified  the
      judge from finding the appellant credible in her account.

  13. For these reasons, I am entirely satisfied  that  the  judge  made  no
      error of law.




   Summary of decision:


  14. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mace made no error of law and  her  decision
      is to stand


  15. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    5 April 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


