
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01898/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard At: Bradford                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 20th August 2019                 |On: 23rd September 2019              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     A I
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Patel, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                                  DECISION

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born  in  1997.  His  appeal  comes
    before this Tribunal following a  grant  of  permission  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hillis  to
    dismiss his appeal on protection (humanitarian protection) grounds.


 2. The case for the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  as
    follows. He is from Hawija, a town in Kirkuk governate. He  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2015 and claimed asylum on the grounds  that  his
    home town had been taken over by ISIL and that he was wanted  by  them,
    having stabbed one of their fighters during an  attack  in  his  family
    home.  He asserted that he was without documentation, had lost  contact
    with his family members in the region and was unable to relocate within
    Iraq, for instance to the IKR, because he had no connections there  and
    no means of supporting himself.


 3. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant.   It
    accepted, with reasons, that the Appellant is from Hawija as he claims.
     It rejected, with reasons, his account of having left his home because
    he had stabbed an ISIL fighter  there.  The  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    Appellant had produced a CSID and an INC but agreed with the Respondent
    that these documents were forgeries, produced to support a false  claim
    to be a minor. The Tribunal accepted that Hawija was, and  remains,  in
    'contested' territory such that Article 15(c) would be engaged. It  was
    not satisfied, having regard to the Appellant's Kurdish ethnicity, that
    it would be reasonable to  expect  him  to  relocate  to  Baghdad.  The
    Tribunal was however satisfied that the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
    avail himself of internal flight in the IKR.  It is that latter finding
    that is the subject of this onward appeal.

 4. The crux of the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning is found at  paragraphs
    55-58 of the determination. The Tribunal notes the evidence  that  when
    the Appellant left Iraq in 2015 he was assisted by an uncle, and  finds
    that it would be human nature for this uncle and the Appellant to  have
    stayed in touch. It further finds that this uncle  would  still  be  in
    Kirkuk, and be  in  possession  of  the  Appellant's  genuine  identity
    documents. This uncle would therefore be able to assist  the  Appellant
    in two ways: he would be able to support him, and supply him  with  his
    CSID and INC. In  the  alternative  the  Tribunal  concludes  that  the
    Appellant would be able to use the  "relevant  details  on  the  forged
    document" to obtain genuine cards from  the  Iraqi  embassy  in  London
    prior to his removal.

 5. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    assessment of internal flight to the IKR for the following reasons:

              i) There was no evidential basis  for  the  finding  that  the
                 Appellant has retained contact with his uncle in Kirkuk and
                 that finding is therefore irrational;


             ii) In reaching that finding the Tribunal has  failed  to  take
                 into account relevant background material about  the  state
                 of the conflict in Kirkuk and Hawija in particular and  its
                 findings on  contact  with  family  members  are  therefore
                 unsafe;

            iii) Failed to properly apply the country guidance in AAH (Iraqi
                 Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC);


             iv) Failed to provide adequate reasons.

 6. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McGeachy  on  the  31st
    January 2019. At a hearing  before  me  on  the  11th  April  2019  the
    Appellant expanded on his grounds as follows.

 7. It was plain from  the  background  material  and  indeed  the  country
    guidance that Hawija and Kirkuk had been, and  continue  to  be,  badly
    affected by the conflict in Iraq. It was not in issue  that  these  had
    been areas held by ISIL. The background material consistently  reported
    that ISIL had captured Hawija in 2014 (coinciding with the  Appellant's
    departure) and it remained one of their central strongholds  until  the
    Iraqi Army, supported by Iranian militias, had recaptured the  town  in
    heavy fighting in September 2017.   Notwithstanding the defeat of ISIL,
    Kirkuk continues to be the scene of conflict between Kurdish forces and
    Shi'ite militias acting at the behest of the Government  of  Iraq  (see
    for instance the recent political history set out  at  paras  10-14  of
    AAH). There  had  been  a  significant  displacement  of  the  civilian
    population and widespread disruption to the civil registration  system.
    None of that appears to have been taken into account by the  First-tier
    Tribunal when it concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  likely  to  have
    retained contact with family members in the region who would be able to
    assist the Appellant with documentation.  As for  the  suggestion  that
    the uncle would have retained the Appellant's  real  documentation,  it
    was submitted that there was simply no evidential foundation  for  that
    conclusion.

 8. The Appellant further submitted that the reasoning in  respect  of  the
    forged documents was irrational. The Appellant had, on the Respondent's
    own case, produced a CSID and INC which were  poor  fakes:  a  detailed
    'document verification report' to that effect had been  considered  and
    accepted by the Tribunal.   It appeared that these documents  had  been
    produced in an effort to persuade a local authority that the  Appellant
    was a minor and so to  give  him  financial  support.   Whilst  it  was
    accepted on behalf of the Appellant that  the  Tribunal  was  certainly
    entitled to take a dim view of that matter, it was  in  his  submission
    plainly irrational for the Tribunal to conclude  that  these  documents
    could somehow assist him in obtaining new documentation from the  Iraqi
    authorities. Dr Fatah's expert evidence on the issue of  documents  was
    accepted in AAH:  applicants  would  need  to  produce,  amongst  other
    things, the page reference number for their 'family book'. Even if  the
    relevant office has survived the war and remains operational (there  is
    no finding on that point), there was no reason to  suppose  that  these
    poor fakes would have contained the genuine details that the  Appellant
    would require.

 9. For the Respondent Mr Diwnycz did not oppose the  Appellant's  grounds.
    In respect of the Tribunal's central conclusion - that the uncle  would
    still be in Kirkuk, still be in touch and still  have  the  Appellant's
    CSID - he accepted that important  information  was  missing  from  the
    analysis in the determination. The Tribunal  did  not  appear  to  have
    weighed in the balance the uncontested fact that the population, and in
    particular the Kurdish population, had suffered five years  of  intense
    warfare and that there had been large scale displacement of  civilians,
    often in chaotic circumstances. In this regard it was relevant to  note
    that  the  fake  documents  had  been  sent  to  the   Appellant   from
    Sulaymaniyah, a town some distance away: Mr Diwnycz knew  this  because
    the Secretary of State is in possession of the  envelope  they  arrived
    in.  At the very least this was capable of  supporting  the  suggestion
    that at least some of the Appellant's relatives had been displaced  and
    were no longer in their home area.   As  for  the  fake  documents,  Mr
    Diwnycz accepted that it was irrational to conclude that these would be
    of any assistance at all, since there was no  reason  to  suppose  that
    they would contain any factually accurate data.


10. In view of the agreement between the parties that the 'internal flight'
    findings, insofar as they relate to the IKR, were flawed,  I  set  that
    part of the decision aside.

11. Although no oral submissions were made on the point I  noted  that  the
    grounds do challenge the Tribunal's findings on the alleged stabbing of
    an ISIL fighter. I am not persuaded that these grounds  are  made  out.
    The Tribunal gave, at paragraphs 51-53 of its determination,  perfectly
    good reasons for rejecting that element of the account,  including  the
    implausibility of the Appellant fleeing and leaving his family  members
    to deal with the consequences of a dead jihadi in the  house,  and  the
    fact that it is unlikely that he would have managed to evade patrols on
    the streets of Hawija in order to make his  escape.  That  finding  was
    therefore preserved.   I  further  preserved,  with  consent  from  the
    Secretary of State, the finding that Hawija remains a  contested  area,
    and that there is no reasonable internal flight alternative to Baghdad.

    The Re-Made Decision

12. The matter now comes before me for  remaking[1].  The  parties  confirm
    that the sole issue is whether or not it would be reasonable to  expect
    the Appellant to relocate to the IKR. Mr Diwnycz concedes, in light  of
    the Appellant's inability to speak Arabic and his  lack  of  any  known
    connections there, that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  him  to
    relocate to Baghdad.

13. The availability of an internal  flight  alternative  to  the  IKR  was
    considered in AAH (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  UKUT
    00212 (IAC). The guidance given was as follows:

      1. Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national  returnee  (P)  to
         obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or  do  so  within  a
         reasonable time frame, will depend on the individual circumstances.
         Factors to be considered include:


                    i) Whether P has any other  form  of  documentation,  or
                       information about the location of his  entry  in  the
                       civil  register.  An  INC,  passport,  birth/marriage
                       certificates or an  expired  CSID  would  all  be  of
                       substantial assistance. For someone in possession  of
                       one or more of these documents the process should  be
                       straightforward.  A  laissez-passer  should  not   be
                       counted for  these  purposes:  these  can  be  issued
                       without any other form of ID being available, are not
                       of any assistance in 'tracing  back'  to  the  family
                       record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;


                   ii) The location of the relevant civil  registry  office.
                       If it is in an area held, or formerly held, by  ISIL,
                       is it operational?

                  iii) Are there male family members who would be  able  and
                       willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because
                       the registration system is  patrilineal  it  will  be
                       relevant to consider whether the relative is from the
                       mother  or  father's  side.  A  maternal   uncle   in
                       possession of his CSID would be  able  to  assist  in
                       locating the original place of  registration  of  the
                       individual's mother, and from there the  trail  would
                       need to be followed to the  place  that  her  records
                       were transferred upon marriage. It must also be borne
                       in mind that a significant number of IDPs in Iraq are
                       themselves undocumented; if that is the  case  it  is
                       unlikely that they could be of assistance.   A  woman
                       without a male relative to assist with the process of
                       redocumentation would face very significant obstacles
                       in that officials may refuse to deal with her case at
                       all.


         Section E of Country Guidance annexed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  is  replaced  with  the
         following guidance:


      2. There are currently no international flights to the  Iraqi  Kurdish
         Region (IKR). All returns from the United Kingdom are to Baghdad.


      3. For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish origin in  possession
         of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from Baghdad to  the
         IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable and practical and can be
         made without a real risk of P suffering persecution, serious  harm,
         Article 3 ill treatment nor would any difficulties on  the  journey
         make relocation unduly harsh.


      4. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the  IKR
         without either a CSID or a valid passport.


      5. P will face considerable difficulty in making the  journey  between
         Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or valid passport. There
         are numerous checkpoints en route, including two checkpoints in the
         immediate vicinity of the airport.  If P has neither a CSID  nor  a
         valid passport there is a real  risk  of  P  being  detained  at  a
         checkpoint until such time as the security personnel  are  able  to
         verify P's identity.  It is not reasonable to require P  to  travel
         between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability of P  to  verify
         his identity at a checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance
         of a male family member and production of  P's  identity  documents
         but may also be achieved by calling upon "connections" higher up in
         the chain of command.


      6. Once at the IKR border (land or air) P would  normally  be  granted
         entry  to  the  territory.  Subject  to  security  screening,   and
         registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would  be  permitted
         to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal impediments or
         requirements. There is no sponsorship requirement for Kurds.


      7. Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during  the
         security screening process  must  be  assessed  on  a  case-by-case
         basis. Additional factors  that  may  increase  risk  include:  (i)
         coming from a family with  a  known  association  with  ISIL,  (ii)
         coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii) being  a  single
         male of fighting age. P is likely to be able to evidence  the  fact
         of recent arrival from the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of
         having arrived directly from ISIL territory.


      8. If P has family members living in  the  IKR  cultural  norms  would
         require that family to  accommodate  P.  In  such  circumstances  P
         would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as
         to lead a 'relatively normal  life',  which  would  not  be  unduly
         harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for   decision-makers   to
         determine the extent of any assistance likely to be provided by P's
         family on a case by case basis.


      9. For  those  without  the  assistance  of  family  in  the  IKR  the
         accommodation options are limited:


                          i)    Absent  special  circumstances  it  is  not
                             reasonably likely that P will be able to  gain
                             access to one of the refugee camps in the IKR;
                             these camps are already extremely  overcrowded
                             and are closed to newcomers. 64% of  IDPs  are
                             accommodated in private settings with the vast
                             majority living with family members;


                         ii)    If P cannot  live  with  a  family  member,
                             apartments  in  a  modern  block  in   a   new
                             neighbourhood are available for rent at a cost
                             of between $300 and $400 per month;

                        iii)    P  could  resort  to  a  'critical  shelter
                             arrangement',  living  in  an  unfinished   or
                             abandoned structure, makeshift shelter,  tent,
                             mosque, church or squatting  in  a  government
                             building.  It would be unduly harsh to require
                             P to relocate to the IKR if P will live  in  a
                             critical housing  shelter  without  access  to
                             basic necessities such as  food,  clean  water
                             and clothing;

                         iv)   In considering whether P would  be  able  to
                             access  basic  necessities,  account  must  be
                             taken of the fact that failed  asylum  seekers
                             are entitled to apply for a  grant  under  the
                             Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could  give  P
                             access to �1500. Consideration should also  be
                             given  to  whether  P  can  obtain   financial
                             support  from  other  sources  such   as   (a)
                             employment,  (b)  remittances  from  relatives
                             abroad, (c) the availability of ad hoc charity
                             or by being able to access PDS rations.


     10. Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed on a  case-
         by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


                         i) Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able
                            to secure legitimate employment;


                        ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living  in
                            the IKR is 70%;

                       iii) P cannot work without a CSID;

                        iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be important
                            factors in securing employment. A returnee with
                            family connections to the region  will  have  a
                            significant  advantage   in   that   he   would
                            ordinarily be able to call upon those  contacts
                            to make introductions to prospective  employers
                            and to vouch for him;

                         v) Skills,  education  and  experience.  Unskilled
                            workers are at the greatest disadvantage,  with
                            the  decline  in  the   construction   industry
                            reducing   the   number   of   labouring   jobs
                            available;

                        vi) If P is from an area with a marked  association
                            with   ISIL,   that   may   deter   prospective
                            employers.

14. The parties were in agreement that this guidance remains valid save  in
    respect of two factual matters. It is the Respondent's contention  that
    since AAH was promulgated direct international flights  to  Irbil  have
    resumed, so that paragraph 2 of the headnote is now  out  of  date;  Ms
    Patel accepted that this may be the case but submitted  that  it  would
    not be relevant in this case since there is no evidence  that  the  IKR
    authorities would  accept  the  Appellant,  since  he  has  never  been
    registered as living  in  that  territory.  The  second  factual  issue
    concerns the ability of returnees to use a laissez-passer in  order  to
    travel from Baghdad to the IKR border. At the hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal the unequivocal evidence (accepted by both parties)  was  that
    those temporary travel documents  are  destroyed  upon  the  returnee's
    arrival. The Respondent has since produced  evidence,  in  her  Country
    Policy and Information Note  of  February  2019,  that  this  may  have
    changed:

         2.7.5 In a letter dated 5 September 2018, the Iraqi Ambassador to
         the United Kingdom confirmed that a laissez passer or a
         'certification letter' can be used to board a domestic flight at
         Baghdad International Airport (BGW) (see Annex A). The Home Office
         believes that as this is official confirmation relating to airport
         procedures this evidence amounts to very strong grounds supported
         by cogent evidence to depart from AAH's finding explained at
         paragraph 135(4) ...

15.  That letter, from the Iraqi embassy in London, reads:


         "In reference to your letter dated 4 September 2018 I would like to
         assure you that all the returnees papers are checked on arrival and
         they are received with courtesy at  Baghdad  International  Airport
         where they may be provided with a certification letter.


         The arriving returnees can continue their onward journey  to  their
         final destination by domestic flight or road  using  their  Laissez
         Passer or letter (if provided) which  help  them  to  pass  through
         other designated check points. Please note that most of them may be
         in possession of  their  National  IDs  which  may  not  have  been
         disclosed previously".


16. Whilst very little turns on it in this appeal, I am not satisfied  that
    this letter constitutes cogent evidence for departing from the findings
    made in AAH, which were based on evidence, including that of Dr  Fatah,
    accepted by both parties. The real difficulty with the  letter  is  the
    equivocal terms in which it is expressed.  Returnees  'may'  be  issued
    with  a  'certificate  letter'.   What  such  a  letter  is,   or   the
    circumstances in which it 'may' be issued, are unexplained.   Nor  does
    the Ambassador explain why a returnee would need such a  letter  if  he
    could in fact use his Laissez Passer. Nor does the letter confirm  that
    either document would  in  fact  enable  the  holder  to  pass  through
    checkpoints, only that they would 'help' to do so.  The assertion  that
    'most' returnees 'may' be in possession  of  identity  documents  which
    'may not' have been disclosed is  similarly  unhelpful,  unsourced  and
    unsupported by any evidence.


17. Against that country background  information,  I  turn  to  assess  the
    position of the Appellant.

18. The Appellant is, as far as anyone is aware, not in possession  of  any
    genuine identity document.  His home area in Hawija in the governate of
    Kirkuk. Neither party was able to point me to any specific up  to  date
    information on whether the civil registration centre there is likely to
    be operational, but I note that this was an area held by  ISIL  between
    2014 and 2017, and that thereafter fierce fighting took  place  between
    Kurdish peshmerga and GOI troops: paragraph  12  of  AAH  refers.    Dr
    Fatah's evidence, accepted in AAH, was that in areas formerly  held  by
    ISIL there is a huge backlog of  civil  status  events  waiting  to  be
    recorded [at 30]:

            "Dr Fatah explained that this complex bureaucracy has existed in
            Iraq for many years. The family registration  books,  and  their
            contents reflected on  the  CSID,  are  the  foundation  of  the
            state's  control.    Iraq  is   presently   facing   significant
            challenges in  maintaining  the  system  in  the  north  of  the
            country, however. Under ISIL control all recording  of  official
            events was banned, and some civil register offices, such as that
            in Mosul, were damaged or destroyed. The effect is that there is
            now a huge backlog for the bureaucrats to catch up  on.  Between
            2014 and 2017 no marriages,  births  or  deaths  were  recorded.
            Catching up will be a mammoth task.  In Mosul  alone  there  are
            1.5 million Iraqis who  will  need  their  records  updated.  In
            addition to recording the names of those who have  died  in  the
            conflict there will be  tens  of  thousands  of  children  whose
            births have not been registered, or who were  not  entered  into
            the record before  ISIL  took  power.  Their  families  are  now
            desperate to have  their  existence  recorded,  because  without
            that, they cannot obtain CSID  cards;  without  CSID  cards  the
            children are not entitled to PDS cards; without PDS  cards  they
            cannot receive food rations.    In  addition  many  people  lost
            their documents during the conflict when homes were destroyed or
            when fighting broke out, causing people to flee at short  notice
            without them.   In light of this, the problems of one individual
            returnee are likely to be given short shrift. No procedures have
            been implemented to assist the re-documentation of returnees and
            in the view of  Dr  Fatah  this  is  because  their  issues  are
            considered to be  trivial  compared  to  the  position  of  IDPs
            already  on  the  ground.  These  returnees   are   a   "totally
            insignificant problem" for the authorities,  whose  efforts  are
            further hampered by the fact that many of the  more  experienced
            civil servants, whose skills could be  helpful  at  this  point,
            were  sacked  in  the  "de-Ba'athification"   programme.     The
            likelihood of persuading an  official  to  spend  precious  time
            trying  to  find  an  individual's  records  are  even   further
            diminished".


19. In light of this information it is, in the case of an  individual  from
    Hawija, unlikely in my view to be relevant whether  or  not  he  is  in
    touch with members of his family, for the simple reason that an uncle's
    CSID is not going to be of any assistance if you are at the  end  of  a
    queue of hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, of other  applicants.
    The reality is that it is reasonably likely that this  individual  will
    not be able to obtain fresh identity documents within a reasonable time
    frame.


20. He will arrive at Baghdad with no document other than a Laissez Passer.
    For the reasons set out above I apply the  country  guidance  and  find
    that this document is of no assistance to him  in  his  onward  travel.
    Without his CSID he cannot board a domestic flight.  He  will  need  to
    pass through innumerable checkpoints to make that journey by  land.  In
    AAH we accepted the evidence of Dr Fatah that an individual  attempting
    to pass through  a  checkpoint  without  identity  documents  would  be
    detained, until such time as a  documented  male  relative  arrived  to
    verify the individual's identity.  The question then is whether or  not
    the Appellant can demonstrate that it is  reasonably  likely  that  his
    uncle will not greet him at the airport and make that  journey  between
    Baghdad and the IKR border with him.

21. The evidence about the Appellant's uncle is that he has  not  seen  him
    since he left the country in 2014.   He last spoke to him in 2016  when
    he asked him to send him some identity documents (these were the  fakes
    rejected by the Respondent's document verification team).   There  was,
    it is confirmed by the country background material, very heavy fighting
    in Kirkuk governate at that time. The peshmerga were  inflicting  heavy
    defeats on ISIL but at the expense of  the  civilian  population,  many
    thousands of whom fled  their  homes.    We  know  that  the  documents
    themselves were posted from Sulaymaniyah, since this is the postmark on
    the envelope that they arrived in.   Although I  have  weighed  in  the
    balance the fact that the First-tier Tribunal found the Appellant to be
    lacking in credibility as a witness I am satisfied,  having  regard  to
    the foregoing, that it is reasonably likely that the Appellant's uncle,
    a Kurdish civilian living in Hawija, has himself been displaced by  the
    internal conflict in Iraq, and that he  and  the  Appellant  have  lost
    contact.  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the
    Appellant would be unable to re-establish contact so as to  be  met  at
    Baghdad. Applying the guidance in  AAH,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that the Appellant,  as  an  undocumented  traveller,
    would experience multiple and possibly prolonged detentions as he tried
    to make the journey to the IKR border. This would not be  a  reasonable
    means for him to avail himself of an internal flight alternative.


22. If I am wrong I must nevertheless consider the situation that he  would
    find himself in upon arrival.    As a native  of  Kirkuk  governate  he
    will encounter no legal obstacles in entering the IKR: see paragraph 13
    of AAH (that is assuming that he manages to persuade the border  guard,
    using his fluent Sorani, that he is a Kurd). From there he  would  need
    to find himself somewhere to live. Without a CSID he would be unable to
    book a hotel room, or rent accommodation.   He has no known  connection
    to the IKR so in those circumstances  the  overwhelming  likelihood  is
    that he will find himself looking for a 'critical shelter arrangement',
    ie a tent, abandoned building or the like. Whether conditions  in  such
    an arrangement would fall below the  requisite  humanitarian  standards
    should be evaluated in light of the likelihood of the  Appellant  being
    able to  secure  a  regular  income.    By  the  Secretary  of  State's
    reckoning the Appellant was seventeen when he left Hawija.   He  was  a
    student at  the  time.  He  therefore  has  no  known  skills  or  work
    experience that might assist him in getting a  job.  He  has  no  known
    means of  receiving  support  from  abroad,  for  instance  from  other
    relatives. He may have, if available to him, money from an  IOM  grant,
    but it unlikely that this will last him very long, particularly  if  he
    has had to use that money to bribe his way out of checkpoint  detention
    en route. Taking all of that into account I find that it is  reasonably
    likely that the Appellant will not be able to  secure  regular  income,
    and that it is therefore reasonably likely that  his  living  standards
    will fall  below  the  threshold  of  reasonableness  as  discussed  in
    Horvath. It would be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant to  live  in,
    or on the cusp of, destitution.

23. His appeal must therefore be allowed.



    Anonymity Order

24. The Appellant is  entitled  to  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Decisions


25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
    is set aside to the limited extent identified above.


26. The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

27. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                              [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     8th
                               September 2019








                           -----------------------
[1] It was not possible to proceed to remaking the decision on the 11th
April because no interpreter was available. The reason for the delay in
relisting is unclear.

