
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01497/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on:         |
|On 16 August 2016                    |On 25 October 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 shahbaz ali
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For  the  appellant:      Mr  R  Sharma,  Counsel,  instructed  by   Mayfair
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr R Harland, Counsel, instructed by  the  Government
                    Legal Department


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                            Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  refusal  of
   international protection under the  Refugee  Convention  or  humanitarian
   protection grounds, or leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2. His is one of the lead cases considered by the Court  of  Appeal  in  the
   ETS/TOEIC judgment in Mehmood  &  Anor,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  744.   Since
   the appellant is named in the reported version of that judgment, which is
   freely available on the internet, I do not  consider  it  appropriate  to
   maintain  anonymity  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  I  discharge  the
   anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1984,  and  now  32  years
   old.  The appellant previously lived in Multan, Lahore,  and  Manwali  in
   Pakistan.

4. He claims to have been a member of Anjamane Sarfaroshane Islam  (ASI),  a
   religious group whose spiritual leader is said to  be  Riaz  Ahmed  Gohar
   Shahi (Mr Shahi).   His cousin had introduced him to ASI in 1994, when he
   was 10 years old and  still  living  in  Multan  City.   In  1998,  ASI's
   spiritual leader, Mr Shahi, declared that 'his picture was  seen  in  the
   moon and the holy stone'. Many other people also declared that  they  had
   seen Mr Shahi's picture in the sun, the moon and the holy stone, and also
   in the Temple in Jamshoro. In September 1998, members of other  religious
   parties brought a blasphemy case against Mr Shahi.

5. On 27 November 1998, the appellant's family home was stoned: he  and  his
   family had to move.  The police, to whom they reported the event, refused
   to register a first information report (FIR).  The  appellant  was  still
   studying in Multan, living for part of the time in a college hostel.   He
   experienced many verbal threats  while  at  the  hostel.   Teachers  were
   unwilling to educate him, people used abusive language to him, and  there
   were signs at the grocery shops indicating that  followers  of  Mr  Shahi
   would not be served.

6. Almost 2 years later, in June 2000,  Mr  Shahi  selected  a  team  of  12
   people to organise a peaceful protest.  The appellant became involved: he
   was selected to lead protests in the South Punjab region, and  named  the
   Amir of South Punjab.  On 12 September in Multan City, he led  the  first
   such protest.   60-70 people attended, without any trouble, and the  same
   was the case in other cities.

7. The appellant moved to Lahore in 2000 and stayed there  until  2005.   He
   faced no difficulties during this period.  The group of people  nominated
   by Mr Shahi reduced during this period, from 12 to 3.  The blasphemy case
   against Mr Shahi remained outstanding but nothing happened.

8. In 2008, the appellant and  a  colleague  petitioned  the  government  of
   Punjab to change the sentence provided in section 295C  of  the  Pakistan
   Penal Code and refrain from wrongfully exercising the blasphemy law.  The
   appellant met the Governor of Punjab, Mr Salman Thaseer, who promised  to
   help with the blasphemy laws.  The  Governor  wrote  to  other  religious
   parties seeking support  for  the  modification  of  section  295C.   The
   request was not well received.  The appellant supported opposition to the
   blasphemy prosecution and conviction of a Christian,  Asia  Noreen  Bibi.
   She remains under sentence of death, albeit suspended  by  the  Pakistani
   Supreme Court.

9. In December 2009, a fatwa was declared against ASI.  The appellant  began
   to have difficulties.  He was attacked by  extremists  when  arranging  a
   meeting in Lahore, and when the police attended,  it  was  the  appellant
   they arrested.  He was released after 3 days'  detention.   In  September
   2010, the appellant says that  an  FIR  was  registered  against  him  in
   Lahore.

10. On 4 January 2011, the Governor of the Punjab was  assassinated  by  his
   bodyguard. In April 2011, when the appellant came to the United  Kingdom,
   purportedly to study, he now says he came to save his life.

11. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 6 April 2011  as  a  Tier  4
   (General) Student Migrant, with entry clearance valid until  30  December
   2013.  Before his leave expired, he lodged  an  application  for  further
   leave, which was refused on 7 April 2014, with no right of  appeal.   The
   appellant made a judicial review application, which the Court  of  Appeal
   dismissed.  Permission to appeal to the Supreme Court was refused and his
   appeal rights were exhausted at the end of July 2015.

12. On 4 January 2016, almost 5  years  after  his  arrival  in  the  United
   Kingdom 'to save his  life',  the  appellant  was  detained  and  claimed
   asylum.  The respondent refused to grant him international protection  or
   humanitarian protection and the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

13. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the appellant  attempted  to  reopen
   the ETS/TOEIC issue in an unsigned proof of evidence which he asked to be
   treated as a witness statement. In that document, he also sought to  rely
   on his private life in the United Kingdom, pursuant to  Article  8  ECHR.
   For the respondent, Mr Kandola objected, stating that the Article 8 claim
   was a  'new  matter'  as  defined  by  section  85  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) and that he did not  consent
   to its introduction in an  unsigned  statement  on  the  morning  of  the
   hearing, which he described as an abuse of process.

14. The hearing was adjourned for a short time for  the  representatives  to
   seek instructions.  Mr Sharma returned to the hearing with an  additional
   document, drafted for the appellant and signed by him, purporting to be a
   one-stop response under section 120.  It was somewhat incoherent:

         "[1]     Further to the decision in the ETS/TOEIC test case [SM and
         Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229  (IAC)]  I
         wish to rely on this ground that my removal from the United Kingdom
         as the consequence of the dismissal of my appeal would be  contrary
         to my Article 8 right.

         [2]  I have established a private life in the United Kingdom of the
         continuation  of  the  private  life  is  being  unlawfully  denied
         pursuant to a decision now shown to have no substance.

         [3]  It is clear that there is no proper evidence  of  any  alleged
         deception as such my application for further leave to remain on  29
         December 2013 was wrongly refused in the decision  of  the  7  July
         2014. ...This decision was not according to law and must  therefore
         failed under Common Law assessment of  proportionate  interferences
         with Article 8 rights. ...

         [4]  [Not relied upon at the Upper Tribunal hearing]

         [5]  I confirmed that this statement should be treated as a section
         120 response pursuant to the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002.  This statement will be relied  upon  in  my  appeal  and
         added to by way of legal submissions."

   There was no application by  either  party  for  an  adjournment  of  the
   substantive hearing to enable the respondent to consider the section  120
   notice.

15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant was in breach  of
   directions sent to him on 4  March  2016,  requiring  him  to  provide  a
   witness statement and any evidence on which he wished to rely, not  later
   than 5 days before the  substantive  hearing,  which  the  appellant  had
   failed to do.  The new grounds had  not  been  raised  'as  soon  as  was
   reasonably practicable' as required by section 120(5).

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the matters in  the  section
   120 statement were a 'new matter' for the purpose of section 85(6) of the
   2002 Act and that their admission required the consent of the respondent,
   pursuant to section 85(5).  That consent having been withheld, he was not
   seised of the 'new matters' at the protection claim hearing.

17. Mr Sharma and the appellant then withdrew from the hearing,  asking  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge to decide the protection element of  the  claim
   'on the papers', which he did.  The Judge found the core account to be  a
   fabrication to avoid removal from the  United  Kingdom  and  rejected  it
   entirely. His reasons relied on section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
   (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004, the  Judge  considered  that  the
   appellant had not explained satisfactorily his failure  to  claim  asylum
   earlier; that the  appellant's  inability  or  unwillingness  to  provide
   documentary or other corroborative evidence to  support  his  account  of
   events in Pakistan further damaged his claim; and that overall, the  core
   account,  including   the   appellant's   claimed   membership   of   the
   organisation, was not credible or reliable.  In particular, he took  into
   account the delay in applying and the appellant's reliance on  his  notes
   at the asylum interview.

18. The appellant has not  challenged  either  the  asylum  or  humanitarian
   protection element of the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Permission to appeal

19. First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne granted the  appellant  permission  to
   appeal, on the basis that the section 120 notice arguably did  not  raise
   any 'new matter'.  Further, the Judge considered that  the  Tribunal  had
   arguably erred in his approach to Article 8 ECHR, which was considered in
   the refusal letter and was therefore, arguably also before the First-tier
   Tribunal, such that the section 85(6)(b)(i) exemption was operative.

Rule 24 Reply

20. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Reply, arguing that the Article  8  claim
   was plainly a 'new matter'  and  that  the  appellant  had  never  raised
   private life previously, although  she  had  considered  it  of  her  own
   motion, in general terms.

21. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

22. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, there was no skeleton argument  from  the
   appellant.  Mr Sharma  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  a  skeleton
   argument. He contended that the respondent was  aware  of  an  Article  8
   issue, as she had considered it in the refusal letter.   He  referred  to
   the ETS/TOEIC litigation by this appellant.

23. Mr Sharma asserted that for  a  section  120  notice  to  be  considered
   separately by the respondent, what it contained must amount to  a  ground
   of appeal.  A challenge to the correct interpretation of  the  Rules  was
   not enough.  He relied  on  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
   Lamichhane v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ
   260 at [36], which he contended established that human rights is a ground
   of appeal.  He then relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  AS
   (Afghanistan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  in  the
   judgment of Lady Justice Arden at [36]-[37] and [104]-[107].

24. Mr Sharma conceded that there would be a spectrum as  to  what  was,  or
   was not, a 'new matter'.  He relied upon the Home Office Rights of Appeal
   Guidance, version  3.0  which  set  out  what  was,  and  was  not,  'new
   evidence', giving examples, and in particular, on [19]-[20] and [24]-[27]
   in that Guidance.

25. The respondent's Home Office Presenting Officer  had  read  the  section
   120 notice at  the  hearing,  which  was  capable  of  amounting  to  the
   'consideration' which section 85 required, and had, of  her  own  motion,
   considered Article 8 in her refusal letter. Putting  the  case  back  for
   that reason, followed by confirmation that both  parties  were  ready  to
   proceed  on  the  issue  of  jurisdiction,  was  enough  to   amount   to
   consideration of that issue for the purpose of section 85 of that Act.

26. Neither the ETS/TOEIC point, nor the Article 8 issue could  properly  be
   described as 'new'; the Article 8 point was an underlying claim which was
   always there. The appellant relied on HM (Malawi), R (on the  application
   of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWHC 1407 (Admin)
   in that respect.

27. Even if,  which  Mr  Sharma  did  not  admit,  the  section  120  notice
   contained a 'new matter', it had been open to the Tribunal to consider as
   abusive the Secretary of State's failure to grant consent  to  its  being
   heard.  Both the respondent and the Tribunal risked breaching the  public
   sector duty in section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, the respondent  by
   her finding that it is proportionate to remove the appellant now, and the
   Tribunal by failing to allow  Article  8  to  be  argued.   Although  the
   Tribunal's jurisdiction was limited to the grounds of appeal  in  section
   82(1) of the 2002 Act, there was no such limitation in section 84.

28. For the respondent, Mr Harland said that The Secretary of State had  not
   yet made a decision and that, properly understood, the effect of  section
   85 was to return the respondent to the status of primary decision maker.

29. The statute defined 'new matter' by reference to the raising  of  a  new
   issue.  There was no definition of 'matter'.  If the respondent  did  not
   consent to the raising of a new  matter,  an  appellant  had  alternative
   remedies, for example by way of judicial review.   There  was  simply  no
   justification for treating 'matter' as 'ground' as the appellant alleged.
    'New matter' meant 'new issue'.

30. The grounds of appeal had not contended that  'read'  was  the  same  as
   'considered'  and  that  therefore  the  section  120  grounds  had  been
   considered  by  the  respondent,  for  the  purposes   of   section   84.
   Consideration required deliberation, which was more than hasty reading at
   Court of a statement.

31. This was an opportunistic attempt to switch core issue at  the  hearing,
   which could be seen from the jettisoning of the  protection  claim,  when
   the section 120 notice did not  achieve  that  effect.   The  appellant's
   appeal rights on the ETS/TOEIC point had been fully  exhausted  and  more
   need to be done than simply to raise them again.   Section  85  gave  the
   respondent a right to withhold consent if the issue raised  was  not  one
   which had been considered by her 'in the context of  the  decision  under
   appeal'.  ETS/TOEIC as part of a private and family life claim had  never
   been raised in the earlier proceedings, although they went to  the  Court
   of Appeal.

32. It was right that the refusal letter contained  brief  consideration  of
   such Article 8 matters as were known to the respondent.   The  respondent
   always undertook such consideration, but the appellant had never,  either
   in the ETS/TOEIC litigation,  or  in  bringing  this  appeal,  relied  on
   Article 8 before the  section  120  notice  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   hearing.

33. The legal position was simple, in reality.  Parliament had decided  that
   the first decision maker, should she wish, would be the  respondent.   Mr
   Harland relied on the Guidance, and in particular,  on  page  5  thereof,
   which summarised the respondent's understanding of section 85:

         "Section 85 sets out the matters the Tribunal can consider.  ...The
         Tribunal can only consider  a  'new  matter'  which  has  not  been
         considered by the Secretary of State (SSHD), if the SSHD has  given
         the Tribunal consent to do so.  A new matter should not  be  raised
         before the Tribunal unless the SSHD has had a  chance  to  consider
         the new matter."

34. A human rights claim should be particularised  so  that  the  respondent
   could consider and respond to it: see Jaff (s.120 notice; statement of  -
   additional grounds) Iraq [2012]  UKUT  396  (IAC)  at  [24].   Here,  the
   grounds were insufficiently particularised.  The Secretary of  State  was
   entitled to be the first to deal with new arguments, which the  appellant
   should set out clearly: see Naing & Anor, R (on  the  application  of)  v
   Immigration Appeal Tribunal  [2003]  EWHC  771  (Admin).   The  point  of
   section 85 was that the respondent should not be ambushed:  see R on  the
   application of Khan v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]
   EWCA Civ 88 at [66]-[67].

35. Mr Harland asked me to dismiss the appeal.

36. By way of reply on behalf of the appellant, Mr Sharma  denied  that  the
   introduction of the section 120  notice  had  been  an  ambush.   On  the
   contrary, more particulars  had  been  given  than  previously,  and  the
   respondent in her refusal letter had been prepared to deal with Article 8
   ECHR without any particulars.  The appellant had not failed to pursue the
   protection claim: with the advice of his representative, he  had  decided
   that there was no need for oral argument, and was content to rely on  the
   material already before the Tribunal.

37. Mr Sharma confirmed to me that the appellant did not seek  to  challenge
   the protection decision,  nor  to  challenge  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   reasons.  The appellant's appeal it would  stand  or  fall  on  statutory
   interpretation in relation to section 85 of the 2002 Act.

38. Mr Sharma asked me to allow the appeal and set  aside  the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal.

39. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

The law

40. The provisions of sections 84, 85 and 86 of the  2002  Act,  so  far  as
   material, are as follows:

         "Section 84 Grounds of appeal
          1) An appeal under section 82(1) (refusal  of  protection  claim)
             must be brought on one or more of the following grounds -
               a) That removal of the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
                  Refugee Convention;
               b) That removal of the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in  relation
                  to  persons  eligible  for   a   grant   of   humanitarian
                  protection;
               c) That removal of the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
                  1998 (public authority not to act contrary to Human Rights
                  Convention).

         Section 85. Matters to be considered
         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
         treated by [the  Tribunal]  as  including  an  appeal  against  any
         decision in respect of which the appellant has a  right  of  appeal
         under section 82(1).
         (2)  If an appellant under section 82(1) makes  a  statement  under
         section 120, [the Tribunal] shall consider any matter raised in the
         statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed  in
         section 84(1) against the decision appealed against.
         (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under  section  120
         whether the statement was made  before  or  after  the  appeal  was
         commenced.
         (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1) [83(2) or 83A(2)]  against  a
         decision [the Tribunal] may  consider  evidence  about  any  matter
         which [it] thinks  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
         including evidence which concerns a matter arising after  the  date
         of the decision.
         (5)  But the Tribunal must not consider a  new  matter  unless  the
         Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.
         (6)  A matter is a 'new matter" if -
             (a)  It constitutes a ground of appeal of  a  kind  listed  in
             section 84, and
             (b)  The Secretary of State has not previously considered  the
             matter in the context of -
                  (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or
                  (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120."


         86   Determination of appeal
         (1)      This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1)
         (2)      [The Tribunal] must determine-
                  (a) any matter raised as a ground of  appeal  (whether  or
             not by virtue of section 85(1)), and
                  (b)  any  matter  which  section  85  requires   [it]   to
                  consider."

41. Section 120 gives the respondent the power to  invite  an  appellant  to
   advance additional grounds for remaining in the United Kingdom.

         "120     Requirement to state additional grounds for application
         ...(2)   The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may by
         notice in writing require the person to state-
             (a) his reasons for wishing to enter or remain in the United
             Kingdom,
             (b) any grounds on which he should be permitted to enter or
             remain in the United Kingdom, and
             (c) any grounds on which he should not be removed from or
             required to leave the United Kingdom. ...."

42. In Khan v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
   88, having considered BA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] 1 AC  444  (26  November
   2009), ZA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA 926 (30 July 2010) and Lamichhane,
   but with particular reference to the mischief identified by Lord  Justice
   Neuberger (as he then was) in ZA (Nigeria), Lord  Justice  McCombe,  with
   whom Lord  Justices  Tomlinson  and  Moore-Bick  agreed,  summarised  his
   understanding of the intended operation of section 85 thus:

         "65. I think that it  must  have  been  the  intention  to  prevent
         claimants from advancing on a new  appeal  new  points  and/or  new
         material in aid of old points  which  might  reasonably  have  been
         advanced in a previous appeal.  The  mischief  identified  by  Lord
         Neuberger in paragraph 3 of his ZA judgment would be met by such an
         interpretation and he seems  to  have  clearly  understood  section
         96(1) to be read in this sense when he said (at paragraph 29)  that
         it was the administrative procedural equivalent of Ladd v  Marshall
         [1954] 1 WLR 1489. The rule in  Ladd  v  Marshall  is,  of  course,
         directed to the criteria for the admission  of  fresh  evidence  on
         ordinary civil appeals. Other procedural rules govern  the  ability
         to raise fresh "issues" in such appeals.

         66.  Turning to matters outside the interpretation of the words  of
         the statute, I do not consider  that  the  Parliamentary  materials
         assist our consideration of  this  question  of  construction.  The
         explanatory notes and the  Minister's  statement  merely  refer  to
         clarification of the certification power and there is no  reference
         to the distinction between "issues"  and  "evidence"  that  is  now
         sought to be drawn.

         66.   As  Mr  Blundell  submitted  in  his  written  argument,  the
         Parliamentary record does not "decisively" resolve the point. There
         was nothing in  the  Minister's  statement  addressing  the  proper
         meaning of the word "matter" or why  the  word  "ground"  had  been
         removed from the section. Moreover, there can be no doubt that  the
         wording  of  the  present  section  96  is  in  fact  significantly
         different from the section as initially enacted.  As  the  Minister
         said, the object was to make the process easier for caseworkers  to
         operate consistently and for lawyers to understand  what  had  been
         done. While the latter aim has perhaps not been met, as  this  case
         illustrates, nonetheless, if the  Respondent  is  correct,  section
         96(1) does obviate  the  need  for  caseworkers  to  agonise  about
         whether they are confronted by new issues or new evidence.  Equally
         consistent with the Minister's statement the "one-stop powers" were
         not, I think, added to and the previous four options in the old Act
         were reduced from four to two in the new.

         67.  Next, I am not persuaded that the question of shutting out  an
         individual's  access  to  an  impartial  tribunal  (Saleem's   case
         (supra)) really arises here in quite the same way as it did in that
         case. ...The Appellant here has not been shut out in that  way.  He
         has had one full appeal to an independent tribunal and has had  his
         application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  a   higher   tribunal
         considered on no less than two occasions. The issue that he  wished
         to raise was the same as  that  considered  on  the  first  appeal,
         namely the question whether his rights and/or those of  his  family
         under Article 8 were being breached. He merely wished to bolster by
         new evidence the case that he had lost on the first occasion.  That
         does not seem to me to be an exclusion of a right of appeal of  the
         same quality at all."

   I adopt and rely on that interpretation, which  I  have  found  of  great
   assistance in this appeal.

The Secretary of State's guidance

43. The Secretary of State's guidance to her caseworkers is  not  a  binding
   guide to statutory interpretation, particularly where, as here, there  is
   in reality no ambiguity in the statute. The Secretary of  State's  Rights
   of Appeal guidance, so far as relevant, says this:

         "What is the difference between a new matter and new evidence?

         ...A 'new matter' must be clearly distinguishable from and  outside
         the context of the original  claim.   The  following  examples  are
         likely to constitute new matters:

            .     A protection claim has been made, including a claim under
              Article 3 of the ECHR, but  the  appellant  is  now  claiming
              removal would be (or would also be) a  breach  of  Article  8
              based on his family life ...

         Additional facts or evidence relating to the original claim do  not
         amount to a new matter. The  following  examples  are  unlikely  to
         constitute new matters:

            .     A human rights claim has been made based on private  life
              under Article 8 of the Convention but since the  decision  on
              this  matter  further  time  has  elapsed,  friendships  have
              developed and property assets have been acquired ...

            .     An application has been made for leave  to  remain  as  a
              parent but since  the  decision  on  this  matter  additional
              children have been born

            .     A protection claim has been made, but since the  decision
              on this matter, an additional risk factor has been identified
              or the country situation has changed.

         Where the material raised by the appellant does not amount to a new
         matter, the Tribunal is entitled to  consider  that  material  when
         deciding the appeal.

         A matter can only be described as 'considered' by the SSHD where  a
         decision has been made on the merits of the matter raised. "

44. The guidance is not binding upon me, but it does give an  indication  of
   the respondent's approach, which indication is publicly available.

Discussion

45. I have had regard to all the submissions, and all  of  the  passages  in
   the authorities to which I was taken, whether or not specifically set out
   in this decision. The question is whether the Article 8  point  taken  in
   the section 120 notice served at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  was  a
   'new matter' for the purpose of section 85 of amended 2002 Act.

46. The first point to make is that the appellant's right to appeal  against
   the ETS/TOEIC decision had been  exhausted,  whether  considered  on  the
   basis of the Rules or under Article 8 ECHR.  The decision  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal in SM and Qadir did not make it proper to reopen it  before  the
   Upper Tribunal. The interjection of the section 120 notice  referring  to
   the ETS/TOEIC does not entitle the appellant to reopen an issue which has
   been considered by the Court of Appeal  already,  without  any  reference
   being made to any Article 8 issue.  The appellant has not been shut  out:
   the Article 8 variant of his ETS/TOEIC arguments could  and  should  have
   been raised in the earlier proceedings.  This is a case where he  'merely
   wished to bolster by new evidence the case that he had lost on the  first
   occasion'.   The proper course to  be  taken  in  that  respect,  if  any
   evidential issue arose out of SM and  Qadir,  would  have  been  to  make
   further submissions to the respondent,  giving  her  the  role  of  first
   decision maker on such issues, once particularised.

47. As regards the broader Article 8 argument at  [2]  in  the  section  120
   notice, I accept that a section 120 notice may be  served  at  any  time.
   The remaining Article 8 ECHR  argument  in  the  section  120  notice  is
   entirely unparticularised:

         "[2] I have established a private life in the United Kingdom of the
         continuation  of  the  private  life  is  being  unlawfully  denied
         pursuant to a decision now shown to have no substance."

48. The applicant's grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  related
   only to asylum and humanitarian protection.  This is a case where, as  in
   the first example given in the Guidance,  a  protection  claim  has  been
   made, including an Article 3 claim, but the  appellant  is  now  claiming
   that there would be a breach of private and family  life.   It  does  not
   appear that any family life is relied upon, and  I  have  regard  to  the
   effect on private life of the appellant's status in the  United  Kingdom:
   little weight can be given to it under paragraphs 117B(4) and (5) because
   his presence in the United Kingdom has been either precarious or unlawful
   throughout.

49. The inclusion in the  First-tier  Tribunal  grounds  of  appeal  of  the
   phrase 'further grounds may be adduced at the time of the  hearing'  does
   not, in the context of section 85, indicate that  such  grounds  will  go
   beyond the protection issues under asylum  and  humanitarian  protection,
   nor does it give the appellant an option to vary limitlessly his  grounds
   of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  the   Upper   Tribunal
   thereafter.  The Tribunal, and the respondent, were  entitled  to  assume
   that any such grounds would be sui generis with the existing  grounds  of
   appeal.

50. Human rights is a section 84 ground  of  appeal.   Section  85(6)(a)  is
   therefore met, but that subsection is conjunctive with section  85(6)(b),
   and it is plain that the respondent has  not  previously  considered  the
   Article 8 claim now made, such as it is, in the context of  the  decision
   under challenge, nor a section 120  statement.   The  appellant  had  not
   given her the opportunity to do so.  This question is undoubtedly both  a
   fresh ground and a fresh issue, and amounts to a 'new matter' as  defined
   by section 85(6).

51. Accordingly, the Home Office Presenting Officer  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, representing the respondent, had the choice whether to  consent
   to its introduction.  He  did  not  consent,  and  that  meant,  applying
   section 85(5), that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to
   consider the Article 8 point raised in the section 120 notice, until  the
   respondent had done so and had made an appealable decision thereon.   The
   appellant's attempt to graft an entirely different case onto  the  asylum
   and human rights claim before the First-tier Tribunal  was  unsuccessful.
   The First-tier Tribunal did not err in refusing to admit  the  Article  8
   claim.

52. For the avoidance of doubt,  I  do  not  accept  that  the  Home  Office
   Presenting  Officer  reading  the  section  120  notice  over  the  short
   adjournment amounted to 'consideration'. There  were  no  particulars  to
   consider and the time was too short.  'Consideration' implies  more  than
   just reading a document:  if it did not, section 85(5) and section  85(6)
   would have made no change to the legal  position  at  all  and  would  be
   completely ineffective.  I am fortified in this by the final sentence  of
   the passage from the respondent's  guidance  quoted,  but  I  would  have
   arrived at that conclusion from the natural meaning of the words  of  the
   statute in any event.

53. Nor do I accept Mr Sharma's submission that the Tribunal could have,  or
   should have, rejected the respondent's refusal to consent as an abuse  of
   process.  If the appellant wished to challenge the  respondent's  refusal
   to consent, he could have done so by judicial review. Alternatively,  the
   effect of section 85 is to permit  the  respondent  to  make  a  reasoned
   decision on Article 8.  If it were negative,  the  appellant  could  then
   challenge it by whatever means were available to him, on receipt of  that
   decision.

DECISION

54. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law



Date:         21 October 2016                 Signed    Judith  AJC  Gleeson
                                                   Upper   Tribunal    Judge
Gleeson





