
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01883/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the Upper |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules   |On 20th July 2020                  |
|2008                               |                                   |
|Without a hearing on 7th July 2020 |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MG
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  in  February  1977.  He
       arrived in the UK in January 1999 with a visit visa and  overstayed.
       In December 2016 he was remanded in custody accused of  murder,  but
       the  charge  was  withdrawn  due  to  additional  information   that
       conflicted materially with the prosecution case, and he was released
       from custody in June 2017. In  June  2018  the  Secretary  of  State
       proposed to remove the claimant as an overstayer, and  he  responded
       by claiming asylum. The application  was  refused  on  6th  February
       2019. His appeal against that decision was dismissed  on  protection
       grounds but allowed on human rights grounds by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Bulpitt in a determination promulgated on  the  20th  November
       2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on
       2nd March 2020 on the basis that it is arguable that the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law on ground 2 when applying the principle in  ZH
       (Bangladesh) v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  in  the  context  of  fraudulent
       documents. It was said that ground 1, which related to the  evidence
       as to whether the claimant was a gang member,  could be  argued  but
       the Secretary of State should consider whether it was worthwhile  as
       there was currently nothing put forward  from  her  representative's
       record to support the claim about the claimant's oral evidence,  and
       it did not seem to be supported by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
       typed record of proceedings.

    3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-
       19 and with regard to the overriding object set  out  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  to  decide  matters  fairly  and  justly
       directions were sent out to the  parties  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Keith by email on 31st March 2020 seeking written submissions on the
       assertion of an error of law with a view to determining  that  issue
       on the papers, and giving an opportunity for any party who felt that
       a hearing  was  necessary  in  the  interests  of  justice  to  make
       submissions on that issue too. Submissions were  received  from  the
       claimant but not  the  Secretary  of  State  in  response  to  these
       directions.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  it  is  in  the
       interests of justice to decide this matter without a hearing and  if
       so to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law and
       if so whether the decision should be set aside. I find  that  it  is
       appropriate to determine whether there is an error  of  law  on  the
       papers as neither party has put forward any objection to this course
       of action, and I find, whilst appreciating that this is an issue  of
       great importance to the claimant given it determines his  Article  8
       ECHR rights, that the issue is discrete and it can, I find, be  done
       fairly and justly in this way.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. In the grounds of appeal drafted by Mr D Clarke,  Senior  Presenting
       Officer for the Secretary of State it is argued, in short summary as
       follows. This is a "Nexus" human rights appeal in which  the  First-
       tier Tribunal dismissed the protection claim but allowed the  appeal
       by reference to paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  on  the  basis  that  the
       claimant had been in the UK for 20 years and  found  there  were  no
       suitability issues arising under S-LTR 1.6 which requires that: "The
       presence of the applicant  is  not  conducive  to  the  public  good
       because their conduct  (including  convictions  which  do  not  fall
       within paragraphs S-LTR 1.3 -1.5) character, associations  or  other
       reasons, make it undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK." The
       Secretary of State argues that there are  two  errors  made  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal in allowing the  appeal  by  reference  to  this
       suitability condition.

    6. Firstly, it is argued that the evidence did show that  the  claimant
       was part of a the "S" gang. It is argued  that  this  was  the  oral
       evidence of claimant and also the evidence of DC Hutchinson  in  his
       statement. It is argued that it was not accurate to say at paragraph
       64 of the decision that the police  evidence  did  not  support  the
       claimant being a member of that gang,  as  the  evidence  showed  he
       associated at a club with the leader of the gang, Mr E.

    7. Secondly, it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal wrongly  applies
       ZH (Bangladesh) at paragraph 65 of the decision  when  finding  that
       the use of a false birth certificate and  a  false  driving  licence
       does  not  provide  justification  for  finding  the   claimant   is
       unsuitable to remain. This is because it is clear from paragraph  14
       of ZH (Bangladesh) the claimant did not use false documents, and  it
       is clear that this claimant was supporting the trade in  counterfeit
       documents which was a more serious matter making him unsuitable.

    8. Mr Bazini for the claimant in his reply of 17th April  2020  argues,
       in summary, as follows.

    9. With respect to the first ground it is noted that the  Secretary  of
       State has not produced any further evidence from her  representative
       at the hearing with regards to the claimant's own oral  evidence  at
       the hearing as Judge Macleman suggested was needed in the  grant  of
       permission, and in light of the opportunity given in the  directions
       of Judge Keith. There was no oral evidence from the claimant that he
       was a member of the S gang. It was also not contended in the reasons
       for refusal letter or  in  oral  submissions  by  the  Secretary  of
       State's representative at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
       that the claimant was not suitable as  a  result  of  being  a  gang
       member so this is not an argument that can be made at this stage.

   10.  With  respect  to  the  second  ground  it  is  argued   that    ZH
       (Bangladesh), at paragraph 16, states that  the  appellant  in  that
       case used a false identity, but  as  it  was  used  to  avoid  being
       detected as an illegal immigrant rather than for the  more  sinister
       reasons of committing fraud that it did not form a basis  to  refuse
       on the basis of making the appellant undesirable under  a  provision
       of the Immigration Rules which permitted those who had long  illegal
       residence to remain, as this would be to defeat the purpose of  that
       Rule. It is argued that the First-tier Tribunal correct applied  the
       same  principle  here  and  there  is  no  "overstretching"  of  the
       principle.

   11. It is also argued that the appeal should have also been  allowed  by
       reference to s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act as the claimant has a genuine
       and subsisting parental relationship with his son and it  would  not
       be reasonable for his son to leave the UK, and that this matter  was
       not determined by the First-tier Tribunal.  Reliance  is  placed  on
       this  contention  in  accordance  with  the  principles   in   Smith
       (appealable decisions; PTA requirements; anonymity) [2019] UKUT  219
       IAC in raising this issue at this stage.

   Conclusions - Error of Law

   12. The Secretary of State had conceded before the  First-tier  Tribunal
       that the claimant has been in the UK for a continuous period of more
       than 20 years, as set out at paragraph 63 of  the  decision.  It  is
       also recorded, in a paragraph not  challenged  in  the  grounds,  at
       paragraph 63 of the decision that the respondent's challenge to  the
       claimant's ability to qualify under the long residence private  life
       Immigration Rule  at  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  was  based  on  the
       contention  that  he  was  not  suitable  due   to:   his   previous
       convictions; his involvement with the murder investigation; and  his
       use of a false birth certificate and driving licence  to  remain  in
       the  UK  illegally.  It  is  therefore  correct  to  say  that  gang
       membership was not a matter explicitly argued by  the  Secretary  of
       State with respect to suitability.

   13. No challenge is made to the validity of the findings of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal that the claimant's past criminal record did  not,  of
       itself, make him unsuitable under the Immigration Rules.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal makes clear findings at paragraph 64 of  the
       decision  that  the   claimant's   involvement   with   the   murder
       investigation did  not  undermine  his  character  because,  on  the
       material before the First-tier Tribunal,  there  was  ultimately  no
       evidence to link him to the murder and it was not correct to say, as
       contended in the reasons for refusal letter, that  he  only  escaped
       prosecution on a point of law. There is no challenge to this finding
       by the Secretary of State.

   15. It is said by the Secretary of State that the finding of the  First-
       tier Tribunal at paragraph 64 of the decision that the  evidence  of
       DC Hutchinson records that the intelligence picture did not  support
       the contention that the claimant was part of  the  "S"  gang  is  an
       inaccurate statement, and further  that  the  claimant  himself  had
       given oral evidence that he was a member of that gang  to  which  no
       consideration had been given, and thus  material  evidence  had  not
       been considered with respect to gang membership.

   16. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal did therefore consider that
       the Secretary of State's evidence had raised  the  possibility  that
       gang membership could make the claimant unsuitable,  but  ultimately
       found that the evidence did not support this.

   17. As set out in the grant of permission the evidence of the  claimant,
       as set out in Judge Bulpitt's typed record of proceedings, does  not
       contain an admission that he was part of the "S"  gang  although  he
       accepted that he did socialise with them watching  football  and  at
       parties. The Secretary of State has produced no record of  what  was
       said which would challenge the accuracy of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       record of proceedings so I find that there was no error  of  law  in
       relation to the contention that relevant evidence from the  claimant
       indicating he was a gang member was not considered. I  also  do  not
       find that the First-tier Tribunal has misrepresented the evidence of
       DC Hutchinson in his witness statement. The evidence in the decision
       correctly reflected what is said in DC Hutchinson's statement:  that
       the claimant was "not widely known to police indices" and  as  there
       was little police intelligence on him there  was  no  real  evidence
       which supported him being a member of the gang, unlike  in  relation
       to Mr E, although consistent with the claimant's only oral evidence,
       there was evidence of him socialising with  Mr  E  at  a  club.  The
       findings that the claimant does not fail the suitability test on the
       basis of being a gang member are, I find, entirely properly reasoned
       and considered all material evidence accurately.

   18. At paragraph 65 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal went  on  to
       consider  whether  the  use  by  the  claimant  of  a  false   birth
       certificate and a driving licence to facilitate remaining in the  UK
       for  a  long  period  illegally  made   the   claimant   unsuitable.
       Consideration is rightly given to  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
       Appeal in ZH (Bangladesh). The appellant in that case did not have a
       national insurance number but had used a false identity, and had not
       paid tax or national insurance  whilst  working  illegally.  It  was
       found that by virtue of this behaviour he could not be  said  to  be
       undesirable due to his character, conduct  or  associations,  absent
       evidence of fraud, as this  was  a  provision  of  the  Rules  which
       allowed a person who had been  unlawfully  present  and  working  to
       remain in the UK, and to use the methods by which the applicant  had
       evaded immigration control to refuse would be to defeat the  purpose
       of the Rule. It is not argued by the  Secretary  of  State  that  ZH
       (Bangladesh) is inapplicable to this case, but it is argued that  it
       "nothing at all to do with possession of fraudulent  documents".  As
       the appellant in ZH (Bangladesh) is  found  to  have  used  a  false
       identity I find that this is not the case. It is  not  contended  by
       the Secretary of State that the claimant had  committed  fraud  with
       the false birth certificate or driving licence, and it is  found  by
       the First-tier Tribunal that there was no evidence of any fraud.  It
       is reasonably found by the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  claimant
       possessed these documents to evade immigration control and remain in
       the UK, and that applying ZH (Bangladesh) that it would be to defeat
       this new version of the long residence  Immigration  Rule  based  on
       unlawful presence for a 20 year period if  these  matters  made  the
       claimant unsuitable by reference to his character,  associations  or
       others reasons making it undesirable for him to be allowed to remain
       in the UK.

   19. As I have found that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in  law  it
       is not necessary to deal with the issue raised by  the  claimant  in
       the reply that the human rights appeal might have also succeeded  by
       reference to s.117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
       2002 Act. I note only that this argument was clearly  raised  before
       the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  recorded  at  paragraph  20  of  the
       decision, on the basis of the claimant's claimed  relationship  with
       his son X, but the  issue  was  not  determined  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal
      of the claimant on human rights grounds.


Signed    Fiona Lindsley                           7th July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

