
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01434/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 October 2016                       |On 18 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    E T A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Elliott-Kelly, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant or his wife.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Eritrea  born  on  27  March  1992.   He
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 10  September  2015
    to refuse his asylum claim on the grounds of his sexuality.  His appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal David Taylor ("the  FTTJ")
    who, in a decision promulgated on 21 April 2016, dismissed  his  appeal
    on asylum and human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  This was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  Fisher  on  17  May  2016  who  noted  the
    following:

         "2.      ... [The grounds] assert  that  the  Judge  erred  in  his
         approach to the 2013 determination or, in the alternative, that  he
         failed to consider material evidence in  the  present  appeal.  The
         grounds also claim that the  Judge  took  into  account  irrelevant
         matters, and conclude by alleging that he failed to  determine  all
         of the issues before him.

         3. The Appellant's previous appeal in 2013 was advanced  solely  on
         Article 8 grounds, although  it  would  appear  that  there  was  a
         reference to the decision in KA  during  the  hearing.  The  appeal
         before the Judge raised Articles  3,  4,  5  and  8  of  the  ECHR.
         Arguably, therefore, the Judge's assertion that the  Appellant  had
         previously relied principally on Article 8 was an error,  and  this
         infected his conclusion that the current appeal was "pursued by way
         of what is no more than a repetition of the human rights arguments"
         advanced in 2013.  Further, it is arguable that the Judge failed to
         adequately consider the up to date evidence of the risk  to  forced
         returnees, and the conditions in Eritrean military service.  It  is
         also arguable that the  Appellant's  decision  not  to  pursue  his
         asylum appeal on the grounds of his sexual orientation  was  not  a
         factor which ought to have been considered as damaging his  overall
         credibility."

         4. I consider that all four grounds raised have some merit, and  so
         I grant permission to appeal on each of them."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me.

Submissions

 4. Ms Elliott-Kelly noted that MST and Others  (national  service  -  risk
    categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC) had been handed down the
    afternoon before the hearing before me.  She submitted that the  FTTJ's
    findings were flawed in numerous ways: he had not addressed the Article
    3, 4 or 5 claims. The  earlier  determination  in  2013,  on  which  he
    relied, had addressed only the appellant's Article 8 claim at the  time
    yet had been taken by the FTTJ to cover all the issues raised in  2016.
    There were no references in the FTTJ's decision to the current position
    in  Eritrea  for  forced  returnees.  There  was  no  analysis  of  the
    appellant's evidence, simply reliance  on  the  earlier  determination.
    Rather, the findings in that earlier  determination  should  have  been
    taken  into  account  in  the  light  of  current  background  material
    regarding risk on return.  These failures  were  material  because  the
    appellant was not a draft evader; he had left Eritrea lawfully; and his
    parents had refugee status in the UK. These matters  should  have  been
    the subject of findings of fact by the FTTJ in his  assessment  of  the
    current risk on return. It had been pleaded before the  FTTJ  that  the
    appellant, although a person who had exited lawfully as a child, may be
    at risk on return on Article 4 and 3 grounds  as  a  result  of  forced
    labour (conscription). This issue had not been addressed at all by  the
    FTTJ. This was a material breach, in the light of the clarification  in
    MST that where a person was likely to be subject  to  conscription  (as
    was the case with this appellant) there was likely to be  a  breach  of
    Article 4 and 3 [429] of MST. It was relevant that the  respondent  had
    accepted, before the FTTJ,  that  the  appellant  would  be  liable  to
    conscription.

 5. Ms Elliott-Kelly further submitted that whilst it had been unattractive
    for the appellant to withdraw his asylum claim based on his  sexuality,
    the appellant's credibility had no bearing on  the  Articles  3  and  4
    assessments. Similarly, his criminal history in the UK had  no  bearing
    either.

 6. Mr Avery, for the respondent, indicated that he could see why the  FTTJ
    had given the appellant "short shrift":  the  appellant  had  been  the
    subject of an earlier deportation hearing at which he could have raised
    the risk on return yet at which  he  had  focussed  on  his  Article  8
    rights. He noted that the key  risk  factors  of  having  left  Eritrea
    illegally and evading the draft did not apply to  this  appellant.   He
    submitted that, insofar as the FTTJ had considered the findings of  the
    earlier tribunal, there  was  no  fundamental  difference  in  the  two
    tribunals' findings,  the  appellant  being  in  neither  of  the  risk
    categories identified.  Mr Avery accepted that, Article 4  having  been
    raised substantively in the appellant's  counsel's  skeleton  argument,
    the FTTJ should have made findings on this issue, albeit  there  was  a
    lack of country guidance of relevance.   He  accepted  that,  with  the
    benefit of hindsight, and  given  the  fact  the  issue  has  now  been
    "flagged" in MST, he could not suggest it was right  for  the  FTTJ  to
    have failed to address the issue.  He accepted that the FTTJ's  failure
    to do so was a material error of law.

Discussion and Findings

 7. The FTTJ's decision is flawed in various respects.   The  determination
    promulgated in 2013 was limited to the appellant's Article 8 claim.  It
    is quite clear from [12] of that determination that the  appellant  did
    not seek to pursue an asylum claim and that the appeal was based solely
    on Article 8.  Quite properly the panel took into account in  2013  the
    fact the appellant would be of draft age on return but this was done in
    the context of his Article 8 claim, not in the context  of  considering
    claims pursuant to the Refugee Convention or Articles 3, 4  and  5  (as
    was the case in 2016).  There was  no  consideration  of  these  latter
    issues  in  2013.  Whilst  the  FTTJ  states  at   [16(i)]   that   the
    determination in 2013 is his starting point he has inaccurately  stated
    that "at [12] the panel noted that Ms Manyara [sic],  counsel  for  the
    appellant, confirmed that the appellant  raised  no  issues  under  the
    refugee convention but relied principally on Article 8" (my  emphasis).
    This is not an accurate reflection of  the  panel's  decision  in  2013
    which states at [12]  "Miss  Manyarara  confirmed  that  the  Appellant
    wished to rely solely upon Article 8 [my emphasis] and  there  were  no
    issues to raise under the Refugee Convention but she wished [the panel]
    to note  he  was  of  "draft  age"  ...  she  confirmed  [the  panel's]
    understanding that the Appellant had  left  Eritrea  legally".   Whilst
    this was a vague submission, and the  panel  acknowledged  as  much  in
    2013, it is quite clear that  the  panel  was  only  required  to  make
    findings in relation to the Article 8 claim.  As requested,  they  took
    into account the appellant was of draft  age  and  had  exited  Eritrea
    lawfully and  referred  to  the  guidance  in  KA  (draft-related  risk
    categories) Eritrea CG [2005] UKAIT 00165 but only in  the  context  of
    the Article 8 assessment.  It was wrong for the FTTJ in  2016  to  find
    that the appellant had relied "principally on Article 8" at the earlier
    hearing.  There were no other issues before the panel in 2013.

 8. It was also wrong for the FTTJ to find that the appeal before  him  was
    "pursued by way of what is no more  than  a  repetition  of  the  human
    rights arguments that had been before the First-tier Tribunal panel  in
    2013".  As is quite  clear  from  the  appellant's  counsel's  skeleton
    argument, the  appellant  relied  in  2016  not  only  on  the  Refugee
    Convention but also Articles 3,  4,  5  and  8.   The  FTTJ  states  at
    [16(viii)] that "this appeal has been pursued as a means to reopen  and
    in the hope of redeciding the issues that have already been  determined
    by the deportation appeal panel ... ".  That cannot be the case,  given
    that additional claims were made in 2016 over and  above  those  before
    the panel in 2013.  Irrespective of whether the appellant had  had  the
    opportunity of pursuing those claims in 2013, he had been granted leave
    to appeal against the decision of the respondent in September 2015  and
    was entitled to be heard on  the  grounds  pursued  and  those  grounds
    included claims which were not before the FTT in 2013. It was an  error
    in law therefore for the FTTJ in 2016 to dismiss the appeal  solely  by
    reference to the earlier decision. The appellant  was  not  asking  the
    FTTJ to depart from the earlier findings but to apply the  guidance  in
    Deevaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 000702 and take them  as  his  starting
    point. This he did not do. He  made  no  findings  on  the  appellant's
    current circumstances and the current  risk  on  return  in  the  wider
    context of Articles 3, 4 and  5,  but  merely  relied  on  the  earlier
    findings of the panel in 2013 in relation to Article 8.

 9. The lack of country guidance on Article 4 issues arising from the  risk
    of conscription on return does not excuse the failure to  consider  the
    issue at all, as Mr Avery  rightly  conceded.  MST  now  clarifies  the
    position  insofar  as  conscription  in  Eritrea  is  concerned;   that
    clarification, albeit with the benefit of  hindsight,  demonstrates  at
    [429] that the outcome of the appellant's appeal, insofar as  the  risk
    of conscription  and  forced  labour  is  concerned,  might  have  been
    different had the FTTJ made a proper assessment of the current evidence
    and background material before him and appropriate findings of fact  as
    to the appellant's circumstances on return.

10. I am also satisfied that the FTTJ  gave  inappropriate  weight  to  the
    adverse  credibility  finding  made  by  the  panel  in  2013  and  the
    appellant's withdrawal of his earlier asylum claim on the basis of  his
    sexuality. This  was  also  the  case  with  the  appellant's  criminal
    convictions and history.  These matters are of no relevance to the risk
    of conscription on return.

11. Viewed in the round, I  am  satisfied  that  the  FTTJ's  reasoning  is
    unsafe; there are material errors of law in his decision and it must be
    set aside.  Both Ms Elliott-Kelly  and  Mr  Avery  requested  that  the
    matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal given they had had little
    opportunity to consider the new guidance in  MST  which  had  a  direct
    bearing on the appellant's Article 3 and 4 claims.  Mr Avery said  that
    the respondent had  not  as  yet  issued  an  "official  line"  on  the
    judgment, given its recent publication and he was not therefore  in   a
    position to make detailed submissions.  Ms  Elliott-Kelly  also  sought
    further time to consider the impact of MST on the appellant's case; she
    considered that, whilst it was helpful to the appellant on  Articles  4
    and 3, it did not address his particular circumstances in that  he  had
    left Eritrea in 2005 whereas the appellants in MST had  left  prior  to
    2008.  Those  instructing  her  had  telephoned  the  Tribunal  in  the
    knowledge that MST would be issued shortly;  they  had  been  told  the
    hearing before me would be on error of law only. She was not  therefore
    ready to proceed.

12. In the circumstances, I agree that the matter should be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Decision

13. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of material errors on points of law.  The decision is set aside.
     The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    aside from FTTJ David Taylor.

14. The anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


A M Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 17 October 2016



                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is  to  be
    filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party  by  no  later
    than 14 days before the date of the hearing in the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appeal is listed at Taylor House with  a  time  estimate  of  three
    hours to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................

 3. A Tigrinya interpreter is required.





A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated:    17 October 2016

