
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01841/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Microsoft     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams)                               |                                     |
|On the 4th June 2021                 |On the 21st June 2021                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     JMM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Coen instructed by Kabir Ahmed & Co Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Saffer ('the Judge') promulgated on 27  August  2020
        who dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
     2. The appellant was born on 25 June 1995 and is  a  citizen  of  Iraq
        from Topwaza near Kirkuk.
     3. Having had the benefit of being able to  consider  the  documentary
        and oral evidence the Judge sets out his findings of fact from [21]
        of the decision under challenge which  can  be  summarised  in  the
        following terms:


                 i. It is reasonably likely the appellant  is  from  Topwaza
                    near  Kirkuk,  given  his  CSID  and  Iraq   Nationality
                    Certificate which is now produced and whose authenticity
                    has not been challenged [21].
                ii. The finding as to the appellant's  place  of  birth  and
                    home  area   does   not   undermine   previous   adverse
                    credibility findings which were not based  on  geography
                    [21].
               iii. The appellant lied in his previous hearing when claiming
                    not to know where his documents were. The Judge did  not
                    accept his assertion that he only re-established contact
                    with his sister in 2019 through Facebook, it being  more
                    likely that they have been in contact throughout [22].
                iv. The Judge did not accept it was  reasonably  likely  the
                    appellant's sister is in Iran as there was no  statement
                    from her or documents to show where she is [23].
                 v. It was  not  accepted  as  reasonably  likely  that  the
                    appellant's mother died in 2015 or  that  the  informant
                    was his brother-in-law as the appellant claimed, as  the
                    certificate provided says  it  was  2014  and  that  the
                    appellant was the informant.  The  Judge  placed  little
                    weight upon that document as establishing anything as  a
                    result of the discrepancies [24].
                vi. The  Judge  placed  little  weight  on  the  appellant's
                    father's death certificate as it was  not  produced  for
                    the previous hearing despite being in existence at  that
                    time. The full name of the  father  was  not  given  and
                    there was no evidence to confirm the  informant  is  the
                    appellant's brother-in-law, despite the appellant  being
                    in touch with him, and there is no indication as to  how
                    the deceased was killed [25].
               vii. Even if the appellant's parents were deceased the  Judge
                    was not satisfied that materially altered  the  risk  to
                    the appellant for the reasons given at [30].
              viii. Although the appellant did not stay with his mother when
                    he was working in Kirkuk the Judge placed little  weight
                    upon that as it did not appear to be material [27].
                ix. The Judge had no reason to doubt the authenticity of the
                    appellant's CSID and Iraq National Certificate and finds
                    it is reasonably likely he will be  able  to  return  to
                    Baghdad, the issue being whether it will be unduly harsh
                    for him to travel and resettle in Kirkuk [28].
                 x. The appellant failed to establish he will  be  perceived
                    to be associated with ISIS  as  the  findings  from  the
                    previous hearing had not been dislodged. The Judge finds
                    the appellant will  have  family  assistance  as  it  is
                    reasonably likely his sister and brother-in-law  are  in
                    Kirkuk and he has  documentation  that  establishes  his
                    "right" to be there. The appellant  is  not  a  military
                    target and of little interest to insurgent  attacks  and
                    the  Judge  was  not   satisfied   the   appellant   had
                    established that he possessed any risk factors over  and
                    above the general population that  would  make  movement
                    unduly harsh or will place him at risk of indiscriminate
                    violence amounting to serious harm [29].
                xi. At [30] the Judge writes:


                    "The evidence within SMO is that the situation in Kirkuk
                    is  complex,   encompassing   ethnic,   political,   and
                    humanitarian issues which differ by region. Despite  the
                    high levels of violence, he has failed to  establish  he
                    has any risk factor that  would  aggravate  the  general
                    risk (see [29] above). Whilst 7% of  housing  in  Kirkuk
                    has been damaged, 93% has not,  and  he  has  failed  to
                    establish it is reasonably likely his family home is one
                    of those damaged. Whilst 35% of primary  health  centres
                    are not functioning, he has failed to adduce any medical
                    evidence  to  suggest  he  has  any  elements  requiring
                    treatment. Accordingly, it would not be unduly harsh  to
                    require him to resettle in Kirkuk, and he would not need
                    to relocate within Iraq or to the IKR."


               xii. The Judge did not accept the appellant is a  refugee  or
                    that his Article 3 rights will be breached if return  to
                    Iraq or that he is entitled to a grant  of  humanitarian
                    protection [31].
              xiii. In relation to Article 8 and paragraph 276  ADE  of  the
                    Immigration Rules, the  Judge  finds  it  would  not  be
                    unduly harsh or even unreasonable for the  appellant  to
                    reintegrate in Iraq. It is found the appellant  has  had
                    no family in the United Kingdom and in relation  to  his
                    private life the Judge had no supporting statements from
                    anyone that identify what ties the  appellant  has.  The
                    appellant has only been in the UK for five years and any
                    private life has been established whilst his  leave  has
                    been precarious. The appellant failed  to  establish  he
                    speaks English or would not be a burden on the state  as
                    there  was  no  evidence  as  to  what  his  income  and
                    outgoings are. Any ailments the appellant may have  come
                    nowhere near the relevant threshold to found a claim  as
                    the Judge has no medical evidence at all [32].


     4. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was refused by  the
        First-tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by a judge
        of the Upper Tribunal, the operative part of the grant being in the
        following terms:


        1. Ground 2 is just about arguable. Ground 3 seems to  add  nothing
        but refers to other grounds, so is, I find arguable.
        2. Ground 1 makes out an arguable case that the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge should have included a "sliding scale" in  his  reasons  but,
        arguably, did not. It will not necessarily follow  that  any  error
        thus established is material.
        3. For the avoidance of doubt, I give permission on each ground.


     5. The three grounds relied upon by the appellant read:


        Ground 1


        IJ Saffer did not properly consider the Appellant's  case  in  line
        with the County Guidance case of SMO, KSP &  IM  (Article  15  (c);
        identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC)  in  that  they
        did not apply a fact sensitive 'sliding scale'  assessment  of  the
        Appellant's circumstances as prescribed  by  paragraph  3  of  that
        case.


        Ground 2 The death certificate for the Appellant's Father  produced
        was given little weight despite the CSID  and  ID  documents  being
        sent at the  same  time  and  by  the  same  means  and  not  being
        challenged and accepted as genuine.


        Ground 3 The grounds above were not fully  considered  by  the  FFT
        when  refusing  permission.  (This  ground  relates  to  apply  for
        permission to appeal, which was granted).


     6. Ms Coen asserts the Judge failed to  carry  out  a  fact  sensitive
        "sliding  scale"   assessment   of   the   appellant's   individual
        circumstances when considering the prospects of return to a  Former
        Contested Area as per SMO. It was accepted the Judge had considered
        several risk factors at [29] but claimed this still fell  short  of
        the thorough fact sensitive assessment required.
     7. There is nothing in SMO that states  that  just  because  a  person
        originated from Kirkuk  that  they  are  entitled  to  a  grant  of
        international protection per se. The Upper Tribunal in SMO identify
        the correct approach to be taken in such a case, but the Judge  was
        clearly aware of the guidance provided in the case  law  and  makes
        specific reference to this case. It was not made out  that  any  of
        the factors identified in SMO that may give  rise  to  an  enhanced
        real risk on return were present in this case.  Those  specifically
        identified in SMO are set out in  the  headnote  in  the  following
        terms:


        5.   The impact of  any  of  the  personal  characteristics  listed
             immediately below  must  be  carefully  assessed  against  the
             situation in the area to which return  is  contemplated,  with
             particular reference to the extent of  ongoing  ISIL  activity
             and the behaviour of the security actors in  control  of  that
             area. Within the framework of  such  an  analysis,  the  other
             personal characteristics which are capable of being  relevant,
             individually and cumulatively, to the sliding  scale  analysis
             required by Article 15(c) are as follows:
         ( Opposition to or criticism of the GOI, the KRG or local security
        actors;
                    ( Membership of a national, ethnic  or  religious  group
                    which is either in the minority in the area in question,
                    or not in de facto control of that area;
                    ( LGBTI individuals, those  not  conforming  to  Islamic
                    mores and wealthy or Westernised individuals;
                    ( Humanitarian or medical  staff  and  those  associated
                    with Western organisations or security forces;
         ( Women and children without genuine family support; and
         ( Individuals with disabilities.


     8. It was not made  out  before  the  Judge  that  any  enhanced  risk
        elements were present. The Judge considered the  evidence  provided
        in relation to Kirkuk and the application  fails  to  identify  any
        specific element the Judge failed to consider that would give  rise
        to a real risk. The Judge made specific  reference  to  an  earlier
        decision by a previous judge which  found  the  appellant  to  lack
        credibility, to have made a meritless claim, and to  face  no  real
        risk on return. The appellant was aware of this earlier finding yet
        produced insufficient  evidence  before  the  Judge  to  warrant  a
        finding that such risk did exist.
     9. It is not established the Judge failed  to  consider  the  evidence
        provided with the required  degree  of  anxious  scrutiny  and  the
        Judge's finding as to  why  the  appellant  had  not  establish  an
        entitlement to a grant of international protection is supported  by
        adequate reasons. The Judge was clearly aware of relevant case  law
        and the grounds fail to establish that the Judge did  not  approach
        the evidence in the required  manner  or  that  if  the  Judge  was
        required to set out further detail of how he considered the sliding
        scale approach  the  result  would  have  been  any  different.  No
        material error is made out on this basis.
    10. In relation to ground 2, there  is  no  merit  whatsoever  in  this
        ground. The Judge clearly considered the documentary evidence  with
        the required degree of anxious scrutiny and gives adequate  reasons
        for why the appellants CSID and Iraqi Nationality Certificate  were
        accepted,  which  was  because  their  authenticity  had  not  been
        challenged, but  why  little  weight  was  placed  upon  the  death
        certificate. The Judge gives adequate reasons but, in any event, at
        [25] finds in the alternative that even if the appellant's  parents
        are dead that does not alter the  Judge's  conclusion  [26]  again,
        making any alleged error not material. Whilst the grounds  referred
        to the documents having been made available at a similar time  that
        does not mean they are all genuine.
    11. On the basis of the evidence before the Judge  the  conclusion  the
        appellant is not entitled to succeed with his appeal is  a  finding
        clearly within the range of those available to  the  Judge.  Whilst
        the appellant disagrees with that outcome and seeks to be permitted
        to reargue the appeal, he fails to establish arguable  legal  error
        material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  sufficient  to
        warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this  matter.
        The appellant has failed to establish any material legal  error  in
        the decision.


Decision

         There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
         decision. The determination shall stand.

Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
                       Dated 8 June 2021


