
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01480/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood, instructed by I A S (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction.  Unless the Upper Tribunal  or
a court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

This is the appellant's appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Herwald promulgated 13 July 2018 dismissing his appeal against the
decision of the Secretary of State dated 16 January 2018 to refuse his
protection claim as an Iraqi Kurd.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson refused permission to appeal to the
Upper Tribunal on 15 August 2018.  However, when the application was
renewed to the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted
permission on 15 November 2018.  There is a Rule 24 reply dated 7 December
2018.

In granting permission to appeal Judge Coker considered it arguable that
the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to engage with the current country
guidance which could in the appellant's particular circumstances have an
impact on the outcome of his appeal.  I take that to be a reference to the
current country guidance of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG
[2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC) and in particular the considerations whether the
appellant would be at particular risk of ill-treatment on return to the
IKR.

Judge Herwald rejected entirely the appellant's factual claim, finding him
not credible.  The judge then considered whether the appellant would be
able to return to Iraq and/or relocate to the IKR.  The appellant claimed
that he did not know anyone in the IKR.  However, the judge found that he
claimed to have previously worked for the Mines Advisory Group (MAG) who
employed him within the IKR, and their letter makes clear that he was
working in Sulaymaniyah. The judge also found that his family were in
Sulaymaniyah, having relocated there from Kirkuk.

The appellant's case is that he was born in Sulaymaniyah but at an early
age moved with his family to Kirkuk.  However, he clearly returned to the
IKR, his family has also returned to the IKR, and he remains in contact
with his family.  The judge did not accept that the appellant had been
targeted at all and therefore it follows that the claim that his family had
relocated to the IKR as a matter of urgency because of threats in relation
to the appellant's work as a mine clearer cannot be accurate and is not the
basis upon which relocation to the IKR is to be considered.

In summary, therefore, the situation is that the appellant is a Kurdish
Iraqi, born within the IKR, who lived for a period of time in Kirkuk
outside the IKR, but who returned to live and work in the IKR immediately
before coming to the UK.  He has family in the IKR, he is in contact with
that family in the IKR and he had employment in the IKR.  In addition, the
appellant has a photocopy of his CSID card and although the Secretary of
State suggested that little reliance could be placed on that document
because it was a photocopy, the appellant's case is that it is genuine.
With that photocopy the appellant will be able to obtain a replacement CSID
card before leaving the UK.

On the country guidance, as an Iraqi Kurd the appellant will be able to
return to the IKR.  If it is accepted that he comes from the IKR he could
be returned there directly, according to the country guidance.  However,
even if he is not registered in the IKR he can certainly gain entry into
the IKR, travelling there from within Iraq.  With a CSID his return to Iraq
is feasible. The country guidance is to the effect that with a CSID the
appellant will have no difficulty boarding a plane from Iraqi international
airport to the IKR, either to Erbil or Sulaymaniyah, and will be granted
temporary admission and will not be asked to leave.

It is correct that the judge did not specifically address the factors set
out within AAH as to the appellant's circumstances in the IKR on return.
Paragraph 9 of the headnote of AAH states that for those without the
assistance of family in the IKR accommodation options are limited.  That is
not going to be a difficulty for the appellant because his family already
live in the IKR and he remains in contact with them.  In paragraph 10 of
the country guidance it is stated that whether the appellant is able to
secure employment must be assessed on a case by case basis taking the
matters listed therein into account, including:

      i) gender;

     ii) the unemployment rate for Iraqis, where the employment rate for
         IDPs is 70%;

    iii) that the appellant could not work without a CSID;

     iv) that patronage and nepotism continue to be important factors in
         securing employment.  A returnee with family connections to the
         region will have a significant advantage in that he would
         ordinarily be able to call upon those contacts to make
         introductions to prospective employers and to vouch for him;

      v) skills, education and experience.  Unskilled workers are at the
         greatest disadvantage with the decline in the construction industry
         reducing the number of labouring jobs available;

     vi) if the appellant is from an area with a marked association with
         ISIL that may deter prospective employers.

As stated above, the appellant will have access to his family.  He has a
CSID with which he can seek and obtain work.  He will have the assistance
of his family for accommodation as well as for moral and physical support
whilst he looks for work to be able to sustain himself independently in due
course.  He has previously worked for MAG and it reasonable to expect, and
Judge Herwald was entitled to find that, the appellant could turn to the
Mines Advisory Group (MAG) for help in seeking employment.  Considering the
way in which the judge looked at the evidence as a whole and taking into
account the credibility findings, there is no reason why the appellant
would be at any particular disadvantage in returning to the IKR, whether he
does so directly from the UK on the basis of a preclearance by the IKR
authorities, or whether he returns to Baghdad International Airport and
takes a connecting flight from there to the IKR.

I am satisfied that even if the judge had directly set out and considered
the various criteria referred to in AAH the appeal would have been
dismissed.  If there is any error in the failure of the judge to
specifically address AAH and the criteria, I am satisfied that that failure
is not material given the way in which the judge has addressed all the
other factors and assessed the appellant's personal circumstances.  The
outcome of the appeal would have been the same. It should also be noted
that whilst AAH indicates that there were no direct flights at that time
from the UK, that has now changed.  There are daily and regular flights
from both international airports to the IKR and from Baghdad International
Airport; which was not challenged by Mr Ell.  As the judge noted, with a
CSID the appellant would be able to work in line with the country guidance,
as stated at [20(b)] of the decision.

In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that there is no material error of
law in this decision and that the appeal cannot succeed.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law such as to require the decision to be
set aside.

I do not set aside the decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal remains
dismissed.



                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 30 May 2019


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note  Fee  awards  in
immigration appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: the appeal has been dismissed.



                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 30 May 2019
