
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01165/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 October 2016                   |On 2 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                John FREEMAN

                                   Between

                                    [D G]
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Gordon Lee (counsel instructed by Tuckers)
For the Respondent:    Mr Keith Norton

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   This is an appeal by [DG], who was born in Albania  on  3  February  1998
   against a decision of Judge Peter Herbert OBE sitting  at  Hendon  on  18
   July. The appellant left Albania, according to the Home Office summary of
   his movements, on 12 February 2014 for Milan  and  was  not  recorded  as
   returning there; but on his case, following the declaration  of  a  blood
   feud in March 2015, he arrived here on 22 April last  year  by  lorry  in
   this country from the port of D?rres, and it was  on  23  April  that  he
   claimed asylum.  The Home Office eventually got around to  refusing  that
   claim on 20 January this year.


2. The appellant gave an  account  of  his  own  movements  in  his  witness
   statement, and at paragraph 69 he mentions that his brother had  returned
   to Albania from 10 to 19 June last year. However, when the judge came  to
   sum  up  the  appellant's  case  at  paragraph  7  of  his  decision,  he
   unfortunately misread that as referring to the appellant himself, and  in
   his conclusions at paragraph 23 he went  on  to  say  this:  "The  travel
   patterns of the appellant himself showed that he has left and  re-entered
   Albania since 2013 and that strongly suggests that it is  not  an  active
   feud."

3. In the face of that conclusion it is quite clear that the  judge's  error
   of fact on the appellant's movements was a material one,  and  Mr  Norton
   does not suggest otherwise.  The decision will have to be remade.   There
   will be a fresh hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  not  before  Judge
   Herbert.

Appeal allowed: decision to be re-made
Fresh first-tier hearing, not before Judge Herbert

                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)


