
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01453/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 March 2018                              |On 8 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  NH (Iraq)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Radford, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge  Gribble  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  3  August  2017)
    allowing the claimant's appeal  on  the  basis  that  (a)  he  did  not
    originate from the autonomous Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) - but that  he
    originated from Kirkuk, a contested area adjacent to the IKR - and  (b)
    his point of return was therefore going to be Baghdad,  where,  due  to
    his particular profile (which included being from  a  minority  Kurdish
    community, being unable to speak Arabic, and being unlikely to be  able
    to obtain a CSID) he would probably face a  real  risk  of  destitution
    amounting to serious harm, contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 2. A member of the Specialist Appeals Team  settled  detailed  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Ground 1 was that the starting point for
    considering the claimant's prospective return to  Iraq  was  erroneous.
    Although the claimant said that he had lived in Kirkuk for a period  of
    time, it was clear that he originated from Bazyan which is  located  in
    the Governate of Sulaymaniyah, which in  turn  is  located  within  the
    autonomous  Iraqi  Kurdish  region  (IKR).   Given  that  the  claimant
    originated from the IKR, his direct return  to  IKR  should  have  been
    considered.

 3. While this error was relied upon by all sides, any findings of fact had
    to be based on the correct premise, and to uphold  this  decision  that
    was factually incorrect would amount to a material mistake of fact  and
    a procedural irregularity.  The concession was made in  error,  arising
    from  a  misunderstanding  about  the  area  from  which  the  claimant
    originated.  Fairness required that the matter of  internal  relocation
    should be properly decided.

 4. Ground 2 was that the statement in the refusal letter, at page 10, that
    Bazyan was in a contested area was contradicted  by  the  statement  at
    page 9 of the refusal letter that the Bazyan was not (my emphasis) in a
    contested area.  Accordingly, the Judge should have  satisfied  himself
    as to whether the claimant's home was in a contested area or not.   The
    evidence showed that Bazyan did not fall into any identified  contested
    area: see paragraph 1.2.1 of the Country Policy & Information  Note  on
    Iraq: Security and Humanitarian Situation (March 2017).

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission to Appeal

 5. On  3  November  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Easterman  refused
    permission to appeal for the reasons set out below:

         The grounds sought to argue that, notwithstanding that there was an
         agreed position in relation to the  claimant's  origin  in  Iraq  -
         which was that the claimant came  from  a  contested  area  -  that
         concession by SSHD was in fact wrong, and as a result the  decision
         itself, and the conclusions about internal relocation, were flawed.
          The Presenting Officer was given time to consult with  the  Senior
         Case Worker and the claimant's representative, and they produced an
         agreed position, which  included  that  the  claimant  was  from  a
         contested area and would have to be returned first to Baghdad:  "In
         my view it cannot be an error of law for  a  Judge  in  adversarial
         proceedings to accept an agreed position by the parties, even if it
         subsequently  transpires  that  they  were  or  one  of  them   was
         mistaken."

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

 6. In a renewed application for permission to the Upper Tribunal, a member
    of the Specialist Appeals Team  submitted  that  in  the  interests  of
    justice, the correct factual basis of any  appeal  should  be  properly
    ascertained in making findings of  fact.   The  principle  of  fairness
    extended to all  parties.   Had  the  same  error  worked  against  the
    claimant, the Tribunal would have sought to correct that, even  if  the
    position had been agreed upon.

 7. On 20 December 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons: "The Judge proceeded on the  basis
    that the [claimant]  comes  from  a  contested  area,  whilst  this  is
    arguably not the case.  The concession made by the Secretary  of  State
    was  arguably  based  on  erroneous  facts,  arguably  giving  rise  to
    procedural unfairness."

Relevant Background

The Relevant Country Guidance on the return of Iraqi nationals from the IKR

 8. In AA (Article 15C) Iraq [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  drew  a
    sharp distinction between the autonomous Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) and
    the remaining territory of Iraq.   References  to  "Iraq"  were  to  be
    treated as references to the  territory  of  Iraq  excluding  the  IKR,
    unless otherwise stated.

 9. In A1 of the headnote guidance, the Tribunal held  that  there  was  at
    present a state of internal armed conflict in  certain  parts  of  Iraq
    (but not in certain parts of the IKR - see above), involving Government
    security forces, militias of various  kinds,  and  the  Islamist  group
    known as ISIL.  The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called
    "contested areas", comprising the Governates of Ambar, Diyala,  Kirkuk,
    (aka Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-Din, was such  that,  as  a  general
    matter, there were substantial grounds for believing that any  civilian
    returned there, solely on account of his or her presence there, faced a
    real risk of being subjected to indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to
    serious harm within the scope  of  Article  15C  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.

10. At B5 of the headnote guidance, the Tribunal said that  the  return  of
    former residents of the IKR would be to the IKR, and all  other  Iraqis
    would be returned to Baghdad.

11. At section E of the headnote  guidance,  the  Tribunal  said  that  the
    Secretary of State would only return an Iraqi national (P) to  the  IKR
    if P originated from the IKR and P's identity had been pre-cleared with
    the IKR authorities.  The authorities in the IKR did not require  P  to
    have an expired or current passport, or laissez passer.   The  IKR  was
    virtually violence-free, and there was no Article 15C risk for ordinary
    civilians in the IKR.

12. In AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944,  the  Court  of  Appeal  amended  the
    guidance given by the Tribunal in 2015, but the  guidance  cited  above
    remained undisturbed.

The Claimant's Material History

13. The claimant is a national of Iraq, whose date of birth is  [  ]  1992.
    He was born and brought up in the village of Bazyan, which  is  in  the
    Sulaymaniyah Governate.  His claim was that  he  had  lived  in  Bazyan
    until 2012 when he says that he and the rest of his family left because
    of problems with his girlfriend's family.  They  had  moved  to  Allawa
    Mahmud, outside Kirkuk. Allawa Mahmud was not in the IKR  (Decision  of
    Judge Butler, paragraph 17). Two years later ISIL came to the area, and
    the family moved into Kirkuk "for their own safety" (Decision of  Judge
    Butler, paragraph 3).  In Kirkuk, he and his cousin were threatened  by
    people in the Islamic group; and so they fled from  Kirkuk  on  30  May
    2015, and made their way to Europe, via Turkey.

The Stance taken in the Decision Letter

14. On 2 February  2016,  the  SSHD  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    claimant's protection claim.  His account of his  claimed  problems  in
    Iraq was not  accepted,  as  he  had  given  a  contradictory  account.
    Initially he said that he had run away  from  the  village  because  of
    ISIL, but he then changed his account to  say  that  he  had  left  the
    village due to problems with his girlfriend's family.

15. On the related issues of internal relocation and the prospective  point
    of return, the refusal letter was muddled and contradictory.

16. At the top of page 9, the case  worker  referred  to  the  claimant  as
    originating from Baqert, rather than from Bazyan, and asserted that  he
    had not demonstrated a genuine objective  fear  of  return  to  Baqert,
    which was an area of Iraq to which he could reasonably relocate. At the
    bottom of page 9, the case worker stated that the claimant was  Kurdish
    and from Bazyan, which was not a "contested" region of Iraq.  The  case
    worker then quoted A1 of AA, and commented as follows: "Owing to  this,
    it is not considered to be sustainable to argue  that  you  can  safely
    return to Bazyan."  At page 11 of the refusal decision, the case worker
    asserted that the claimant was a Kurd, "who does  not  originate"  from
    the IKR.

The Decision of Judge Butler

17. The claimant's appeal against the refusal of his protection  and  human
    rights claims came  before  Judge  Butler  sitting  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 26 August 2016.  Both parties were legally represented.  In
    his subsequent decision, Judge Butler held that the claimant was not  a
    genuine refugee.  His account was inconsistent, and he believed that it
    was a fabrication. He did not have a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    from ISIL or from his girlfriend's family, or from religious groups  in
    Kirkuk.  He found that it would  be  reasonable  for  the  claimant  to
    relocate to the IKR.  There was no reason why he could  not  return  to
    Bazyan, as it was not true that he had had problems in Bayzan with  his
    girlfriend's family. There was no evidence that  his  parents  were  no
    longer alive and so could not support him in Bayzan.

The Application for Permission to  Appeal  against  the  Decision  of  Judge
Butler

18. On 6 October 2016,  the  claimant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of Judge Butler, arguing that the Judge had  erred
    in law in finding that the claimant could  relocate  to  IKR  and  that
    there was no reason that he could not return to  Bazyan.   His  finding
    was unreasonable, as AA had held that only those formerly from the  IKR
    would be returned to the IKR, and all other Iraqis would be returned to
    Baghdad.  The claimant was not originally from IKR.  The  finding  that
    he could return to Bazyan was an error of law.



The Grant of Permission to Appeal from the Decision of Judge Butler

19. On 20  October  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Froom  granted  the
    claimant permission to appeal, as the Judge appeared to  have  assessed
    internal flight on the basis that the claimant was from  either  Bazyan
    or Kirkuk, "both of which are  in  contested  areas  according  to  the
    Country Guidance."

The Rules 24 Response

20. On 17 November 2016, a member of the Specialist Appeals Team settled  a
    Rule 24 Response opposing the appeal, as the  SSHD's  refusal  did  not
    accept that Bazyan was in a contested area. He pleaded that  the  Judge
    had properly considered that the claimant could relocate to the IKR and
    that the Judge had applied AA correctly.

The Decision of the Upper Tribunal

21. Following an error of law hearing at Field House on  30  January  2017,
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss gave his reasons for finding an  error
    of law in a decision promulgated on 8 February 2017.  The first  reason
    was that he was satisfied that both Kirkuk (where the claimant had gone
    to settle) and the village of Bazyan (where the  claimant  was  brought
    up) were contested areas. Judge Juss set the decision of  Judge  Butler
    aside, and remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, Judge Gribble

22. Both  parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Gribble.   Ms
    Rutherford appeared on behalf of the claimant, and Ms Houghton appeared
    on behalf of  the  SSHD.  Paragraph  [8]  of  the  subsequent  decision
    contains an account of how the agreed position was arrived at.

23. Before the hearing was called on, Ms Houghton asked for a  short  break
    to consult with a Senior Case Worker and with Ms Rutherford.  When  the
    case was called on, Ms Rutherford put forward an agreed  position  that
    the sole extant issue was the question of internal relocation as  Judge
    Butler's adverse credibility findings were not  challenged.  She  noted
    the confusion in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  on  the  issue  of
    internal relocation.  Ms Houghton acknowledged that the letter conceded
    that the claimant was from a contested area and that  return  would  be
    first to Baghdad.  The Judge asked the representatives to confirm  that
    the issue was return to Baghdad, and then onwards. The  representatives
    agreed that this was the issue.

24. I have consulted the Judge's typed record of proceedings  in  order  to
    see whether this throws  further  light  on  the  reasoning  behind  Ms
    Houghton's concession. She is recorded by the Judge as  conceding  that
    the claimant was from a contested area and conceding that  the  refusal
    "jumps re place of relocation".  She conceded that relocation would  be
    to Baghdad "on basis it is Kirkuk he is from."





The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

25. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms  Brockleby-Weller  developed  the  arguments  advanced  in  the
    permission application.  I took her through the procedural history, and
    invited her to comment.  She submitted that Counsel for  the  appellant
    had inadvertently misled the Tribunal when applying for  permission  to
    appeal  from  the  decision  of  Judge  Butler.   In   her   permission
    application, she had asserted wrongly that the claimant  was  not  from
    the IKR and was therefore not returnable to the IKR.

26. Ms Radford referred me to E&R [2004] EWCA Civ 49,  and  submitted  that
    the requirements for setting aside a  decision  on  the  grounds  of  a
    mistake of fact were not met on the particular facts of this case,  not
    least because the SSHD was responsible  for  the  asserted  error.   In
    addition, it was not clear that the error was  material,  as  the  Home
    Office had suspended returns to Erbil last year, and hence  someone  in
    the claimant's position would have to be returned via  Baghdad  in  any
    event.

Discussion

27. At paragraph [66] of E&R, the Court of Appeal said:

         In our view, the time has now come to accept that a mistake of fact
         giving rise to unfairness is a separate head  of  challenge  in  an
         appeal on a point of law, at least in a statutory context where the
         parties share an interest in cooperating  to  achieve  the  correct
         result.  Asylum law is undoubtedly such an area.   Without  seeking
         to lay down a precise code, the ordinary requirements for a finding
         of unfairness are apparent from the above analysis of CICB.  First,
         there must have been a mistake as to an existing fact, including  a
         mistake as to the availability of evidence on a particular  matter.
         Secondly, the fact or evidence must have been "established", in the
         sense  that  it  was  uncontentious  and  objectively   verifiable.
         Thirdly, the  appellant  (or  his  advisers)  must  not  have  been
         responsible for the  mistake.   Fourthly,  the  mistake  must  have
         played a material (not necessarily decisive) part in the Tribunal's
         reasoning.

28. Having considered all the relevant material which is before  me,  I  am
    persuaded that three out of the four  requirements  identified  by  the
    Court of Appeal are made out.

Mistake of Fact

29. I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that until now both  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal  have  laboured  under  the
    fundamental  misconception that the claimant's village of origin is  or
    was at all material times in a contested area; and that it is in  Iraq,
    as opposed to being in the IKR.

30. The true position is objectively verifiable by consulting a  map  which
    shows Bayzan's close proximity to the city  of  Sulaymaniyah,  and  the
    fact that it is on  the  eastern  side  of  the  boundary  between  the
    Governate of Sulaymaniyah - which is one of the three governates of the
    IKR (see paragraph [112] of AA) - and the Governate  of  Kirkuk,  which
    lies to the West.

31. The mistake of fact can be traced back to the refusal decision.  It was
    initially correctly stated that Bazyan was not in a contested area. The
    case worker then quoted the Headnote Guidance  of  AA  at  A1  for  the
    contrary proposition. Although it is clear from the maps  produced  for
    this appeal to the Upper Tribunal that Bazyan is not located within the
    same governate as Kirkuk, the case worker appears to have decided  that
    it was, and hence that not only was it in a contested area, but it  was
    also by definition not within the IKR.

Whether Mistake of fact established

32. Ms Radford queried whether the mistake of fact  could  be  said  to  be
    "established". I accept that the extrinsic evidence relied  on  by  the
    SSHD to show that Bayzan is in the IKR dates from March  2017,  and  so
    there is the theoretical possibility that boundaries have shifted since
    February 2016. But this appears to me to be fanciful. The same  applies
    with even greater force  to  the  question  of  whether  Bayzan  was  a
    contested area in the past. It is clear from AA  that  the  "contested"
    area designation only applies to certain areas  within  Iraq  excluding
    the IKR. The Governate of Sulaymaniyah was peaceful in 2015,  according
    to AA, and so - unless Bayzan was not in the Governate of  Sulaymaniyah
    in 2015 - Bayzan cannot have been  in  a  contested  area  in  2015  or
    subsequently.

Whether Mistake of fact material to the outcome

33. The mistake of fact was clearly material to the outcome as, subject  to
    his identity being pre-cleared with the IKR authorities,  there  is  no
    reason to suppose that the claimant will face destitution amounting  to
    Article 3 ECHR harm in the event of a direct return to the IKR.

Responsibility for the Error

34. The difficulty for the SSHD is that not only is she responsible for the
    original error, but she must also carry the primary responsibility  for
    this error being carried forward to, and adopted by, the Upper Tribunal
    in the appeal against the decision of Judge Butler.  For example,  when
    granting permission to appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Butler,
    Judge Froom held that Bazyan was a  contested  area  according  to  the
    Country Guidance.  This was erroneous in law, but the error of law  was
    not corrected in the Rule 24 response.  Reliance was simply  placed  on
    the fact that at one point in the refusal letter the  case  worker  had
    said that Bazyan was not a contested area.  This was not  good  enough.
    Evidence ought to have been presented  at  the  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal  before  Judge  Juss  that  Bazyan  was  in  the  Sulaymaniyah
    Governate, and not in one of the contested areas identified  in  A1  of
    the Headnote Guidance in AA.

35. It was not too late to withdraw the  concession  made  in  the  refusal
    letter at the re-hearing before Judge Gribble.  But not only was it not
    withdrawn, but a fresh  concession  was  made.  In  the  light  of  the
    decision of  the  claimant's  representative  not  to  "challenge"  the
    adverse credibility findings of Judge Butler, the  logical  consequence
    was that the claimant had not given a credible explanation for him  and
    his family leaving Bayzan and relocating to  Kirkuk.  He  had  admitted
    that they had  not  left  Bayzan  because  of  ISIL  and  Judge  Butler
    disbelieved his claim that they had left because of problems  with  his
    girlfriend's family. It was for that reason  that  he  found  that  the
    claimant could return  to  his  parents  in  Bayzan.  Nonetheless,  the
    Presenting Officer conceded  that  the  claimant  and  his  family  had
    decamped to Kirkuk, and the claimant gave unchallenged evidence  before
    Judge Gribble that he had been issued with a CSID in Kirkuk,  which  he
    had left behind in Kirkuk in the former family home there.

36. There is a duty on all parties  to  co-operate  with  the  Tribunal  in
    achieving a just outcome. But there is no evidence that the  claimant's
    representatives  had  superior  knowledge  to  that   of   the   SSHD's
    representatives. The simple fact is that nobody on either  side  looked
    at a map to check whether the case worker in  the  refusal  letter  was
    correct to treat Bayzan as (a) not being in the IKR or (b) as being  in
    a contested area within Iraq. Since the  concession  was  made  by  the
    SSHD, the primary responsibility for checking the concession  lay  with
    the SSHD, especially as the  contradictions  inherent  in  the  refusal
    letter alerted the reasonable reader to the distinct  possibility  that
    the concession was misconceived.

37. Thus  the  SSHD  is  responsible  for  the  fact  that  the  claimant's
    protection claim has been consistently assessed on the basis  that  the
    only viable point of return is that of Baghdad, and it is not suggested
    that Judge Gribble erred in law in finding that the claimant would face
    a real risk of Article 3 harm in that eventuality.

38. Since the SSHD is responsible for the claimant's protection claim being
    assessed on a mistaken basis which works to the  claimant's  advantage,
    there is no material unfairness in the outcome of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the SSHD.  Failure to comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 3 March 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
