
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01330/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 13 November 2018                 |On 27th November 2018                    |
|                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                 Miss P D K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Revill (of Counsel), instructed by MTC & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in June 1989.  She
arrived in this country on 4 June 2009 as a Tier 4 (General) Student under
a visa granted on 19 May 2009.  Her leave was extended twice to expire on
22 May 2014 but was then curtailed on 21 September 2012.  An application
for further leave to remain on 28 March 2013 was refused on 12 April 2013.
An application for a further extension of her student visa was refused on
24 October 2014.  The appellant applied for asylum on 18 January 2015.  It
is the refusal of that application on 13 January 2018 that gives rise to
the appeal proceedings herein.

2.   The appellant claimed to be in a relationship with a Tamil man in Sri
Lanka (R) from 2007 to 2008.  She was detained in March 2009 by the Sri
Lankan Army and questioned on suspicion of helping the LTTE and was
informed for the first time that her ex-boyfriend had been a member of the
LTTE and that his name was RK.  The appellant, while admitting her
relationship with RK, denied any involvement in or knowledge of his
political activities but she claimed that she had been detained, beaten and
raped and escaped after her father paid a bribe.  She entered the UK in
June 2009 on her own passport using a student visa.  Since she had been in
the UK the authorities had visited her family home in Sri Lanka on several
occasions to search for her.  She had not returned to Sri Lanka since 2009.

3.   The respondent did not accept the appellant's account.  She had not
provided any evidence of her claimed relationship with R/RK and had been
unable to get evidence from her mother in Sri Lanka to confirm matters.  No
medical evidence had been provided to support her claims of ill-treatment
or the claim that she had attended demonstrations critical of the Sri
Lankan government.  The respondent noted the delay in making her
application for asylum in the light of Section 8 of the Asylum and
Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  The respondent did
not consider that the appellant had given a reasonable explanation for the
delay.  In the light of GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]
the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant had a fear of
persecution upon her return as she did not fall into any of the risk
categories.  There were no very significant obstacles to her integration
into Sri Lanka and there were no exceptional circumstances. The appellant's
Article 8 claims were also refused.  Her medical condition did not reach
the threshold in N v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]
UKHL 31.

4.   The appellant's appeal came before a First-tier Judge where the
appellant was represented by Miss Revill, who appears before me.  Having
clarified the issues on the appeal, the judge confirms in paragraph 15 that
she had taken into account the appellant's evidence and the oral
submissions from both representatives prior to reaching his decision and
that she had also taken into account the documents that she lists in
paragraph 16 including the appellant's bundle and medical documents and
Miss Revill's skeleton argument.  The judge correctly addressed herself on
the burden and standard of proof by reference to R v Secretary of State, ex
parte Sivakumaran [1988] AC 958 and observed: "Each part of the evidence
must be looked at separately and given such weight as it merits.
Thereafter all the subjective and objective evidence should be considered
together as a whole, prior to coming to a conclusion."

5.   The judge's conclusions in relation to credibility are set out as
follows:

"52. Although no submission was made by Ms Revill to this effect, I accept
that the appellant is a vulnerable witness (given her mental health issues)
and accordingly I am mindful of the guidance with regard to the benefit of
the doubt.

53.  In KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 552 (IAC) it was held that in
assessing the credibility of an asylum claim, the principle of the benefit
of the doubt ('PBOD'), as discussed in paragraphs 203 and 204 of the 1979
UNHCR Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status,
is not to be regarded as a rule of law and adds nothing of substance to the
lower standard of proof.  What is involved is simply no more than an
acceptance that in respect of every asserted fact when there is doubt, the
lower standard entails that it should not be rejected and should rather
continue to be kept in mind as a possibility at least until the end when
the question of risk is posed in relation to the evidence in the round.

54.  I have found that the appellant has not shown (even on the lower
standard) that she had a relationship with someone who was perceived as an
LTTE member.  I accept that the appellant's account of her detention was a
detailed one and this was not challenged by the respondent.  However, I
have also noted that the Medico-Legal report does not support the
appellant's account of her detention as the scars identified as obtained
during that detention do not tie in with the appellant's account of her
physical treatment during that detention.  I do not draw any adverse
conclusions from the appellant's refusal to have a genital examination.

55.  If, as she maintained, the appellant had been released from detention
due to bribery, she would risk being stopped at the airport.  The appellant
said her parents instructed an agent to help her leave the country yet the
appellant's evidence as to how she left Sri Lanka was inconsistent and I do
not accept her account of the agent and the Buddhist monk.  The appellant
left Sri Lanka on her own passport and on a student visa.  That visa would
have been obtained after the appellant was released from detention.  This
puts in question the credibility of her account of the detention and the
reason for any such detention.

56.  I also note that the appellant did not provide any external evidence
of the visits of the Sri Lankan authorities to her home in 2012 and
thereafter.  The appellant is in regular contact with her mother who could
have provided a letter/statement to confirm the visits.  The appellant said
whilst her mother might shelter the appellant from the details of such
visits she would tell her uncle (with whom the appellant lives in the UK).
This in itself is a plausible explanation however, it would have been
relatively easy for the appellant to ask her uncle (with whom she lives) to
give evidence orally or by a statement, on this point.  The fact that this
was not done does impact on the appellant's credibility.  I also note that
this case was originally listed for hearing in February 2018 but was
adjourned to allow the appellant to obtain the Medico-Legal Report.  There
would have been time to also obtain evidence from her mother and/or uncle.

57.  I did not find the appellant to be a credible witness on several
matters even allowing for the benefit of the doubt."

6.   In relation to Section 8 the judge, again having correctly addressed
herself on the law, found the appellant's oral evidence to be inconsistent
and it was not explained why the appellant had waited until 2015 before
applying for asylum.  She found that the appellant's behaviour impacted
adversely on her credibility.  In paragraph 62 the judge states as follows:

"62. I have considered all the evidence presented in the round.  I have
found that the appellant's account of her links to an LTTE member; her
detention and of her fear of persecution is not credible (see Credibility
above).  I also find that the appellant has not shown on the lower standard
of proof that there would be a serious risk of persecution upon return to
Sri Lanka."

7.   In relation to the claim based on being at risk of committing suicide
the judge found as follows:

"64. The risk of suicide can engage Article 3.  In Pretty v UK [2002] 35
EHRR 1 it was said that suicide is self-evidently a type of serious harm
and, if the evidence established that removal would expose a person to a
real risk of committing suicide on return, then such a removal decision
could give rise to a breach of Article 3.  In N (Kenya) [2004] UKIAT 00053
the Tribunal concluded that there would need to be the clearest possible
evidence of such real risk which would not otherwise be preventable by
appropriate medical supervision both on the part of the UK and having
regard to facilities which might reasonably be expected to exist in the
country of destination.

65.  The Medico-Legal Report presented by the appellant stated that the
appellant was not at immediate risk of suicide but in the event of removal
she would need urgent reassessment of such risk.  I do not find this to be
the clear evidence required in order to engage Article 3 (N (Kenya)).  It
may be that such a reassessment would result in providing such evidence but
that was not available at this stage.  Further, the Tribunal was not
presented with any objective evidence of the facilities available with
regard to mental health care in Sri Lanka.  However, I note that the
appellant had suffered from mental health issues from a young age and had
made suicide attempts while she was in Sri Lanka, prior to her allegations
with regard to her detention.  This would suggest that she had previously
had access to some form of medical care at that stage.  The appellant's
claim under Article 3 on this ground does not succeed."

8.   The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

9.   Miss Revill settled the grounds and it was argued that the judge had
not had regard to the medico-legal report from Dr Corbett when holding
matters against the appellant, which was contrary to the approach in
Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367 at
paragraph 24, in which Miss Revill highlighted the penultimate sentence in
relation to expert reports, which reads as follows: "What, however, they
can offer, is a factual context in which it may be necessary for the fact
finder to survey the allegations placed before him; and such context may
prove a crucial aid to the decision whether or not to accept the truth of
them."  In paragraph 5 of the grounds it was also argued that there was no
indication that the judge had had regard to paragraph 15 of the Joint
Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and
sensitive appellant guidance ("the guidance note"), which required the
Tribunal to consider the extent to which the vulnerability or sensitivity
of the witness was an element of any discrepancy or lack of clarity.  It
was acknowledged that the judge had noted at paragraph 52 of the decision
that the appellant was a vulnerable witness.  The judge had erred in
asserting in paragraph 52 that no submissions had been made about the
matter when the very point had been raised at paragraphs 5 and 6 of Miss
Revill's skeleton argument.  It was also argued that the judge had erred in
paragraph 55 in stating: "If, as she maintained, the appellant had been
released from detention due to bribery, she would risk being stopped at the
airport."  This was contrary to the country guidance in GJ at paragraph 146
- expert evidence had been given that it was indeed possible for wanted
persons to arrange safe passage on their own passports.  The appellant's
skeleton argument had cited the relevant passages from GJ and MM (Sri
Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 36.  Insofar as the appellant's ability to leave on
her own passport had been treated as undermining her claim to be of adverse
interest, this was a material error of law.

10.  It was argued that the judge had erred in rejecting the appellant's
account of being assisted to leave by a Buddhist monk on the grounds that
this was inconsistent with objective evidence as to the usual security
measures at airports.  The judge had erred in failing to consider this in
the context of the evidence of widespread bribery and corruption in Sri
Lanka.

11.  The grounds were considered by the First-tier Tribunal and it was
found arguable that the judge had erred in the consideration of the
likelihood of the appellant being apprehended at the airport in the light
of GJ and others.

12.  A response was filed on 23 October 2018 in which it was argued that
the appellant's grounds amounted to a disagreement with the detailed
decision of the First-tier Judge and it was clear that the First-tier Judge
had viewed the appellant as a vulnerable witness and it was not necessary
to state within every paragraph that she had taken into account the
appellant's mental health issues.  In any event, the judge had fully
considered the report of Dr Corbett in paragraphs 42 - 51. It had been open
to the judge to find that the appellant's account had been inconsistent and
she had not fallen foul of the principles in Mibanga.  In relation to the
point that the appellant had left Sri Lanka on her own passport, while it
was accepted that GJ confirmed that a person was able to leave Sri Lanka on
their own passport notwithstanding adverse interest in them, the judge had
not made such a finding in isolation.  The judge had found that there had
been inconsistent evidence regarding who had assisted her in leaving the
airport and it had been open to the judge to take such factors into account
as undermining the appellant's credibility with regard to her detention.

13.  At the hearing Miss Revill submitted that the First-tier Judge had not
limited the grounds of appeal.  The judge had referred to the appellant's
oral evidence in paragraphs 30 to 41.  These findings had been made before
consideration of the medical report in paragraphs 42 to 51.  The reference
to the appellant being a vulnerable witness was made in paragraph 52, which
was after a finding made in paragraph 46 as well as the earlier findings.
The judge had cited the guidelines but it did not mean that they had been
applied.  There had been an error of law in relation to the appellant
leaving the airport, as had been conceded in the response.  The appeal
should be remitted for a fresh hearing.

14.  Ms Pal submitted that there was no material error of law in the
decision.  The judge had considered the appellant as a vulnerable witness
and had given her the benefit of the doubt.  It made no difference if the
references to the medical report were set out before or after the findings
of fact.  The judge had taken into account the appellant's vulnerability
when assessing credibility.  Her approach had not been contrary to Mibanga.
 She had noted in paragraph 54 that the medico-legal report did not support
the appellant's account of her detention as the scars identified did not
tie in with the appellant's account of her physical treatment during that
detention.  The appellant would not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka and
it was submitted that the judge had not materially erred in referring to
the risk of being stopped at the airport.  The judge had found that the
appellant's account had been inconsistent and had rejected the evidence of
the agent and the Buddhist monk.  The judge had further found that the
appellant lacked credibility and noted the lack of evidence of the claimed
visits of the Sri Lankan authorities to the appellant's home in paragraph
56 of the decision.  The judge had taken into account all the evidence
before her and there was no material error of law.

15.  Counsel submitted that the credibility findings did not all come after
paragraph 52 where reference had been made to the guidance in relation to
vulnerable witnesses.  Numerous findings had been made before that.  Giving
an appellant the benefit of the doubt applied to all cases.  The judge's
findings were perverse.

16.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I have
carefully considered all the material before me.  I remind myself that I
can only interfere with the judge's decision if it was flawed in law.

17.  In my view the judge's decision was a fully reasoned one in which she
set out her approach properly and directed herself correctly on legal
matters by reference to the leading authorities.  She confirms in paragraph
16 that she had taken into account the material before her, which included
the medico-legal report and the appellant's skeleton argument.  She also
refers to taking into account the oral submissions made.  As I have set out
above, she reminds herself to consider all the subjective and objective
evidence together as a whole prior to coming to a conclusion.  I reject the
complaint that the judge made her findings in a vacuum or otherwise fell
foul of the well-known principles in Mibanga. In that case a "structural
failing" was identified by Buxton LJ at paragraph 30 of the judgment:

      "...The adjudicator's failing was that she artificially separated the
medical evidence from the rest of the evidence and reached conclusions as
to credibility without reference to that medical evidence; and then, no
doubt inevitably on that premise, found that the medical evidence was of no
assistance to her. ..."

     There is no such failing in this case. It is quite plain that the
judge was well aware of the appellant's vulnerability as well as the
medical evidence and the order in which she set out her reasoning and
findings does not indicate any flaw in her approach. I reject the argument
that the judge cited the guidance on vulnerability but failed to apply it
conscientiously and correctly.

18.  In relation to the appellant's untroubled departure from Sri Lanka, as
is pointed out in the response, the judge had other reasons for rejecting
the appellant's account.  She had found the appellant's evidence to be
inconsistent and she rejected the claimed involvement of an agent and a
Buddhist monk. For the reasons given on behalf of the respondent I do not
find that what the judge said in paragraph 55 of her decision to be a
material error in the context of this case.

19.  The determination is fully and carefully reasoned. Despite the
arguments persuasively put forward by Ms Revill I am not satisfied that the
judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility was perverse or otherwise
materially flawed in law.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons I have given the appeal is dismissed and the decision of
the First-tier Judge shall stand.

I consider it appropriate to make an anonymity order in this case.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.



Signed                                  Date 20 November 2018


Judge Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
















