

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/01325/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th June 2019                       |On 25th June 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DISTRICT JUDGE MCGINTY SITTING AS A
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                      mr Abdulrahman Salih Abdulrahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin (counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S J Clarke promulgated on 9th April 2019  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's asylum and human rights appeals.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq who was born on 5th February  1991.
    The Appellant's case was that his father was a  member  of  the  Ba'ath
    Party and he had been targeted and killed because of that and  that  he
    and the family remained at risk of reprisal.  The Appellant claimed  it
    was either the Shia militia or the Kurdish  militia  who  targeted  his
    family and himself.  The Appellant claimed that his whole  family  were
    killed and as a result he went to live with a man who was  not  related
    to him, but whom he called 'uncle' and he lived in a village which  had
    15 to 45 houses. He had then been taken to Mala Abdulla to  fight,  but
    fled after one day fearing that he would be killed and  had  then  been
    advised to flee the country and join his brother abroad.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the oral evidence and  witness
    statements made by the Appellant and also the  oral  evidence  from  Ms
    Farid, but did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness.

 4. In looking first  at  the  asylum  appeal  the  judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant had said in his screening interview that he came to the UK to
    apply for asylum 'to see his brother'. He was asked to briefly  explain
    all the reasons why he could not return to his country and he said that
    he did not have anyone left in Iraq and came to join his brother as  he
    is the only family he had.  The rest of the family he said died from an
    explosion and if returned he did not know what  would  happen  to  him.
    The box to be filled in remained largely empty and the judge found that
    had his father been a member of the Ba'ath Party and  had  he  and  his
    family been targeted as a result, the Appellant  would  have  mentioned
    this at first instance.  The Appellant said at the hearing he  was  not
    asked, but the question is clear. The judge stated  "I  find  the  late
    claim in the asylum interview is an establishment and  had  the  father
    been part of the Ba'ath Party, the brother would have given evidence to
    confirm the same, but he was not called to give evidence."   The  judge
    found  that  the  Appellant  gave  vague  details  about  his  father's
    involvement and his father being active as claimed.  She found  it  was
    unlikely that the other  villagers  would  have  not  known  about  the
    involvement. The judge stated that even if she was  wrong  the  country
    guidance showed that since 2008 the issue of assassinations  of  former
    Ba'ath Party members has been minimal and it   was  not  likely  anyone
    would  be  targeted  solely  with  reference  to  a  former   Ba'athist
    association, given everyone employed by the previous regime had to be a
    member of the Ba'ath Party.

 5. The judge went on at paragraph 13 to say that at the  asylum  interview
    the Appellant said that his parents had died in 2003 or  2004  when  he
    was 11 or 12 years old, because they were shelled, but he did not  know
    if it was by ISIS or the Ba'ath Party as he was very young at the time.
    She found the account accorded with  a  well-known  battle  which  took
    place in April 2013 and found that it is likely  that  his  father  has
    died simply as being a result of a casualty of war, rather  than  being
    targeted.  She said she did not find all of  the  family  members  were
    killed as claimed because the brother was not called to  give  evidence
    to confirm what he knew about what happened.

 6. The judge went on to consider the Appellant's case  that  he  had  been
    forced to join a battle when he  was  taken  to  a  place  called  Mala
    Abdulla to fight ISIS and he was given a gun but no training  and  then
    fled after one day.  The judge at paragraph 15  found  the  Appellant's
    case is that he left Iraq in the summer  of  2014  and  the  background
    evidence showed the Peshmerga continued to advance and take the village
    of Mala Abdullah from ISIS in March 2015,  much  later  than  when  the
    Appellant claims he fled.  She did not find the Appellant a credible or
    a reliable witness and did not accept he was engaged in any fighting as
    claimed.

 7. The judge then went on to consider, having not accepted the core of the
    Appellant's asylum claim, the extent to which he could be returned,  if
    at all, to Iraq and the judge starting  at  paragraph  16  went  on  to
    consider there whether or not the Appellant  had  a  CSID  card  and/or
    Iraqi nationality certificate.  The judge in paragraph  16  found  that
    the Appellant was  asked  about  his  ID  card  and  Iraqi  nationality
    certificate and he said in his screening interview  that  his  passport
    had been taken by an agent in Turkey, but that he could get his ID  and
    certificate 'later'.  The judge stated:

         "In the asylum interview he said that he had his personal status ID
         card as well as his Iraqi  nationality  certificate  in  Iraq,  and
         tried to distance himself from his earlier answer by saying he  has
         not seen those documents, they were last shown to him when  he  was
         10 or 11 years old, and he came to the UK without the documents and
         had difficulty with the consulate.  I consider this in the round."

 8. At paragraph 18 the judge went on to consider the risk  on  return  and
    found:

         "I find the Appellant has in his possession his ID and  certificate
         and he brought these with him.  I find the Appellant is fully aware
         of where and how to  claim  asylum  and  has  shown  his  expertise
         travelling around Europe.  The aim of coming to the UK was to  join
         his brother.  I place weight  upon  the  answer  in  the  screening
         interview which is that he can get his  documents  later.   I  find
         that these documents are in the UK and he brought them with him."

 9. The judge then went on to find that even if she was wrong  (this  is  a
    finding in the alternative to the primary finding  that  the  Appellant
    did have his CSID and Iraqi nationality certificate  with  him  in  the
    UK), then he had a brother who could obtain documents for him by  proxy
    as a male member of the family.   The  judge  said  she  placed  little
    weight upon the trip to the embassy with Ms Farid given that  she  came
    from the law firm but also said that the Appellant  presented  a  self-
    serving claim to the embassy that he had not got any documents.

10. The judge found that the Appellant had travelled with his  ID  and  his
    CSID and retained them, but said that even if she is  wrong  she  would
    look at whether or not he  could  obtain  the  necessary  documents  to
    return to his country and found that  the  Appellant  she  found  could
    obtain the documents through his brother at the CSA office in  Baghdad.



11. Permission to appeal in  this  case  has  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew on 1st May 2019 who found it  was  arguable  that
    the judge did not follow the guidance given in the Court of Appeal case
    of AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 in relation to the  obtaining  by  the
    Appellant of a CSID.

12. In this case I have been assisted greatly by having detailed Grounds of
    Appeal submitted on behalf of the Appellant prepared by  Mr  Parkin  of
    Counsel together with his helpful oral submissions today, and the  Rule
    24 reply from the Secretary of State and the helpful  submissions  made
    by Mr Bramble the Senior Home Office Presenting Officer  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.

13. Firstly it is argued by the Appellant that the judge's finding that the
    Appellant had in his  possession  a  CSID  card  or  an  Iraqi  citizen
    identity card was bizarre and irrational.  It was said not  to  be  the
    Appellant's case or indeed the Respondent's case.  It  is  argued  that
    the Appellant had believed during  the  screening  interview  he  could
    obtain documentation, which is said to be inconsistent with him already
    having been in possession of the documents.  It is argued that what was
    relevant was not the Appellant's subjective belief  that  he  would  be
    able to obtain documentation, but  the  country  guidance  which  could
    confirm whether or not someone who  does  not  have  documentation  can
    actually obtain the  same.   The  Tribunal,  it  is  argued,  erred  in
    essentially taking the Appellant's word (or one version thereof) for it
    without consideration of the country evidence and  that  the  reasoning
    was inadequate.

14. The first ground is that the judge was wrong to find that the Appellant
    did have access to a CSID card or nationality  card  and  that  if  the
    Appellant did not have those documents then the second ground of appeal
    is that the judge has materially erred in finding the  Appellant  could
    simply obtain that documentation in Baghdad with the assistance of  his
    brother and that the Tribunal did  not  apply  the  reasoning  set  out
    within paragraph 10 of the headnote of the case of AA (Iraq) that:

         "Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P should as a
         general matter be able to obtain one from the Civil Status  Affairs
         Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi  passport  (whether
         current or expired) if P has one.   If  P  does  not  have  such  a
         passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID  may  depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family).  P's ability to persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P."

15. I note in the headnote at paragraph 11 it goes on to state:

         "P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered  if
         P is unable to go  to  the  Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring.  As a result of the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala.  The evidence does not  demonstrate  that  the
         'central archive', which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in need  of  them.   There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity.  The precise operation of this  court  is,
         however, unclear."

16. As quite properly conceded by Mr Parkin, his second  Ground  of  Appeal
    relating to the misapplication of AA is  dependent  upon  the  Tribunal
    accepting that the judge erred  in  respect  of  the  first  Ground  of
    Appeal.  Mr Parkin accepts that if the Appellant did have his CSID  and
    Iraqi nationality certificate that he would be able to go to the  Iraqi
    Embassy and obtain a passport,  but  argues  that  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant has been to the embassy with Ms Farid but not  been  able  to
    obtain one was an indication  that  he  did  not  actually  have  those
    documents.  I however note in that regard the finding made by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in that regard at paragraph 19 the judge found:

         "I place little weight upon the trip to the Embassy with  Ms  Farid
         given that she is merely a witness albeit independent  because  she
         comes from his law firm, but the Appellant presented a self-serving
         claim to the Embassy that he had not got any documents."

    The point being made by the judge was that the Appellant  had  said  he
    had not got any documents and on that basis the embassy said they could
    not give him a passport.  However, what the judge had previously  found
    in her findings was that she did not accept that the Appellant did  not
    have his CSID or Iraqi nationality certificate.

17. It is  argued  by  the  Appellant  that  the  judge's  finding  on  the
    CSID/Iraqi nationality certificate is both irrational and  inadequately
    reasoned. What the judge stated at paragraph 16 was:

         "The Appellant was asked about his ID card  and  Iraqi  nationality
         certificate and  he  said  in  his  screening  interview  that  his
         passport was taken by an agent in Turkey but he could obtain his ID
         and certificate later.  In the asylum interview he said he had  his
         personal  status  ID  card  as  well  as  his   Iraqi   nationality
         certificate in Iraq and tried to distance himself from his  earlier
         answer by saying he has not seen these documents,  they  were  last
         shown to him when he was 10 or 11 years old, and he came to the  UK
         without the documents and had difficulty  with  the  consulate.   I
         consider this in the round."

18. As stated the judge went on to find  that  the  Appellant  had  in  his
    possession the ID and certificate and he brought  them  with  him.   At
    paragraph 18 she  said  she  placed  weight  upon  the  answer  in  the
    screening interview which was that he can get his documents later.  She
    said that she found that these documents are in the UK and  he  brought
    them with him.

19. When actually one looks at what was both said in the original screening
    interview and also the substantive interview, when  asked  at  question
    1.7 and 1.8 whether there was any evidence to confirm his identity,  at
    that screening interview he said no and then went on to state in answer
    to question 1.8 "my passport the agent took from in Iraq.  I can get my
    ID and certificate later".

20. In his substantive interview when asked at question 39 when he was last
    in possession of his documents the Appellant  stated  "I  haven't  seen
    them.  All I know I had them, they were showed to me when I  was  young
    and my father and mother were alive I was 10 or 11 years old".

21. When one looks at the answers given by the Appellant in  the  interview
    obviously in order for a finding to be irrational it has to be one that
    no reasonable judge properly directing themselves could have made.  But
    in this case the  answer  that  was  given  by  the  Appellant  in  the
    screening interview as  to  the  CSID  card  and  certificate  was  "my
    passport the  agent  took  from  in  Turkey.   I  can  get  my  ID  and
    certificate later".  The judge compared that with the  answer  that  he
    gave in the substantive interview when he said that  he  had  not  seen
    those documents and they were last shown to him when he was  10  or  11
    years old and he came to the UK without them.  However,  the  Appellant
    had said "I can get my ID and certificate later".   The  Appellant  did
    not reply that he could get a replacement ID  certificate  in  Iraq  or
    through the embassy in the UK,  he  makes  specific  reference  to  the
    passport being taken from him in Turkey but him being able to  get  the
    ID and certificate later.   It  was  a  finding  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.

22. Further it is quite  clear  as  to  why  the  judge  has  reached  that
    decision.  It is adequately  reasoned,  the  reasons  are  set  out  in
    paragraph 16 through to 20 as to why the judge, having considered those
    answers by the Appellant, found the Appellant did have those  documents
    in the UK. The judge's reasons are adequate and sufficient.  In  effect
    the arguments raised by the Appellant are  simply  seeking  to  reargue
    that point and it is not a matter for the Upper Tribunal to consider re-
    arguments on the point, it is whether or not the judge made a  material
    error of law.  The judge has not made a material error of law  in  that
    regard.

23. There was no concession in the Secretary of State's  original  decision
    that he did not have documentation. The judge is not  simply  reviewing
    the decision of the Secretary of State, the judge is entitled to  reach
    her own findings upon the evidence and that is exactly what this  judge
    has done when making the findings that she made.

24. Moving on to the second Ground of Appeal.  In that regard the judge  in
    the findings in the alternative appears  not  to  have  actually  fully
    considered the question as to whether or not  the  Appellant  knew  the
    page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  reporting   the   Appellant's
    information, such that he could obtain  the  replacement  documentation
    through the Civil Status Affairs Office in Baghdad, which had been  set
    up as an alternative office for Mosul.  However, given the judge  found
    that the Appellant did have documentation, as Mr Parkin quite  properly
    conceded that ground cannot succeed in isolation.

25. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Clarke  therefore  does  not
    contain a material error of law and the judgment is upheld.

Notice of Decision

The judgment of First-tier Tribunal  Clarke  does  not  contain  a  material
error of law and  the  appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Clarke is upheld.

No anonymity was ordered by the First-tier Tribunal nor has one been  sought
before me today and therefore I do not make an  anonymity  direction  today.


Signed                                  Date 23rd June 2019
District Judge McGinty

District Judge McGinty sitting as a
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 23rd June 2019
District Judge McGinty

District Judge McGinty sitting as a
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
