








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01765/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Taylor House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2018                         |On 10th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                 Ghadeer [S]

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adebayo of A2 Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge T Jones promulgated on the 20th June  2018  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Frances on 2nd November 2018. Thus the case appeared before me to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. The grounds of appeal in the main are a disagreement with the  findings
    of fact made by the judge.

 5. The first issue taken relates to paragraph 73 the decision in which the
    judge makes adverse credibility  findings  relating  to  the  appellant
    having returned to Saudi Arabia. It  is  claimed  that  the  judge  has
    misunderstood the evidence. As an integral part of the appellant's case
    the appellant has claimed that she was in fear from a man called T.  In
    the grounds she is seeking to suggest that she was able  to  return  to
    Saudi Arabia in May 2012 to renew her visa and  then  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom because T was in the USA and by reason of that  she  was
    therefore not at risk from him. It is clearing what she is saying  that
    she is seeking to suggest that  the  problems  with  regard  to  T  had
    started prior to her  returning  to  Saudi  Arabia.  In  interview  the
    appellant had specifically claimed that the antipathy  between  herself
    and T had arisen some three months prior  to  her  returning  to  Saudi
    Arabia.

 6. However in the documentation there is  a  statement  by  the  appellant
    [marked 1 JPMc]. In that statement  the  appellant  clearly  refers  to
    returning to Saudi Arabia and  whilst  T  was  in  Saudi  Arabia  being
    introduced over the telephone to T. There the appellant refers  to  the
    fact that she told T she would be returning to the United  Kingdom  and
    he indicated he would contact her when she was in the  United  Kingdom.
    In that statement there is no suggestion at that stage of any antipathy
    between herself and T. It was only after she  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom that the problems began. That clearly is inconsistent with  the
    appellant's latest account that the only reason  she  could  return  to
    Saudi Arabia was because T was in the USA.

 7. The appellant sought to rely upon a series of Text that  she  disclosed
    to the police. The text were allegedly disclosed on 29  May  2015  when
    she made a police report. However the texts  themselves  are  dated  10
    February 2012. In those texts it is suggested that there is some threat
    from T and he was considering revenge even though he was  in  the  USA.
    Yet the appellant does not leave the United  Kingdom  to  go  to  Saudi
    Arabia until over three months later.  The  appellant  had  no  way  of
    knowing where T was at that stage and would not know whether or not  he
    was still in the USA. The point was made within the reasons for refusal
    letter.  The judge has pointed out the details and was entitled to find
    that the account was therefore inconsistent with  the  claim  that  the
    appellant she could return to Saudi Arabia without being at risk.

 8. The judge was entitled  to  conclude  in  the  circumstances  that  the
    account by the appellant was not credible.

 9. The next issue taken is with regard to paragraph 74. There the judge in
    dealing  with  the  text  messages  and  a  social  media  profile  has
    discounted the same and found the appellant's account not credible.

10. The relationship of the appellant to T had been examined in  detail  in
    the  refusal  letter  from  paragraph  27  onwards.  In  interview  the
    appellant had suggested that contact with T had been three months prior
    to May and that she had been seeking  to  sell  land  on  behalf  of  a
    friend. Why a man in Saudi Arabia should employ the appellant  to  sell
    land was open to question. When  questioned  as  to  the  name  of  the
    man/friend she was helping the appellant could not  give  any  details.
    Further the appellant could not provide any other details as to how she
    had assisted her friend in selling the land. Taking that  into  account
    the judge was entitled to find that the account was not credible.

11. The judge in making his own findings had considered that the criticisms
    of  the  appellant's  account  were  well  made.   The   details   were
    inconsistent as to when she had spoken to T, either May  or  September,
    as to what happened between her and T.

12. The appellant had claimed in a police report in the  UK  that  she  had
    spoken to T in May 2012. She had otherwise  produced  text  to  suggest
    threats in February 2012 alternatively threats and being  propositioned
    in Ramadan, which in 2012 was July or August but then claimed  to  have
    spoken to T in September 2012.

13. The judge had  pointed  out  the  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    account with regard to when  she  had  spoken  to  T,  what  they  were
    speaking about, whether there were threats. The  judge  had  considered
    the contents of the refusal letter and  had  given  valid  reasons  for
    finding challenges made were justified and that the appellant's account
    was therefore not credible. It was not a matter  of  the  judge  merely
    adopting the refusal letter but of the judge critically  examining  the
    contents finding that the points were well made and that the  appellant
    had failed to answer the points.

14. In light of the inconsistencies and the challenges made specifically as
    to when the appellant was being threatened by T, the judge was entitled
    to  find  that  other  evidence  was  wholly  inconsistent   with   the
    appellant's account of the text messages and that  therefore  he  could
    not place any weight on such.

15. The next issue taken was with regard to an allegation of rape  made  by
    the appellant and whether her parents were in the United Kingdom at the
    time that that allegation was made to the police.  There  was  evidence
    that the appellant's account  was  not  wholly  consistent  with  video
    security camera evidence and that the police otherwise considered  that
    the appellant was trickle feeding them information. It  suggested  that
    the appellant's solicitor's letter of  27  January  2017  suggest  that
    neither of the appellant's parents were in the United Kingdom but  that
    the appellant otherwise has claimed that her mother was in the UK.  The
    letter in question is pages 108 to 115 of the appellant's bundle.

16. The judge in paragraph 73 quite rightly highlighted  the  evidence  and
    the inconsistencies.

17. At the outset of the hearing Mr Adebayo  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    raised the evidence that had  been  presented  to  the  First-tier.  Mr
    Adebayo wished to argue as part  of  the  appeal  that  the  judge  had
    wrongly set out in the evidence that the appellant had stated that  her
    family owned the flat in which she and her sister lived in the UK.   It
    was the appellant's case that she had never stated that in evidence.

18. Mr Adebayo was seeking  to  check  within  the  Record  of  Proceedings
    whether there was any question put to the appellant about the ownership
    of the flat. No request had been made for a copy of the  judge's  notes
    of evidence or a transcript of the notes. Mr Adebayo did not  have  any
    notes from the representative that had been at the First-tier  hearing.
    Mr Adebayo was entirely reliant upon the appellant  claiming  that  she
    had never stated in evidence that her family owned the flat. The  judge
    in the decision had clearly on more than one  occasions  recorded  that
    the appellant had stated that the flat was owned by family members.

19. At the time of the hearing  Mr  Adebayo  did  not  have  the  notes  of
    evidence from counsel. I was unable in the hearing to establish in  the
    notes whether any question had been put to the appellant. The notes  of
    evidence require careful reading. I have been through the notes  again.
    In the notes as marked [tag 2JPMc] as series of questions  are  put  to
    the appellant. To an extent the notes would  require  transposition  by
    the Judge. However parts of it are legible:-

         Q-How long do you bel   [believe] he stay [stayed]UK

         A -I wasn't in touch. I was really fright [frightened]if ever phone
         [indecipherable-th?]  or F house ask where I was

         Q [the question above was put again]

         A I wasn't sure how long he was in UK.

         Q -where was he staying

         A In same flat- my current address

         A So family flat?

20. There is no answer  recorded  against  the  last  question  identified.
    However the judge in the decision has recorded that the  appellant  had
    said that this was a family flat. There was evidence  given  about  the
    appellant's accommodation. Without clear evidence that such  an  answer
    was not given, I have no reasons to  question  the  judge's  record  of
    evidence in the decision.

21. The judge has given reasons for finding that  the  appellant's  account
    was not credible and that the account was therefore  rejected.  In  the
    circumstances  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  nothing   more   than   a
    disagreement with the findings of fact made by the  judge.   The  judge
    has given valid reasons for finding that the appellant's account is not
    credible.

22. In light of that there is no material error in law in the  decision.  I
    therefore dismiss the appeal.

    Notice of Decision

23. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 20th December 2018



