
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA013552016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated and sent                 |
|On 19 July 2017                      |On 10 August 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    H A M
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     M   s A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Mr S Chelran, instructed by Kesar & Co (Bromley)
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision refusing him protection.

 2. The appellant is a national of Iraq, he is from  the  IKR;  he  has  no
    CSID.  Before the First-tier Tribunal it was, as I understand  it,  and
    certainly is now, accepted, that the appellant falls into the  category
    of those whose return is feasible; in this case under EU  arrangements.
    However, it is also accepted that the  present  position  is  that  the
    appellant has no CSID.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered  the
    appellant's  circumstances  in  some  detail  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant was a person who not merely had no CSID but who realistically
    would not be able to obtain it on arrival in the IKR if  removed  there
    by the Secretary of State pursuant to the arrangements that she  makes.
    It  was  urged  before  him  that  new  documentation  would   not   be
    realistically possible and that there were a number  of  reasons  which
    appeared to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  be  accepted,  including
    that he was unlikely to be able to  access  documentation.   The  judge
    accordingly found at para 52 of the determination  that  it  would  "be
    next to impossible for him to  obtain,  either  in  Iraq  or  from  the
    Embassy in the United Kingdom, his civil identity document."  The judge
    therefore concluded that the appellant would, in essence, on return, be
    a person who would not be able to function as a national of  Iraq  with
    access to  relevant  services  and  other  facilities  to  prevent  his
    destitution.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed on the ground that those facts did not,
    on the Country Guidance as it then was (forming AA (Iraq) in the  Upper
    Tribunal [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC)), did not establish that the applicant
    was  entitled  to  protection.   In  relation  to  that  guidance   the
    assumption was that the function of the CSID was to demonstrate or  its
    absence might suffice to deny the possibility of the removal  to  Iraq.
    By consent in the Court of Appeal AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  the
    Country Guidance  in  AA  was  importantly  modified  to  indicate  the
    function of a CSID not merely as one of the factors which might  enable
    a person to be returned but also as  the  crucial  factor  which  might
    enable him to function as a national on return.  The  Court  of  Appeal
    observed that the function of the CSID was to open various doors to the
    applicant's life in Iraq and  that  an  analysis  of  the  prospect  of
    destitution, which would  be  ill  treatment  contrary  to  article  3,
    required an analysis at the time of decision-making in this country  of
    the prospect of obtaining a CSID within a reasonable time - for example
    within a reasonable time after any funds provided by the  Secretary  of
    State to the returnee ran out.

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been found to be  erroneous
    in law for failure to follow the Country Guidance as  it  was.   As  it
    happens, and as  Ms  Holmes  in  this  case  has  indicated  as  rather
    difficult to oppose, the judge's findings appear to have complied  with
    the method of enquiry now required by the Country Guidance  as  it  now
    is.

 5. For those reasons it seems to me that this appeal falls to be  allowed.
    The original determination having been set aside on the basis that  the
    findings of fact in it did not merit the decision, I now  substitute  a
    determination allowing the appeal on the basis  that  the  findings  of
    fact at the First-tier Tribunal did merit the decision.

 6. I say no more  than  that,  because  it  may  be  that  a  more  mature
    consideration in other cases may raise different issues, but so far  as
    this appeal is concerned it is allowed on article 3 grounds.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 28 July 2017
