
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/01096/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool Employment         |             Decision & Reasons       |
|Tribunals                             |Promulgated                           |
|On 7th February 2018                  |             On 5th March 2018        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                  Mr T M O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Harrison (Senior HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge T Thorne, promulgated on 4th April 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Manchester  on  3rd  March  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Eritrea,  and  was  born  on  1st
    January 1990.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State refusing his claim for asylum and  for  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395  by  a  decision  dated  19th
    January 2017.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he was born in Barentu in  Eritrea.   The
    authorities visited his family home twice to try and call  him  up  for
    military service.  On both occasions he was not at home.   After  their
    last failed attempt he exited the country illegally  in  October  2010.
    He travelled to Sudan where he lived for five years.  In about 2015  he
    travelled from Sudan to Libya.  He stayed one  month.   From  there  he
    travelled by boat to Italy.  He stayed for ten days.  He then travelled
    to France.  He was there for five days.  From France he came to the  UK
    hidden in a lorry.  He arrived in  the  UK  on  8th  October  2015  and
    claimed asylum upon arrival.  He now fears that if returned to  Eritrea
    he will face ill-treatment and persecution by the state authorities.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to the basis  for  refusal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  This largely rested upon the answers  that  the  Appellant  had
    given during his asylum interview.   For  example,  he  was  unable  to
    answer questions about military service in Eritrea.  He wrongly  stated
    that Zoba Anseba River runs through Barentu.  He said that the  closest
    villages to Barentu were Dassie,  which  was  in  fact  an  island  400
    kilometres away.  He said Gogne and Barentu were 22 kilometres away but
    did not know in which direction.  He gave inconsistent  evidence  about
    what he did in Eritrea.  He said he looked after cattle.   However,  he
    also said that "all  he  did  was  plough"  (see  paragraph  9  of  the
    determination).  He wrongly stated that the rainy season  was  in  June
    and July.  He did not know what the Eritrean festival of Expo was.   He
    thought that the Buna ceremony was conducted in Eritrea when in fact it
    was conducted in Ethiopia.  He did not  know  the  nearest  airport  in
    Barentu.  Finally, and in addition, he repeatedly refused to  undertake
    a language analysis test to support his claim that he was from Eritrea.

 5. At the hearing before Judge Thorne, the Appellant's Counsel produced  a
    letter from his solicitors dated 16th  February  2017  (which  repeated
    what the Appellant had said at paragraph 12 of his  witness  statement)
    that he was not averse to taking a language analysis test, having  just
    been advised by his solicitors to do so (paragraph 27).

 6. The judge did not accept that the Appellant was  an  Eritrean  national
    from Eritrea.  Full account was taken by  the  judge  of  his  lack  of
    education and the explanations he gave.  However, he  had  (a)  wrongly
    described Asmara and Sawa as port towns; (b) wrongly stated  that  Sawa
    was in the Anseba Region; and (c) was unable to answer questions  about
    military service in Eritrea.  (See paragraph 53 of the  determination).
    It  was  also  observed  by  the  judge  that  he  had  considered  the
    Appellant's explanations "that at various stages he did in fact  answer
    the questions correctly but  they  were  misrecorded  and/or  that  the
    interpreter failed to interpret properly" (paragraph 54), but the judge
    was unpersuaded.  The judge held that the Appellant had stayed for five
    years in Sudan but was unable to answer questions in  relation  to  the
    river that  ran  through  Kassala  and  the  nearby  towns  of  Kassala
    (paragraph 55).  Moreover, the  Appellant  had  repeatedly  refused  to
    undertake a language analysis test to support his  claim  that  he  was
    from Eritrea (paragraph 56).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application rely  upon  the  case  of  JA  (Afghanistan)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 450 and assert that the judge failed to apply  "anxious
    scrutiny" to his assessment of the risk  to  the  Appellant.   He  also
    failed to assess the potential scope for misunderstandings  that  arose
    in the Appellant's account.  In particular, the judge failed to  adhere
    to the guidance provided in JA (Afghanistan).  He  also  unfairly  held
    against  the  Appellant's  purported  refusal  to  undergo  a  language
    analysis.

 8. On 10th October 2017, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal for two reasons.  First,  that  the  judge  failed  to  attach
    sufficient importance to the Appellant's  solicitor's  letter  of  16th
    February 2017 which stated that, upon the Appellant taking advice  from
    his solicitors, he was now willing  and  able  to  undergo  a  language
    analysis.  Second, that the explanations provided  in  the  Appellant's
    witness statement, with respect to the alleged discrepancies, had  been
    overlooked.

 9. On 31st October 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that there was no merit in the grounds
    of application which amounted merely to a disagreement with the adverse
    outcome of the Appellant's appeal.

The Hearing

 1. At the hearing before  me  on  7th  February  2018  the  Appellant  was
    represented by  Mr  M  Karnik,  of  Counsel,  and  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr C Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer.



 2. In his submissions before me, Mr  Karnik  stated  that  the  judge  had
    failed to apply the guidance in JA (Afghanistan) insofar as  that  case
    emphasised the distinction between oral evidence and written  evidence,
    the latter stating the position in  black  and  white,  and  much  more
    cogently, than oral evidence might do.

 3. Second, in short paragraphs, the judge had  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    claim, on the basis of adverse credibility findings  against  him,  but
    these findings were essentially  little  more  than  what  the  refusal
    letter had already stated, but with respect to which the Appellant  had
    offered credible explanations, which the determination failed  to  take
    into account properly.  Thus, at paragraph 53, it was stated  that  the
    Appellant had a lack of knowledge of Eritrea which  led  the  judge  to
    believe that he was not from Eritrea, but which grew  essentially  from
    matters that the Secretary of  State  had  already  identified  in  the
    refusal  letter.   At  paragraph  54,  the  judge  stated  that  having
    considered the explanations provided by the Appellant, as emphasised by
    Mr  Karnik  of  Counsel  before  him,  he  would  still   "reject   his
    explanations".  Thereafter, at paragraph 56,  the  judge  decides  that
    because the Appellant had refused to undertake a language analysis test
    he could not be Eritrean.  However, there was confusion as  to  whether
    the Appellant did actually refuse.  But in any event, by the time  that
    he had taken advice from his solicitors,  it  had  been  made  entirely
    clear that he was more than  willing  to  take  the  test.   Mr  Karnik
    submitted that if one was  coming  from  a  country  where  one  had  a
    distrust of authority, one was not likely to accede to requests made by
    the authority for fear that these may amount to a trap, which had to be
    avoided at all costs.  The Appellant's solicitors had for  that  reason
    written on 16th February 2017 to say that the Appellant was happy  with
    the language analysis test.

 4. For his part, Mr  Harrison  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   He
    submitted that the conclusions arrived at by the  judge  were  open  to
    him.  The judge gave adequate reasons for his  findings.   The  adverse
    credibility findings were set out at paragraphs 53 to 54, but the judge
    had then gone on from paragraphs 56 to 61 to give additional reasons of
    his own, which are not based  upon  the  adverse  credibility  findings
    reached by the Secretary of State in the  refusal  letter.   Therefore,
    the judge had consistently explained throughout the  determination  why
    the Appellant was lacking in credibility.

 5. In reply, Mr Karnik submitted that the judge had erred  in  failing  to
    accept the letter from the Appellant's Eritrean community (at  page  17
    of the bundle) confirming that he was Eritrean.  If they thought he was
    Ethiopian they would never have supported him  in  the  way  that  they
    purported to do in this letter.  In the same way, the letter  from  the
    Appellant's solicitor of 16th February 2017, which  confirms  what  the
    Appellant had himself stated in his witness statement from paragraph 12
    onwards, had been overlooked.  Insofar as the judge had gone on to give
    further reasons from paragraphs 56 to 61 of the  determination,  having
    earlier concluded that the Appellant was  lacking  in  credibility,  at
    paragraphs 53 to 54, this could not suggest that his decision to  adopt
    the conclusions of the refusal letter, had  not  infected  the  way  in
    which he had approached the matter from paragraphs 56 to 61.

Error of Law

 6. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error of law such that I should set aside the decision
    and re-make the decision.  My reasons are as follows.

 7. First, the judge did have his attention drawn to the solicitor's letter
    of 16th February 2017, but states that "it made no reference to  A  and
    there  was  no  clue  as  to  which  asylum  claim   it   related   to.
    Unsurprisingly it was not on the Home Office file" (paragraph 27).   It
    goes on to say that "it contained a series of disagreements" (paragraph
    27).  The letter of  16th  February  2017,  however,  is  from  Broudie
    Jackson Canter (solicitors).  It states that, "but  it  was  the  first
    opportunity our client has had to have had the contents of  his  asylum
    interview transcript read back to him via  an  interpreter".   It  ends
    with the  statement  that  they  would  wish  to  "highlight  that  the
    Appellant is willing to undertake a language analysis test  should  the
    Respondent want to still take this approach.   We  reiterate  that  the
    delay in bringing these matters to your attention were through no fault
    of the Appellant".  It is trite that the Appellant is entitled to legal
    representation in a  case  which  involves  the  exercise  of  "anxious
    scrutiny" and  raises  serious  human  rights  concerns  and  those  of
    protection under the Refugee Convention.

 8.  In the light of this letter of 16th February 2017, the judge erred  in
    the conclusion that, "the credibility of his  claim  to  be  a  genuine
    citizen of Eritrea is  undermined  by  the  fact  that  in  his  A1  he
    repeatedly refused to undertake a language analysis test to support his
    claim that he was from Eritrea" (paragraph 56).  In  cross-examination,
    the judge records the Appellant's answer which was that, "my memory  is
    that I was asked whether I wanted the  interview  recorded  not  for  a
    language test" (paragraph 56).

 9. Whatever the position, the fact  remains  that  the  Appellant,  having
    taken legal advice  from  specialist  solicitors,  was  now  more  than
    willing to have a language analysis undertaken.   Had  the  Appellant's
    proficiency in the Tigrinya language then been assessed,  with  respect
    to his claim that he was from Eritrea, this could have made a  material
    difference to his claim that he was from Eritrea.

10. Second, the explanations given by the Appellant  with  respect  to  the
    answers  that  arose  in  the  interview  are   arguably   not   simple
    disagreements.  The letter of 16th February sets  these  out.   I  have
    also looked at the Appellant's witness statement  (at  pages  1  to  9)
    dated 1st March 2017.  In this the Appellant (at pages 3 to  5)  refers
    to the questions read back to him.  For example, at  question  38,  the
    Appellant explains that he said "Bun" and not  "Buna".   He  also  said
    that "Suwa" is drunk  too.   At  question  63,  he  explains  that  the
    festival is celebrated in Asmara, although he had never been to Asmara.
     He did not say that he had no knowledge of it.  At question  64,  with
    respect to the Eritrean ID card, he had described  the  colour  of  the
    card, the contents he had said were written in Tigrinya and Arabic, but
    he did not go into any further detail regarding what  is  contained  in
    the ID.  Otherwise, he explains he would have said that it contains the
    full name, date of birth, place of birth, date  of  issue,  occupation,
    and a photo of the ID holder.  At question 19, he had explained that he
    did not have documents such as an Eritrean ID, but he did have a  birth
    certificate.  At question 29, he had said that Sawa is found  in  Gash-
    Barka Region, and not Anseba Region.  At question 31 he had  said  that
    there are no rivers that run through Barentu, but the nearest river  is
    Gash River.

11. Where he was not clear about the  question  being  asked,  such  as  at
    question 33, he had told the interpreter that he did not understand it.
     At question 35 he had said that Fenkel is celebrated on 10th February,
    and it marks the freedom of Massawa, and this was  a  major  fight  for
    independence.  Insofar as there was confusion about the Appellant being
    unable to name the nearest airport, he explains at question 36 that the
    interpreter never used  the  word  "port"  and  he  instead  asked  the
    Appellant about the nearest "airport", and  that  is  why  his  answers
    referred to airports.  In relation to his marriage, the  Appellant  had
    at question 44 stated that his marriage was  not  registered  with  the
    local administration, but it was a family arranged marriage,  and  they
    had a cultural ceremony.

12. He was asked about directions of a town, and he explained  at  question
    88, that he was not educated and was not good at  directions.   He  did
    not say he did not know.  One rather significant issue is that  of  the
    Appellant's work in Eritrea.  The judge states that, "at one point,  he
    said that he looked after cattle but he also said that all he  did  was
    plough" (paragraph 9).  The interview notes, however,  do  not  suggest
    that this is the case.

13. When he was asked at question 80, how he is aware of the  animals  that
    they had on the farm, he explains, "normally I help my  father  and  we
    plough land during winter" (paragraph 80).  He did  not  say  that  all
    that he did was plough the land.  It is also not the case that  he  did
    not know the dialling codes.  When he is asked at question 70 what  the
    dialling code for Sudan is, he explains it is  "249"  at  question  70.
    When he is asked what the dialling code for  Barentu  is,  he  explains
    that it is "291" (at question 71).  When he is asked  about  what  work
    experience he has, he answers "farming" (at question 12).

10. To conclude, it does seem that, given that "anxious scrutiny" has to be
    applied here, the combination of the  Tribunal  failing  to  take  into
    account a clear offer on the part  of  the  Appellant  to  undertake  a
    language test in the letter of 16th February 2017 from his  solicitors,
    which was the first opportunity that they had to go through his  asylum
    interview transcript with the aid of  an  interpreter,  with  him;  and
    secondly, the construction put on the answers that he gave  during  the
    interview answers in themselves (which one assumes must have  been  the
    reason which led the solicitors acting for him to immediately  on  16th
    February 2017 suggest that the proper course of action for him  was  to
    offer himself forward for a language analysis test)  means  that  there
    has been an error of law here.  Both sides agreed that in  this  event,
    because the effect of the error had been to deprive a party before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  of  an  opportunity  for  the
    party's case to be put and considered by the Tribunal,  that  I  should
    remit the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2(a).

Re-making the Decision

11. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent that  it  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge  other
    than Judge T Thorne, under Practice Statement 7.2(a).

12. An anonymity direction is made.

13. This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th February 2018
