

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/01566/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 4 December 2017                    |          On 19 December 2017         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, counsel employed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because this is a protection case and there is invariably a  risk  in  cases
of this kind that publicity will itself create a danger to the appellant.

This is an appeal by a citizen of Iran, who is a young person  born  in  the
year 2000, against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  to
recognise him as a refugee.

This is a case where credibility probably goes to  the  very  heart  of  the
case and the First-tier Tribunal Judge has disbelieved  the  witness.   Many
reasons are given for disbelieving the witness.  Some  of  them  are  better
than others.

My concern is that there  are  two  clear  errors  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge.

At paragraph 33 of his decision the Judge refers to a  Mr  Zawie,  who,  the
respondent noted, could not be identified as a person involved with the KDP-
I in Erbil.  The judge said:

  "I find it noteworthy that despite the appellant being  in  contact  with
  the KDP-I that no-one has addressed this issue  to  verify  that  such  a
  person exists or is associated with the organisation which I find  to  be
  damaging to the appellant's credibility."

The difficulty with this criticism is that the point was addressed.  It  was
addressed in the bundle provided by the appellant, who has  given  at  least
three examples of  a  person  purporting  to  be  Mr  Zawie  being  involved
prominently with the KDP-I precisely as the  appellant  has  alleged.   This
documentary evidence is of a kind which might be credible and the judge  has
taken a point that is  just  not  sustainable.   It  is  necessary  to  look
carefully at that supporting evidence and either give a  proper  reason  for
disregarding it or to deal with the case on  the  basis  that  Mr  Zawie  is
indeed involved with the KDP-I as alleged.

The other mistake is at paragraph 30 where the judge says:

  "The appellant indicated that the party headquarters was in Koya  whereas
  Mr Seyedi indicated that the party did not have any official presence  in
  Iran itself.  I find this to be a discrepancy in the evidence before me."



I agree with Mr Hodson that this only makes sense if the judge thought  that
Koya was in Iran but Koya is not in Iran.  Koya is near to Erbil in Iraq.

It follows that the  judge  has  given  two  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
appellant that just do not stand up.  Credibility findings have to  be  made
on an  evaluation  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole.  In  my  judgements  the
consequence of these errors is  that  the  adverse  credibility  finding  is
damaged.  Mr Hodson fairly and wisely did not suggest that this was  a  case
that had to succeed.  It is a case that needs a  thorough,  lawful  analysis
of the evidence and sound findings on credibility. Regrettably that  is  not
what has not happened in this case.

It follows therefore that  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal and I direct that  the  case  be  heard  again  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
and I direct that the appeal be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.







|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 18 December 2017              |
|Judge                                |                                     |






