
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01876/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th April 2019                            |On 24th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   mr s m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter has a lengthy history and previously last came  before  the
    Upper Tribunal sitting at Liverpool on 22nd February 2018  when  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan on hearing an appeal against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd dated 23rd May 2017 found  that  the
    judge's decision involved the making of the material error of  law  and
    gave directions for the continuation of the matter.

 2. It is relevant to note that the Appellant is a national of Ethiopia and
    is of Oromo ethnic origin.  He  had  previously  given  an  account  of
    having come to the adverse attention of the Ethiopian authorities.  The
    first occasion being in 2008 when the Appellant asserted  that  he  had
    attended an OLF demonstration and had been arrested  and  detained  for
    two months.  The second occasion had been in 2014 when  he  attended  a
    further demonstration and had been recognised  by  local  police.   The
    Appellant had asserted that he hid in a relative's  house  for  fifteen
    days before leaving Ethiopia in May 2014 and thereafter  the  Appellant
    spent time in other countries before arriving  in  the  UK  in  October
    2015.  Following his claim for asylum his application  was  refused  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 9th February 2016.

 3. The appeal was heard on 12th May  2017  and  the  Appellant  gave  oral
    evidence and relied upon certain photographic evidence  of  his  having
    attended demonstrations in the United Kingdom in support of  the  Oromo
    cause.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal finding that
    the Appellant's account of his activities for the OLF and  having  come
    to the adverse attention of the Ethiopian authorities was untrue.

 4. Having been granted permission to appeal  the  hearing  as  to  whether
    there was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge came as stated above before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    O'Ryan.  Judge O'Ryan in a very lengthy error  of  law  set  aside  the
    judge's decision and ruled that the matter did not need to be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  However before remaking  the  decision  he
    indicated that further findings needed to be  made/further  documentary
    evidence required in relation to the following issues

      i)  has  the  Appellant  in   fact   been   photographed   at   public
         demonstrations with the person's he alleges?  Evidence  as  to  the
         identity of such persons, and their political profile, would be  of
         assistance.

     ii) Has there, in fact, been any material  published  online  regarding
         the Appellant's activities?

    iii) Is there any further evidence  as  to  the  Ethiopian  authorities'
         current practice of direct monitoring of  political  activities  in
         the diaspora, in the UK in particular?

 5. Having heard the submissions and made such findings  it  was  incumbent
    that the appeal be brought back  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Ryan.  His decision finding a material error of law dates  from  26th
    June 2018.  For reasons totally unknown to  me  and  to  the  advocates
    attending before me this matter has been listed before me and not Judge
    O'Ryan.  However I am advised that it is now some nine months since the
    error of law hearing and I am urged by both legal  representatives  not
    to adjourn it.  I consequently agreed to rehear the matter but in doing
    so I asked the parties, and  in  particular  Mr  Schwenk,  to  take  me
    through the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  the  basis
    upon which Judge O'Ryan set aside the decision so that I am at least up
    to speed in being able to understand the position that we have  reached
    and to answer the outstanding questions  which  need  to  be  addressed
    before the decision could be remade.

 6. It is on that basis that  this  appeal  now  proceeds.   The  Appellant
    appears by his instructed Counsel Mr Schwenk.  Mr Schwenk is  extremely
    familiar with this matter.  He has appeared previously and he  is  also
    the author of a most helpful skeleton argument.  The Secretary of State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer  Mr  Tan.   Judge  O'Ryan
    granted the Appellant anonymity.  No application is made to  vary  that
    order and none is made and  the  anonymity  direction  will  remain  in
    place.

The Evidence And The Issues

 7. I am advised that there are  two  bundles  of  evidence,  the  original
    consolidated bundle and a supplemental bundle  and  in  addition  I  am
    drawn to the Appellant's skeleton argument  dated  22nd  January  2019.
    The issue that I have to address centre very  much  on  the  sur  place
    activities engaged in by  the  Appellant  and  thereafter  having  made
    findings on that point to make an assessment of the Appellant's risk on
    return.

Evidence

 8. The Appellant attended and  gave  oral  testimony.   He  confirmed  and
    adopted his previous witness statements.  Mr Schwenk took  him  through
    photographs that had been produced in particular photographs which were
    identified of being of Dr Bersisa Berri who I understand is the  leader
    of the OMF in the UK.  The Appellant gave evidence that the  photograph
    of him taken with Dr Berri was at a fundraising event in Bolton.

 9. The Appellant was cross-examined by Mr Tan.  Mr Tan took the  Appellant
    to a letter dated 1st October 2016 from Dr  Berri  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's application for asylum.   The  Appellant  advised  that  he
    obtained  the  letter  having  since  arriving  in  the  UK   following
    participating in  community  events  and  attended  demonstrations  and
    meetings and consequently continued to give support.  He  advises  that
    he approach Dr Berri and asked him to produce it.  There are of  course
    produced to me two letters and whilst they are very similar  in  nature
    there is some minor  discrepancies  within  them  with  regard  to  the
    Appellant having purportedly been arrested attending a demonstration in
    2014.  It is the Appellant's response to Mr Tan that he too spotted the
    discrepancy and that  the  second  letter  was  written  following  his
    request that Dr Berri amends the letter so as a  correct  and  accurate
    picture is produced.  He advises that all requests for this  were  done
    by telephone.  Further the appellant in evidence complains  photographs
    taken with Mr Safiri who is the chair of the OMF.

10. Thereafter the Appellant  gave  evidence  with  regard  to  information
    provided in his second witness statement with regard to his ID card and
    by his brother.  I did point out at this stage in the cross-examination
    that  I  was  not  rehearing  the  whole  case  but  that  this  was  a
    continuation.  Evidence was given by  way  of  explanation  as  to  the
    differing dates on the ID card compared to the Appellant's testimony as
    to when he left Ethiopia.  His evidence was that the  date  on  the  ID
    card was wrong and that he definitely left in  May  2014.   He  further
    emphasised that he only relied on the ID card in  order  to  prove  his
    identity.

11. Mr Tan turned  to  the  issue  with  regard  to  any  difficulties  the
    Appellant may experience on return and the contention  that  the  Oromo
    broadcasting network is no longer banned in  Ethiopia.   The  Appellant
    advises that whilst the network may not be banned any  suggestion  that
    there be a studio or office for the organisation is and  that  he  does
    not accept Mr Tan's submission that the OLF  is  no  longer  "a  banned
    organisation."

12. The Appellant had a witness Mr F W who gave evidence on his behalf  and
    confirmed his witness statement of 11th October 2016.  Mr F W confirmed
    that the picture produced in the photograph was one  of  Dr  Berri  and
    that it was taken at a demonstration.  The Appellant's witness  advised
    that he had been granted refugee status in May 2016 and that he had not
    returned to Ethiopia.  Mr Tan  in  cross-examination  enquired  of  the
    witness as to whether anyone he knew had returned to Ethiopia  and  the
    witness indicated that so far as he was aware no one  had  and  in  his
    belief it is not  true  to  say  that  the  OLF  is  no  longer  banned
    particularly bearing in mind that its leaders remain detained.

Submissions

13. Mr Tan relied on the credibility findings of Mr O'Ryan and  that  these
    are reinforced by the discrepancies noted in the Appellant's  ID  card.
    He further contends that  the  inconsistency  of  the  content  of  the
    letters of Dr Berri do not assist the  Appellant's  case  and  that  no
    credible explanation to the inconsistencies  have  been  provided.   He
    points out that the directions of Judge O'Ryan indicated that any other
    documents that were appropriate should be produced but  that  the  only
    evidence that has been produced  is  that  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    witness and that the Tribunal should view the risk  on  return  in  the
    current situation context.  He submits that no evidence has been  given
    to show that there is a change in the  Ethiopian  authorities  to  show
    that they would have any interest in the Appellant as a member  of  the
    OLF and that since Spring 2018 there has been an Oramo  Prime  Minister
    elected, that there has been a lifting of the ban on the OLF  and  that
    this has also been  covered  in  the  foreign  policy  of  the  country
    culminating in peace with Eritrea.  He submits that none of the factors
    that were relevant in the country guidance authority of  MB  (Ethiopia)
    [2007] CG UKAIT 00300 are now applicable.

14. However he notes that the Appellant still contends that he would be  at
    risk.  He refers me to the expert's report of Dr Trueman  2017  and  to
    the evidence provided by the Appellant in  his  interviews  which  show
    that he has not been harassed in the manner that his brother  was.   He
    submits that there is no evidence that the authorities would  have  any
    interest in him or his family despite  his  sur  place  activities  and
    therefore he submits he would not be at risk on  return.   He  contends
    that the arrest made at demonstrations were due more to violence rather
    than being members of the OLF.   He  re-emphasises  that  Ethiopia  has
    changed substantially and that even if MB were to be held  to  be  good
    law he is someone who has no issues in Ethiopia and  would  not  be  at
    risk.

15. Mr Schwenk takes me to his skeleton argument and submits  firstly  that
    it is appropriate to apply country guidance and that it is  appropriate
    if it is to be disapplied that there are strong grounds produced  along
    with supporting evidence that there has  been  a  durable  change.   He
    submits that there has been nothing produced by the Secretary of  State
    merely a reference to an article which actually assists the  Appellant.
    He submits that there is insufficient evidence for me  to  depart  from
    country guidance and that in fact to do so without good reason would be
    an error of law.

16. I note the BBC article to be found at  page  38  of  the  supplementary
    bundle submitting that any change that has taken place is  not  durable
    and consequently it is appropriate to follow MB (Ethiopia).  Further he
    submits that there has not been a lot of challenge  to  the  sur  place
    activities of the Appellant by the Secretary of State and  consequently
    the question is will he be at risk on return.  He submits that he  will
    be and that the Appellant has been accepted as having been at the front
    of demonstrations, held  banners  and  seen  in  company  of  prominent
    people.  He submits he meets the relatively low standard of  proof  and
    the core of his account is that he is an active opponent of the  regime
    who has  been  seen  in  the  company  of  activists  and  consequently
    following country guidance he is at risk on return.   He  asked  me  to
    allow the appeal.

Country Guidance

17. The Appellant relies on MB  (Ethiopia)  [2007]  CG  UKAIT  00300.   The
    headnote states

         "(1) As at February 2007, the situation in Ethiopia is  such  that,
             in general:-


             (a)  Oromo Liberation Front members and sympathisers;


             (b)  persons perceived to be OLF members or sympathisers; and


             (c)  members of the Maccaa Tulema Association;


             will, on return, be at real risk if they fall within the scope
             of paragraph (2) or (3) below.


         (2)  OLF members and sympathisers and those specifically  perceived
             by the authorities to be such members or sympathisers will  in
             general be at real risk if they have been previously  arrested
             or detained on suspicion of  OLF  involvement.   So  too  will
             those  who  have  a  significant   history,   known   to   the
             authorities, of OLF membership or sympathy.  Whether any  such
             persons are to be excluded from  recognition  as  refugees  or
             from the grant of humanitarian protection by reason  of  armed
             activities may need to be addressed in particular cases."


Findings

18. I start by reminding  myself  the  position  in  which  this  case  had
    reached.  I am not holding a complete rehearing of this  matter.   This
    is merely a continuance.  The starting point I turn to  the  additional
    questions that Judge O'Ryan considered necessary to be answered.

      1)  Has  the  Appellant  in   fact   been   photographed   at   public
         demonstrations with the persons he alleges?

      2) The answer to this question is yes he has  and  reasons  have  been
         given for the photographs and I make a finding that the photographs
         are genuine and that the Appellant has  been  photographed  in  the
         company of Dr Berri and Mr Safiri.

19. Secondly, the  question  was  has  there  in  fact  been  any  material
    published  online  regarding  the  Appellant's  UK  activities.   I  am
    referred to the supplementary  bundle,  extracts  from  YouTube  videos
    showing the Appellant at demonstrations are produced therein along with
    a verbal message expressed on behalf of Oromo youth.   Those  materials
    are unchallenged.  I accept the submissions made  by  Mr  Schwenk  that
    additional evidence has been provided.

20. Finally the question is  is  there  any  further  evidence  as  to  the
    Ethiopian  authorities  current  practise  of  direct   monitoring   of
    political activities in the diaspora, in the UK in particular?  This is
    addressed by Mr Schwenk in his skeleton argument.  Whilst I accept that
    there has been a change in leadership  in  Ethiopia  and  a  change  of
    foreign policy there is nothing to produce  to  me  to  show  that  the
    background evidence which demonstrates to the standard of a  reasonable
    likelihood that the Appellant's activities are likely to have  come  to
    the attention of the Ethiopian authorities no longer exists.

21. Consequently I am satisfied that  all  the  questions  posed  by  Judge
    O'Ryan are answered in the affirmative and that the submission made  by
    Mr Schwenk that the Appellant's core  account  that  he  is  an  active
    opponent of the regime who has been seen in  company  of  activists  is
    backed up by evidence which has been produced to the Tribunal  to  show
    that the Appellant meets the relatively low standard of  proof.   As  a
    result there being no evidence to the contrary the view expressed in MB
    (Ethiopia) particularly at headnote number two as  an  OLF  member  and
    sympathiser  would  mean  the  Appellant  would  be  perceived  by  the
    authorities to be a member and sympathiser who will in  general  be  at
    real risk.  The Appellant produces evidence of being sympathetic to the
    OLF cause.  I am satisfied that to the  lower  standard  of  proof  the
    Appellant has produced evidence that is supportive of these findings.

22. These were the only issues extant before Judge O'Ryan but it  has  been
    necessary to consider a full  evaluation  of  the  evidence  previously
    reached and maintained and marrying the two  together  I  am  satisfied
    that this is an Appellant who is at its lowest level a  sympathiser  of
    the OLF, that he has been involved in sur place activities and that  he
    has been seen in photographs and videos which would identify him  as  a
    sympathiser.  To that extent I am satisfied that he would be seen as an
    active opponent of the regime and pursuant to the guidance given in  MB
    (Ethiopia) he would be at risk on return.  For all  the  above  reasons
    the Appellant's appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  on  asylum  grounds  and  pursuant  to
Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

The Appellant was previously granted anonymity by the Deputy Upper  Tribunal
Judge at the hearing of the error of law.  No application is  made  to  vary
that order and none is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 23 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made


Signed                              Date: 24 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
