

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01422/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6th February 2018                      |  On 16th February 2018          |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     SND
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. B Hawkins, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr. N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") has made an anonymity order and  for
       the avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  We  emphasise  at
       the outset that no report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the appellant.


    2. This is an appeal against a decision of FtT Judge  Obhi  promulgated
       on 25th  September  2017.   The  Judge  of  the  FtT  dismissed  the
       appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of   16th
       September 2015.


    3. At the conclusion of the hearing before us, we announced that in our
       judgement, the decision of the FtT is infected by a  material  error
       of law and the decision of the FtT Judge is set aside.  We  directed
       that the matter is to be remitted to the FtT for  hearing  de  novo.
       We said that we would give the reasons for our decision in  writing.
       This we now do.


    4. This matter has an unfortunate and lengthy history that is  set  out
       at paragraphs [1] to [3] of the decision of the FtT Judge and we  do
       not set it out in  this  decision.   For  present  purposes,  it  is
       sufficient to note that the appellant first arrived  in  the  UK  on
       17th December 2005 when she was almost 15 years of age to  join  her
       mother who had settled status in the UK.  In January 2011,  she  was
       convicted of robbery at St Albans Crown Court  and  sentenced  to  2
       years imprisonment.  A deportation Order was made against her on 7th
       December 2013.  An appeal against that decision was dismissed by the
       FtT on 8th April  2014.   On  14th  September  2014,  the  appellant
       applied to revoke the Deportation Order. On 16th  October  2014  she
       was served with a decision refusing to revoke the Deportation  Order
       and certifying her claim as  clearly  unfounded  under  s94  of  the
       Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  The  appellant  made
       various further applications on the basis of  fresh  representations
       most recently, following removal directions  issued  on  28th  March
       2015.  It was the respondent's decision of 16th  September  2015  to
       refuse to revoke the deportation order that gave rise to the  appeal
       before the FtT.


    5. A summary of the appellant's asylum claim is set out  at  paragraphs
       [4] and [5] of the decision of the FtT Judge.  We do not repeat  the
       account of events relied upon by the  appellant  in  this  decision.
       The Judge heard evidence from the appellant and that evidence is set
       out at paragraphs [12] to [15] of the decision.


    6. The findings and conclusions  of  the  Judge  are  to  be  found  at
       paragraphs [25] to [39] of the decision.  The Judge noted  that  the
       FtT had previously considered the appellant's claim that  she  is  a
       lesbian but had not found her to  be  credible  in  respect  of  her
       claimed relationship. However, at [27], the  Judge  notes  that  the
       respondent now accepts that the appellant is a lesbian and the judge
       of the FTT was satisfied that the appellant is  in  a  relationship.
       At paragraph [28],  the  Judge  notes  the  issues  before  her.  At
       paragraph [30], the Judge records that  there  is  now  overwhelming
       evidence before her that the appellant is living  openly  as  a  gay
       person in the UK. In the same paragraph the  Judge  states  "..  The
       more  difficult  question  is  whether  she  would  live  openly  in
       Zimbabwe. I do not believe that she would...". The Judge went on  to
       consider the country guidance decision of LZ (homosexuals)  Zimbabwe
       CG [2011] UKUT 00487.  At paragraph [34], the Judge concluded:


             "..If the appellant returned and lived with  her  partner,  as
             two women living together, that would not in itself give  rise
             to any assumptions on the part of  the  local  community.  The
             appellant would have to  go  out  and  publicly  announce  her
             sexuality. There is a difference about  living  openly,  which
             equates to simply living your life without  interference,  and
             taking steps to hide it. I believe that the appellant  belongs
             to the former. I also find that there would be support for her
             from organisations such as GALZ...."


    7. At paragraph [35], the Judge sets out her overall conclusions as  to
       the international protection claim:


             "Therefore, in summary, I find that the appellant  is  gay.  I
             find that she would live openly,  but  that  for  the  reasons
             given by the Tribunal in LZ that  does  not  necessarily  mean
             that she will be at a real risk of  persecution  in  Zimbabwe,
             but is a factor to be taken  into  account  I  find  that  the
             appellant will live as a homosexual but  she  is  unlikely  to
             make her sexuality a subject of open  discussion  because,  as
             the Tribunal found in LZ,  Zimbabweans  tend  not  to  discuss
             their sexuality. There is some evidence in  the  present  case
             that the appellant will not do so, as she spent many years not
             discussing it with her own family and her mother. Her  reasons
             for  not  doing  so  were  not  to  do  with  persecution  but
             disapproval. For similar reasons I do  not  believe  that  she
             will openly discuss her sexuality, but I do find that she will
             continue to live as a lesbian. Even in the case of HJ and  HT,
             Lord Hope accepted that "the fact that the applicant will  not
             be able to do in the country  of  his  nationality  everything
             that he can do openly in the country whose  protection  he  is
             seeking is not the test......the Convention was  not  directed
             to reforming the lede of rights in the country of  origin.  So
             it would be wrong to approach the issue on the basis that  the
             purpose of the Convention is to guarantee to an applicant  who
             is gay that he can live as freely  and  as  openly  as  a  gay
             person  as  he  would  be  able  to  do   it   he   were   not
             returned....the focus ...must be on what will  happen  in  the
             country of origin".


    8. The Judge then went on to address the appeal against the decision  to
       revoke the deportation order by  reference  to  the  relevant  public
       interest considerations enshrined in paragraphs 390, 390A,  398,  399
       and 399A of the immigration rules and Part 5 of  the  2002  Act.   At
       paragraphs [38] and [39] of her decision, the Judge  notes  that  she
       was not satisfied that there is a  real  risk  to  the  appellant  of
       persecution based on her sexuality and that the appellant's right  to
       a private and family life with  her  partner  over-rides  the  strong
       public interest in deportation.


The appeal before the Upper Tribunal


    9. The Appellant advanced three  grounds  of  appeal.   The  first  two
       grounds relate to the ambiguity in the decision of the Judge  as  to
       whether the appellant would live openly as a  lesbian  in  Zimbabwe,
       and if she would not live openly, the reasons for that.   The  final
       ground is that if the Judge had concluded that the  appellant  would
       'live openly' upon return, the Judge failed to consider the relevant
       risk factors that the appellant may be exposed to,  without  a  male
       partner or support from her family.


   10. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  5th  January  2018  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Blum.   The  matter  comes  before  us  to  determine
       whether the decision of the FtT contains a material  error  of  law,
       and if so, to remake the decision.


   11. At the hearing before us, Mr Hawkins accepted  that  although  there
       appears to be an inconsistency in the Judge's findings at  paragraph
       [30] and [35] of the decision as to whether the appellant would live
       openly as a lesbian in Zimbabwe, in the final analysis at  paragraph
       [35] of the decision, the Judge proceeds upon the premise  that  the
       appellant is gay and that she would live openly in Zimbabwe.


   12.  Mr Hawkins submits that in reaching her decision, the Judge  failed
       to have regard to, or  make  findings  upon  material  matters.   He
       submits that in LZ, the Tribunal considered the position of women at
       paragraphs [75] to [92] of the decision.   The  Tribunal  noted,  at
       [79], that an  economically  active  lesbian  is  at  less  risk  of
       perception as a lesbian because she is more likely  to  be  able  to
       afford to live in a low-density housing area,  and  so  to  enjoy  a
       measure of protection from public  scrutiny  of  her  lifestyle  and
       circumstances, which a woman living in a high-density  housing  area
       would not be able to enjoy.  The Tribunal recognised, at [80],  that
       the perception that a woman is a lesbian may lead to  discrimination
       or harassment from some individuals, but not generally to  violence,
       and at [81], that where a real risk of persecution or  serious  harm
       is established, the police do  not  offer  lesbians  any  sufficient
       protection.


   13. At  paragraph  [24]  of  her  decision,  the  FtT  Judge  noted  the
       submissions made on behalf of the appellant.  It was submitted  that
       an organisation such as GALZ had no teeth, and would not assist  the
       appellant in finding work or pay her bills.  The  difficulties  that
       she would face were that she was likely to live in an area  of  high
       density, so she was more likely to suffer discrimination. She had no
       family there apart from a step mother with whom she had issues.  She
       had no money. Living openly and living  in  hostility  would  create
       insurmountable obstacles, which she may be able to override  if  she
       had support and could find work, but  without  that,  she  would  be
       particularly vulnerable and would face persecution.


   14. Mr Bramble submitted that there was no evidence that  the  appellant
       could not live in Bulawayo and that it was open to the Judge, on the
       evidence, to conclude that she should not depart  from  the  Country
       Guidance set out in LZ.  He submits that the  Country  Guidance  and
       the background material establishes that there is a higher level  of
       tolerance of homosexuality within Zimbabwean society than government
       rhetoric would suggest.  He accepted, rightly in our judgement, that
       the Judge does not in her  final  analysis  take  into  account  the
       evidence of the appellant as to the obstacles that she would face.


   15. We accept that the decision in LZ and the background material  notes
       that GALZ is a long-established organisation, with  nine  affiliated
       organisations across Zimbabwe, whose existence is  tolerated.  If  a
       lesbian is willing to join the organisation (which can  be  done  on
       line without visiting Harare) GALZ is able to provide  some  support
       to her, including practical support in providing access  to  lawyers
       (through ZLHR), and to doctors and clinics which are not homophobic.
        We note however that where a real risk of  persecution  or  serious
       harm is established, the police do not offer lesbians any sufficient
       protection.


   16. In our judgement, the failure to consider the circumstances that the
       appellant would find herself in upon return to Zimbabwe is material,
       because we cannot be satisfied  that  there  is  only  one  possible
       outcome.  The error of law identified in the decision of the FtT  is
       that having found that the appellant is gay and that she would  live
       openly in Zimbabwe, the Judge failed to fully consider all  material
       factors  when   determining   whether   the   appellant's   personal
       circumstances would expose her to a  real  risk  of  persecution  in
       Zimbabwe.


   17. Acknowledging that the country guidance and background material  may
       weigh heavily against the appellant and without wishing to give  the
       appellant any false hope, we are satisfied that the Judge failed  to
       fully consider all material factors  when  determining  whether  the
       appellant's personal circumstances would expose her to a  real  risk
       of persecution in Zimbabwe, such that the decision of the FtT  Judge
       should be set aside.


    18. As to disposal, we have decided that it is appropriate to remit this
        appeal back to the FtT for hearing afresh, having taken into account
        paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement  of  25th
        September 2012.  In light of the nature of the  error  of  law,  and
        extent of  any  judicial  fact-finding  necessary,  the  appropriate
        course is to remit the matter to the FtT for re-hearing. The parties
        will be advised of the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  in
        due course.






 Notice of Decision


    19. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge  Obhi  promulgated
        on 25th September 2017 is set aside, and we remit the matter  for  a
        de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.


    20. An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 13 February 2018


Right Honourable Lord Boyd of Duncansby
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


FEE AWARD


There was no fee award by the FtT since no fee is payable.


Signed                                  Date 13 February 2018


Right Honourable Lord Boyd of Duncansby
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




