
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/01840/2018
                                                               PA/01842/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2019                      |On 6 February 2019            |
|                                        |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    D K K
                                    B K K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Khan (counsel) instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. To preserve the anonymity direction deemed necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellants.



2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Dhanji promulgated on 12 September 2018, which dismissed  the
Appellants' appeals.

Background


3. The Appellants are brother and sister. The first appellant  was  born  on
31 January 1996. The second appellant was  born  on  10  August  1999.  Both
appellants say they are nationals of DRC. On 22 January 2018  the  Secretary
of State refused the Appellants' protection claims.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Dhanji ("the Judge") dismissed the appeals  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  2  November  2018  Judge
Hollingworth granted permission to appeal stating

      At paragraph 7.7 of the decision the  Judge  did  not  find  that  the
      appellants were from the DRC as has been claimed  but  found  it  more
      likely that they were in fact  from  Angola.  The  Judge  went  on  to
      dismiss the appeals. It is arguable that the Judge should have set out
      an analysis of whether a risk arose in relation to  return  to  Angola
      given the evidence put forward as to what had taken place as  referred
      to in the permission application. It is arguable that a full  analysis
      was required in the context of concluding whether the appellants  came
      from DRC or Angola identifying  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
      evidence of the  aunt  referred  to  at  paragraph  5  the  permission
      application. At paragraph 7.5 of the decision the  Judge  states  that
      their aunt was born in the DRC based on her copy passport.  The  Judge
      states it is surprising that she did not in fact attend and gives  the
      reasons for that. It is arguable that the degree of weight attached to
      the aunt's statement required to be set out more specifically  in  the
      light of the Judge stating that her attendance at  the  hearing  would
      clearly have been helpful.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the respondent, Ms Cunha told me that the respondent now  accepts
that the decision contains a material error of law. She  told  me  that  the
Judge failed to make findings  in  relation  to  the  disappearance  of  the
appellant's stepfather and his involvement with FLEC in 2012.  In  addition,
because the Judge reached  the  conclusion  that  the  appellants  are  most
likely to be Angolan, it was for the Judge  to  assess  risk  on  return  to
Angola. The Judge did not carry out that assessment. She told me  that  that
is a material error of law and asked me to set the decision aside and  remit
this case to the First-tier Tribunal.

(b) Ms Cunha asked me to preserve the Judge's credibility  findings  between
[7.3] and [7.7] of the decision. There, the Judge finds that neither of  the
appellants is from DRC. She told me that there is  nothing  wrong  with  the
Judge's reasoning  between  [7.3]  and  [7.7]  and  argued  that  this  case
requires to be remitted solely  for  consideration  of  risk  on  return  to
Angola.

6. For the appellant's, Mr Khan  moved  both  elements  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. He agreed with Ms Cunha that the failure to assess  risk  on  return
to Angola, and the failure to make findings in relation  to  the  events  in
2012 there, are material errors of law. He argued that the Judge's  findings
in the subparagraphs at [7] of the decision are all tainted by  the  overall
errors in fact-finding. He reminded me that the  Judge  placed  emphasis  on
what was said (or not said) by the second appellant at screening  interview,
 and reminded me that at that time the second  appellant  was  a  minor.  He
argued that the Judge's findings in relation to  nationality  are  not  safe
and asked me to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal for a  new  fact-
finding exercise.

Analysis

7. In the reasons for refusal letter  the  respondent  clearly  declares  an
intention to remove the appellants to Angola. At [7.7] of the  decision  the
Judge finds that neither appellant is from the DRC,  but  that  it  is  more
likely that they are from Angola. The Judge does not consider  the  risk  on
return to Angola. The Judge summarises the evidence in 29  subparagraphs  of
section 5 of her decision; the Judge narrates  the  appellants'  claim  that
their stepfather has a political profile and that the  appellants  were  the
focus of unwelcome police interest & brutality in 2012 and 2013.

8. The absence of consideration of risk on return to Angola  is  a  material
error of law. I set the decision aside.

9. The Judge's findings of fact are brief. They are  found  in  the  seventh
section of the Judge's decision where the numbering of the subparagraphs  is
inaccurate. There is an unresolved conflict in the Judge's findings  between
[7.3] and [7.7]. The Judge does not carry out an adequate  analysis  of  the
relationship between the appellants and their aunt. The Judge does not  even
attempt to reconcile a finding that  the  appellants  and  their  aunt  have
different nationalities.

10. As a  result,  none  of  the  findings  of  fact  can  stand.  I  cannot
substitute my own  decision  because  a  further  fact-finding  exercise  is
necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

11. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

13. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Dhanji.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law.

15. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 12 September  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed
              Date 4 February 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle






