
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01410/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |On 30 March 2021                     |
|On 25 March 2021                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               S S (Zimbabwe)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Emma Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Halliday
                    Reeves Law Firm
For the respondent:    Mr Esen Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of S S who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision  of  First-tier
    Judge S Gill dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision on
    31 January 2020 to refuse her refugee status under the 1951 Convention,
    humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.

Background

 2. The appellant was born in Zimbabwe in 1979 and is  now  41  years  old.
    She is married with one daughter.  The appellant has  siblings  in  the
    United Kingdom, but it is not clear how many.

 3. In Zimbabwe, the appellant, her husband and their young daughter  lived
    in Bulawayo, where her husband had a job driving for an  NGO,  a  human
    rights organisation based in Harare, taking relief supplies by lorry to
    remote areas such as Gokwe, Binya and Tsholotsho.   The  appellant  was
    mainly a housewife, taking care of her small  daughter.   In  addition,
    she ran a second hand clothes stall, which was financially supported by
    her husband.

 4. The source of the family's troubles is said to be the  refusal  by  the
    appellant's husband to take  Zanu-PF  (government)  propaganda  to  the
    villages as well as the supplies from the  NGO  for  which  he  worked.
    Zanu-PF is the ruling party in Zimbabwe since its independence in 1980.
     In 2016, and again in 2017, the appellant's husband was  attacked  and
    beaten  for  failing  to  agree  to  take  the  propaganda  with   him.
    Initially, the appellant and her husband thought that the  2016  attack
    was 'just a mugging' as it was less severe than the  2017  attack.  The
    appellant was not present on either of these  occasions:   her  husband
    maintained his refusal.  Both attacks  were  reported  to  the  police,
    without any progress: the appellant and her husband chased  the  police
    up on the 2017 attack.

 5. On 15 January 2019, soldiers came to the family home and attacked  both
    the appellant and her husband.  There were many raids  in  Zimbabwe  in
    January 2019 in response to striking and looting caused by an  increase
    in fuel prices, but the appellant says that although neighbours of hers
    were also raided, she and her husband were singled out by reason of his
    connection with the NGO  and  his  refusal  to  carry  propaganda.  The
    soldiers threatened to 'teach her husband a lesson'.

 6. The appellant was hit on the back  of  a  head,  but  was  roused  from
    unconsciousness by hearing her daughter cry.  Her husband was abducted,
    and the appellant fled with her daughter to an agent already  known  to
    her.  The appellant did not report that attack, or the abduction of her
    husband.

 7. She stayed one night at the agent's home,  then  left  Zimbabwe  on  17
    January 2019, by car to South Africa, which took about 5 days, then  by
    scheduled flight from South Africa  to  the  Republic  of  Ireland  via
    Zurich, on a forged South African passport which bore  her  real  name.
    Her daughter travelled with her.

 8. On 27 January 2019, the appellant was encountered in  the  Republic  of
    Ireland and made an asylum  claim,  which  she  did  not  pursue.   She
    travelled on by air to the United  Kingdom  on  29  January  2019,  and
    claimed asylum two months later, on 1 March 2019.  During  March  2019,
    her husband contacted the appellant to say that he was trying to find a
    way to rejoin his family in the  United  Kingdom.   That  has  not  yet
    occurred.  There have been no enquiries about the appellant in Zimbabwe
    since she left, now more than two years ago.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 9. First-tier Judge Gill dismissed the appeal.  Her  credibility  findings
    are confusing.  It is clear that she accepted that the  husband  worked
    for the Harare-based NGO  as  claimed.  At  [55]  she  noted  that  the
    appellant and her husband did not support either  Zanu-PF  or  MDC  and
    found that the husband was not directly employed or connected with  the
    NGO for whom he drove.  Her parents, brothers, and the parents  of  her
    husband had not been threatened or pursued by the authorities since she
    left.

10. At [42], Judge Gill stated that the appellant  was  unable  to  provide
    sufficient detail of why the soldiers in 2019 would know to single  out
    her  family.   At  [43],  she  identified  an  inconsistency   in   the
    appellant's account of the 2019 attacks: having previously stated  that
    she was hit 'across the head with the back of a gun', in oral evidence,
    she said she was hit  'across  the  side  of  her  face'.   Judge  Gill
    recorded that the appellant became visibly distressed and needed  'time
    to  recompose  herself'.    She  found  that  this   (arguably   minor)
    discrepancy damaged the appellant's credibility.

11. At [44], Judge Gill appears to have treated the 2017 attack as the  one
    where the attackers  said  they  would  teach  her  husband  a  lesson,
    although at [43] she identified that as the 2019 attack.  Her  decision
    continued:

         "44. The appellant stated that she did not report [the] 2019 attack
         as 'no one was coming to help me' (AIR 73).  Given the  pattern  of
         the comments that were made to the husband on the  second  occasion
         (2017) I do not find it credible that the husband  would  not  have
         realised why he was being attacked in 2017.  Similarly, I  find  it
         odd that the couple took no  action  as  a  result  of  the  attack
         earlier.  I am not  satisfied  that  the  attack  in  2  [paragraph
         incomplete]."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

    It is unclear what Judge Gill intended  to  say.   The  paragraph  ends
    there.

12. Paragraphs [45] and [46] are even more confusing: they,  like  much  of
    the decision, bear the signs of a document dictated on Dragon  software
    and then not checked.  There are missing words and repetitions.   Judge
    Gill noted the appellant's  account  that  she  had  rested,  and  then
    claimed asylum immediately on arrival in the United Kingdom,  but  that
    on the evidence, she appeared to have waited two months  to  claim.  He
    considered that this had damaged her credibility.

13. Judge Gill did not accept that the appellant had been able to travel to
    the United Kingdom from the Republic of Ireland on  just  her  boarding
    pass, but stopped short of making a finding that the appellant had used
    the South African forged passport to enter the United Kingdom. At [49],
    Judge Gill said:

         "49. On the lower burden of proof I do find  the  appellant  to  be
         credible in her account."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

    That is somewhat surprising, given the  earlier  findings,  but  it  is
    quite clear and unambiguous.

14. Under  a  subheading  'Risk  on  Return',  Judge  Gill  considered  the
    appellant's account that on return she would attract adverse  attention
    from the authorities, who would want to know  where  her  husband  was.
    She held that this was not consistent with the appellant's account that
    it was the authorities who had abducted her husband and could therefore
    be presumed to know where he was.

15. Judge Gill discounted the appellant's account that after 2019  she  was
    herself of interest to the government or Zanu-PF: she was not  involved
    in her husband's work, had no direct connections with the  NGO  or  the
    government, could not say  whether  she  was  being  sought  after  her
    departure, and her elderly parents and those of  her  husband  had  not
    been troubled since she left.  Nor had the appellant's two brothers. On
    return, the First-tier Judge considered that this  appellant  would  be
    treated simply as a person who had  been  absent  from  Zimbabwe  since
    2019.

16. Judge Gill applied Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  MM
    (Zimbabwe) [2017] EWCA Civ 797 for  what  it  said  about  the  country
    guidance of the Upper Tribunal in CM (EM country guidance;  disclosure)
    Zimbabwe [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC).  The appellant and her  husband  had  no
    MDC links and were therefore unlikely to be at risk, applying the lower
    standard applicable in international protection claims.

17. The appellant's Article 8 ECHR claim was also  considered,  within  and
    outwith the Immigration Rules. Judge  Gill's  concluding  paragraph  on
    exceptionality reads as follows:

         "78. I have taken a step back and considered  all  the  factors  in
         favour of the  appellant  and  factors  in  favour  of  the  public
         interest.  In all the circumstances,  notwithstanding  the  private
         life that the appellant has developed since  being  in  the  United
         Kingdom, I find that the appellant will be  able  to  re  integrate
         into Zimbabwe.  I am accord little weight to the  private  she  has
         formed present in the  United  Kingdom  as  it  was  accrued  while
         present precariously.  On the balance sheet approach,  I  therefore
         do not find the scales to be tipped in the appellant's  favour.   I
         am not satisfied that there are exceptional  circumstances  in  the
         appellant's case, for the reasons set out above, that would warrant
         a grant of leave outside of the Immigration Rules  and  I  consider
         this decision to be proportionate."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

    Again, there are signs of lack of proof reading and this  paragraph  is
    somewhat generic, but the thrust of the judge's decision  is  tolerably
    clear.

18. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

19. The renewal grounds, on which permission was granted, pointed  out  the
    difficulties with the judge's  approach  to  credibility  in  different
    paragraphs, and her poor drafting, with paragraphs being  repeated  and
    [44] not fully completed. The appellant challenged the decision overall
    on the grounds of perversity, irrationality, inadequacy of reasons, and
    failure to take into  account  and/or  resolve  conflicts  of  fact  or
    opinion on material matters.

20. In particular, the appellant argued that the judge had failed to engage
    with the additional risk category identified in  HS  (returning  asylum
    seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094 (those seen  to  be  active  in
    association with human rights  or  civil  society  organisations  where
    evidence suggests that the particular organisation has been  identified
    by the authorities as a critic or opponent of the  Zimbabwean  regime).
    The appellant also relied on the earlier decision in SM and others (MDC
    - internal flight - risk categories) Zimbabwe  CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00100
    which held that family members of the identified risk categories  could
    also be at risk.  The appellant contended that the finding in CM was no
    longer good law and the judge should have departed from it.

21. First-tier Judge  Scott-Baker  granted  permission  for  the  following
    reasons:

         "4.  The judge considered the evidence at [32]-[48]  and  at  [50]-
         [54].  There is merit in the allegation that the determination as a
         whole is poorly drafted in places with  paragraphs  being  repeated
         and in parts uncompleted.  As a result, findings on credibility are
         unclear.

         5.   It was accepted at [35] that the  appellant's  husband  was  a
         subcontracted lorry driver delivering aid for NGOs.  At  [37],  she
         rejected the claim that the appellant's husband had been approached
         to distribute  propaganda  and  found  that  the  lack  of  detail,
         together with the late disclosure, not credible given that she  had
         found that her husband  was  a  subcontracted  driver  with  a  low
         profile.  At  [42],  [43],  [44]  and  [48]  the  judge  found  the
         appellant not credible on various facets of her claim yet  at  [49]
         found the appellant credible.  No specific finding was made  as  to
         whether the appellant's husband had been abducted and  the  finding
         at [57] that she would not be at risk in Zimbabwe in the absence of
         involvement in politics or NGOs seemed  to  be  made  in  a  vacuum
         without regard to the facts which had been accepted.

         6.   The appellant is entitled to a decision with clear findings on
         the core of her account and it is arguable that  the  determination
         is devoid of such clarity, with the judge failing to  give  reasons
         or adequate reasons for findings on material  matters.   Permission
         is granted."

Rule 24 Reply

22. The respondent filed a Rule 24 Reply, drafted by Mr Stephen Whitwell, a
    Senior Presenting Officer.  After setting out a number of excerpts from
    the  First-tier  Tribunal's  credibility   findings,   the   respondent
    submitted that the judge's findings on credibility 'cannot sensibly  be
    said to be unclear'.  The respondent contended that the  appellant  and
    her husband did not fall within the  risk  group  of  those  active  in
    association with human rights or civil society  organisations:  see  HS
    (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094.   He  was  a
    contract driver with no political interest in the work of the NGO which
    employed him.

23. Nor was it an error of law for the judge to continue  to  apply  extant
    country guidance in CM (EM country guidance:  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC).   The  standard  for  departing  from  country
    guidance was high:  SG  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [4].  The appellant had not  advanced
    evidence of durable change: the closest approach to that was to mention
    pages 37 and 74 in her bundle, and to allude to  a  rise  in  political
    violence in Bulawayo.  The appeal should be dismissed.

24. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

25. For the respondent, Mr Tufan relied on the Rule 24 Reply.

26. For the appellant, Ms Rutherford relies on the appellant's  association
    with her husband and on the difficulty which family members could  face
    on return: see SM, TM, MH (MDC - Internal  flight  -  Risk  categories)
    Zimbabwe CG [2005] UKIAT 00100  (11  May  2005).   She  relied  on  the
    appellant's skeleton argument in the electronic bundle submitted to the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  which  confirmed  that   politically   motivated
    violence   and   abductions   were   occurring,   that   socio-economic
    circumstances in Zimbabwe were  dire.   Ms  Rutherford  submitted  that
    although there was no loyalty test in Bulawayo, the level of  increased
    violence there meant that it could no longer  be  regarded  as  a  safe
    place to which to return.

27. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Analysis

28. This is a very unsatisfactory decision.  It is poorly proof read, if at
    all, and the contradictory  findings  on  credibility,  unfinished  and
    duplicated paragraphs, and omitted words do Judge Gill no  credit.  The
    decision fails to engage with the evidence before  the  judge  and  her
    reasoning is incomprehensible in places.

29. I have considered whether in the  light  of  the  unambiguous  positive
    credibility finding, I can proceed to remake  the  decision.   However,
    there are so many omissions and errors that I do not consider  that  it
    would be safe or appropriate to do so.

30. There is no alternative but to set aside this decision and remake it.



DECISION

31. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal will be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson     Date:    27 March 2020
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
