
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA016662015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 May 2016                       |On 17 June 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                    [B B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is an Albanian national.  She is 22 having been  born  on
    [ ] 1994.  She came to the UK via France, claiming that  she  had  been
    raped and forced into the sex industry in her  own  country.   She  was
    screened on 15 May 2015 and an asylum interview  was  conducted  on  22
    July 2015.  The respondent rejected her  claim,  regarding  her  as  an
    illegal entrant.  She was served with a  notice  (IS.151A)  on  15  May
    2015.  On 28 September 2015 the respondent decided to refuse  to  grant
    the appellant  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection  in  the  UK.   The
    appellant  subsequently  appealed  that  decision  to  the   First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) on 12 October 2015.

2.   The appellant's  appeal  to  the  FtT  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Geraint Jones QC (the Immigration Judge).  The Immigration Judge having
    heard evidence from the appellant rejected her account, finding  it  to
    be implausible.  He found that she had made up an allegation of  sexual
    exploitation for the purpose  of  seeking  residence  in  the  UK.   He
    therefore dismissed her appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

3.   In her grounds of appeal dated 4 March 2016, the appellant claims  that
    the Immigration Judge had suffered sexual abuse both in Albania and  in
    France.  The reason she had not claimed asylum in France was consistent
    with a person who had been "trafficked" - i.e. she was  too  frightened
    to report it to the police.  The Immigration Judge had been precipitate
    and wrong in his assessment of the appellant's credibility,  which  was
    broadly in line with a person who  was  telling  the  truth  about  her
    sexual exploitation.  The Immigration Judge had  shown  a  "concerning"
    lack of regard for the appellant's account which  had  been  consistent
    and fully explained in interview.

4.   These grounds were considered by Judge of  First-tier  Tribunal  Saffer
    who considered  there  had  been  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    Immigration Judge's assessment.  The findings were open to him  on  the
    evidence.

5.   The appellant had appealed that refusal by renewing the application  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  In her further  grounds  she  contended  that  the
    Immigration Judge's decision had been beset with  "myths"  whereas  the
    reality was that the appellant had been exploited by a  member  of  the
    underworld with possibly, official connections.  Her  account  was  not
    "glaringly inconsistent" but there were in fact material errors of  law
    which needed to be looked at by the Upper Tribunal.

6.   Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman decided to grant permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal because he considered that although the  Immigration
    Judge had not been obliged  to  believe  the  appellant,  some  of  the
    points, at least, were "arguable".  In particular, a criticism  of  the
    appellant to the effect that she  had  not  mentioned  being  raped  in
    interview had been within the context of the screening interview.   The
    Immigration Judge's strong credibility findings against  the  appellant
    seemed to be based on what was put  to  her  in  cross-examination  and
    should  have  been  considered  in  the  context.   The  appellant  had
    explained a number of the contradictions in her evidence.

7.   Directions were sent out to the parties informing them that  the  Upper
    Tribunal would not consider evidence not before the  FtT  unless  there
    was an application to admit such evidence explaining  why  it  had  not
    been produced below.

8.   The respondent provided their response under Rule 24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 indicating that in her  view  the
    FtT  had  directed  itself  appropriately,  properly   considered   the
    evidence, given clear reasons for not accepting the appellant's account
    and had not become fixated upon  what  happened  to  the  appellant  in
    France.  It was clear that the FtT had rejected  both  the  appellant's
    account of what had  happened  in  France  and  what  had  happened  in
    Albania.  The findings were sustainable and lawful  and  there  was  no
    error of law.

9.   A notice of hearing was  sent  out  for  a  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 5 May 2016, fixing a date of 25 May 2016.

The Hearing

10.  At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   Mr
    Bonavero, who appeared for the appellant, said that it was "not easy to
    allege rape".  He said that the Immigration Judge had been hasty  in  a
    number of his judgments.  Mr Bonavero said that paragraphs 37-38 of the
    decision gave a  flavour  of  the  Immigration  Judge's  approach.   In
    particular, the Immigration Judge had referred to the  appellant's  use
    of her "feminine youthfulness" as a  platform  for  alleging  rape  and
    sexual exploitation.  She had alleged  that  Melis,  her  boyfriend  in
    Albania, had been an influential and  powerful  person  which  was  the
    reason for her failure to report the rape and other allegations to  the
    police.  It was therefore the Immigration Judge's view that she had not
    demonstrated  that  she  was  embarrassed  or  shameful  over  such  an
    allegation.

11.  Mr Bonavero then went to deal with a  number  of  specific  points  the
    Immigration Judge had made earlier in his decision.  He said  that  his
    client had been a victim of sexual abuse in Albania and had  then  been
    abused in France by "people traffickers".  However, the allegations  as
    to what happened in France did not go to the core of  her  claim.   The
    Immigration Judge was said to have focused too much on what happened in
    France by reference to paragraph 35(vi).  The  Immigration  Judge  said
    that the appellant's account  of  having  been  sexually  exploited  in
    France was "a blatant fabrication" designed to bolster  her  allegation
    of sexual exploitation in Albania.  This, Mr Bonavero claimed, made  no
    sense.

12.   My  attention  was  also  drawn  to  paragraph  35(viii)   where   the
    Immigration Judge said that the  appellant  had  given  an  implausible
    account.  The Immigration Judge had not accepted that Melis was someone
    "capable" of exerting influence over the  appellant.   The  Immigration
    Judge rejected any suggestion that the appellant feared Melis.

13.  In Mr Bonavero's submission, the Immigration Judge  had  made  findings
    of inconsistency that  were  not  justified  by  the  facts.   He  made
    trenchant adverse credibility findings which were not  justified.   The
    case should be remitted to the  FtT  for  fresh  findings.   There  was
    infelicitous language but the core of the  attack  on  the  Immigration
    Judge's decision related to his approach.

14.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on the respondent's Rule 24 response  which
    stated that, contrary to the assertions  made  by  the  appellant,  the
    Immigration Judge had directed himself appropriately and rejected  both
    the account of the events in Albania and the events in  France.   These
    were conclusions he was entitled to come to.  As to the issue  of  what
    happened to the appellant in France, the Immigration Judge pointed  out
    that her whole purpose in going to France was to then get to the UK  by
    lorry.  The appellant did not identify who she was scared of.  Had  she
    wished to go  to  the  French  police  she  could  have  done  so.   Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the issue of the  appellant's  failure
    to claim asylum in France was an important  one,  particularly  in  the
    light of Section 8 of the Asylum (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004.   I
    pointed out  that  that  Section  had  not  been  referred  to  by  the
    Immigration Judge.  Nevertheless, Ms Brocklesby-Weller said  that  this
    failure did not  prevent  the  Immigration  Judge  from  making  strong
    adverse credibility inferences from the appellant's  failure  to  claim
    asylum in France.

15.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller also referred me to several  passages  within  the
    decision.  She said that paragraph 35(ix) contained a  clear  rejection
    of the appellant's alleged fear of Melis.  There, the Immigration Judge
    points out that Melis had made no attempt to contact the  appellant  or
    any member of her family for the five months prior to her departure  in
    November 2014.  This suggests that he was no longer interested in  her.
    In essence, the appellant had not given a good reason for not reporting
    the alleged rape or sexual exploitation.  She had  not  had  a  medical
    check-up and she had not given a good reason for explaining why she had
    been able to  return  to  her  family.   She  gave  no  detail  of  any
    connections between Melis and the authorities.

16.  Mr Bonavero then  reiterated  a  number  of  the  points  he  had  made
    earlier.  These included the fact that, as Judge  Freeman  had  pointed
    out, a screening interview contained a number of limitations.   It  was
    understandable that the appellant had not given a full account at  that
    stage.  The Immigration Judge had been  wrong  to  reject  her  account
    being afraid to escape which was a classic indication of a  person  who
    had been trafficked.

17.  After hearing the submissions I decided to reserve my decision which  I
    will later give with my reasons.

Discussion and conclusion

18.  I have considered whether the Immigration  Judge  was  too  precipitate
    and whether  he  considered  properly  allegations  of  serious  sexual
    exploitation and trafficking.  It is the  nature  of  such  allegations
    that they need to be handled with great sensitivity since it  is  known
    that victims of sexual violence often feel embarrassed or humiliated by
    their  experiences  and  are  reluctant  to  come  forward.    As   the
    Immigration Judge himself acknowledged (at paragraph 21) complaints  of
    this nature are often slow  to  come  forward.   The  respondent's  own
    guidance is quoted at paragraph 5 of the grounds of appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.  This indicates (quoting paragraph 31) that:


         "It is important to be aware of a number of  myths  and  issues  of
         incomplete understanding relating to human trafficking: -


         Myth: the person did not take opportunities to escape ...


         Reality: remaining in an exploitative situation  could  indicate  a
         willingness to remain there ... but  there  are  many  reasons  why
         someone may choose not to escape ..."


19.  I am afraid the Immigration  Judge  expressed  himself  infelicitously.
    As Mr Bonavero submitted, it was not appropriate  for  the  Immigration
    Judge to  suggest  that  the  appellant  had  exploited  her  "feminine
    youthfulness" for  the  purposes  of  her  claim.   Unfortunately,  the
    Immigration Judge showed a lack of knowledge of the  nature  of  people
    trafficking.   It  was  also,  in  my  view,  inappropriate   for   the
    Immigration Judge to attach so much weight to the  screening  interview
    which should have been seen in its  proper  context  as  a  preliminary
    questionnaire rather than a fully nuanced account.

20.  These criticisms of the Immigration Judge need to be considered in  the
    light of his actual findings.  Whilst these were expressed in trenchant
    language it is one thing to comment on the language used and another to
    identify specific findings which the Immigration Judge should not  have
    made.  Overall,  I  have  concluded,  they  were  findings   that   the
    Immigration  Judge  was  entitled  to  come  to.   In  particular,  the
    Immigration Judge came to the clear findings on the following:

    (1)  He did not accept that the appellant had given  adequate  evidence
         that Melis had connections or influence with the  police  and  that
         this explained  adequately  why  she  had  not  come  forward  with
         allegations to the police in Albania.  It is difficult to  see  how
         any  judge  could  attach  much  weight  to  the  appellant's  mere
         suspicions in this respect.  The appellant seems to  have  accepted
         in cross-examination that she did not know what Melis's connections
         were.


    (2)  The Immigration Judge completely rejected the appellant's  account
         of sexual exploitation whilst in France, finding that she had  been
         intending to come to the UK in all events and at  all  costs.   The
         fact that she did not go to the French  authorities  was  a  matter
         that damaged her credibility based on this finding.   There  is  no
         doubt it is entirely safe to report  such  matters  to  the  French
         authorities  just  as  it  is  to  report  them  to   the   British
         authorities.  This tends to indicate that the appellant was not  in
         genuine need of international protection.  Whilst  the  Immigration
         Judge did not actually refer to Section 8 of the  2004  Act  it  is
         clear that he did regard this as a significant adverse  credibility
         issue.


    (3)  The Immigration Judge also found that Melis had not contacted  the
         appellant or her family in the five months prior to  her  departure
         at paragraph 35(ix) and this was also a conclusion which harmed her
         credibility but which he was also entitled to come to.  If, as  the
         appellant claims, Melis was intent on pursuing her he would  surely
         have got in touch in that timeframe.


    (4)  The Immigration Judge completely rejected the appellant's  account
         of having been trafficked at paragraph 36 of his decision. Whatever
         the motives for the appellant's false claim it is difficult to  see
         how she could have succeeded on her  claim  to  being  in  need  of
         international protection in the light of this finding.

21.  I would add that even if the appellant's account were accepted in  full
    it would be questionable whether the appellant would  be  justified  in
    asserting that there is no safe place within Albania to which she could
    travel. Albania is a parliamentary democracy and  a  candidate  for  EU
    membership and there must be many  safe  places  where  she  could  go.
    However, I acknowledge this was not a  finding  the  Immigration  Judge
    actually came to and it is not one I need to pass any  further  comment
    on therefore.

22.  I have therefore concluded that the Immigration Judge was  entitled  to
    come to the decision he came to on the evidence he heard.  There  is  a
    justified criticism of his use of inappropriate language but that  does
    not amount to a material error of law in this case.

Notice of Decision

I have decided that there was no material error in the decision of the  FtT.
 Therefore, the decision to reject the appellant's asylum claim as  well  as
her humanitarian protection and human rights' claims stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 16.6.16

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 16.6.16

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

