
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/01081/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7th May 2019                         |On 22nd May 2019                    |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                              mrs Ayasha Begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rahman
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 12th July 1962 is a citizen of  Bangladesh.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Rahman.  The Respondent was represented
    by Mr Tufan a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made an application for asylum in August 2013 and her
    application was refused on 1st October 2014.   She  had  appealed  that
    decision and her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bulpitt
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 30th October 2018.  The judge had  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. Application for permission to appeal had been made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and permission to appeal had been  refused  on  10th  December
    2018.  The application was renewed and permission had been  granted  by
    the Upper Tribunal on 4th April 2019.  Permission had  been  issued  in
    respect of one matter only, that being that the judge arguably had  not
    considered the Appellant's minor son's Article 8 matter.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. It was noted that the Appellant was neither present nor represented  at
    the First-tier hearing.  It was further accepted that  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the First-tier did not make reference to  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  It was noted that the refusal letter had dealt with the son in a
    number of paragraphs.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. It was submitted that the minor Appellant was not  a  qualifying  child
    and even if it had been a qualifying  child  there  would  have  to  be
    evidence of  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  on  removal.   It  was
    further submitted that bearing in mind paragraph 51 of the case  of  KO
    [2018] there was nothing to show it was unreasonable for the  child  to
    leave with his mother.  It was  submitted  that  the  two-page  witness
    statement from the mother made no reference to the younger son and that
    the full bundle which ran to about 500 pages also made no reference  to
    the younger son.  Finally on behalf of the Appellant it was  said  that
    following the case of MA (Pakistan) it was possible for a judge in  the
    First-tier Tribunal faced with no information about the child could  in
    a rare case adjourn to obtain information.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the  evidence  and
    submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. Permission was granted on the basis that there  had  been  an  arguable
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  that
    he had not considered the Appellant's minor son's Article 8 issues.

 8. The procedural history  of  this  case  is  somewhat  complex  and  was
    summarised by the judge  at  paragraphs  10  to  17.   In  summary  the
    Appellant's appeal notice had been  drafted  by  her  then  solicitors.
    Thereafter they sought an adjournment and indicated that the  Appellant
    "was just relying on her own  protection  claim  based  on  her  family
    killing and Article 3 medical grounds".  Prior  to  the  final  hearing
    date of 30th October 2018 the Respondent served their bundle  including
    the refusal letter on the Appellant's solicitor and they in turn served
    a 560-page Appellant's bundle.  Thereafter the Appellant indicated  she
    had withdrawn instructions from her solicitor and  did  not  intend  to
    attend the hearing and wished the judge to decide  the  matter  on  the
    papers.

 9. Further the judge noted at paragraph 17 that the Appellant's  case  had
    been heard in February 2015 by another First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who
    had refused her appeal.  The only new evidence postdating that decision
    was documentary evidence which was considered by  the  judge.   As  his
    starting point he correctly referred to  the  first  decision  and  the
    findings therein on fact and credibility.

10. In respect of the Appellant's minor son he was  a  dependant  upon  the
    Appellant's claim.  He had been in the UK less than seven years at  the
    relevant date and was not a qualifying child.  The  Respondent  in  the
    refusal letter served upon the Appellant and her solicitor,  had  dealt
    with his position at paragraphs 42 to 43 of that letter under the terms
    of Article 8 of family and private  life  with  specific  reference  to
    Section 55 of the Borders Act 2009 (best interests of the child).   The
    Respondent had concluded the child's best interests were to  return  to
    Bangladesh with his mother.

11. The Appellant's Grounds of  Appeal  against  the  Respondent's  refusal
    letter made no reference to Article 8 of the ECHR  in  respect  of  her
    son.  The representative's letter of 15th February 2018,  as  noted  by
    the  judge  at  paragraph  11  of  his  decision,  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant's appeal did not  include  any  reference  to  Article  8  in
    respect of her dependent son.  Mr Rahman conceded that the  Appellant's
    own witness statement within her bundle made no reference  to  her  son
    nor did that son (aged about 17 years) produce a witness  statement  or
    supporting  evidence  on  his  own  behalf.   The  Appellant  and   her
    representatives were not present at the hearing and she  had  requested
    the judge to decide the matter on the basis of the papers  before  him.
    The judge did that.

12. He made proper and sustainable findings that were  not  found  arguably
    wanting by the Upper Tribunal who granted  permission  to  appeal.   In
    respect of the Appellant's son the Respondent had reached a  conclusion
    in the refusal letter that the child's best interests were to return to
    Bangladesh with his mother and removal did not breach Article 8 of  the
    ECHR.  The Appellant had not challenged that decision nor produced  any
    evidence to the contrary either within her Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal  or  in  any  documentary  evidence.   Further  the
    representative's letter of February 2018 made no reference or challenge
    to that finding.  The judge in those circumstances  was  understandably
    silent upon a matter that had not been raised at any point as an  issue
    in the case.  It cannot necessarily be said that in those circumstances
    the judge should have taken it upon himself to raise and deal with  the
    issue under the "Robinson obvious" criteria.

13. However even if it was an error of law to fail to  do  so  it  was  not
    material because in the absence of the  Appellant  being  a  qualifying
    child and any evidence as to his circumstances it is difficult  to  see
    what other conclusion could have been reached by the judge.

14. Further, even if it was a material error then in remaking the  decision
    there has been no fresh  evidence  served  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    accordance with Rule 15(2A) or in line with  direction  (v)  dated  8th
    April 2019.  Accordingly the material to be  considered  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and that which I do consider is exactly the same as that which
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  further  take  account  of  the
    recent authority in KO [2018] in particular paragraph 51.  I find  that
    this is a case where the only relevant parent  (the  Appellant  mother)
    was required to leave the UK and the natural expectation would be  that
    her dependent son would go with her.  Neither she nor he have  provided
    any evidence to the contrary  and  I  would  find  therefore  that  his
    removal with his mother would be both reasonable and proportionate.

Notice of Decision

15. I find no material error of law made by the  judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and uphold the decision.  I further find in any event that  if
    required to remake the decision I would arrive at the same finding  and
    dismiss the appeal.

    No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD





I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
