
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
PA/01942/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On December 22, 2017                      |   On January 03, 2018           |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                    MR HM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson and
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I extend the anonymity direction in this matter.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran. He entered the  United  Kingdom  on
    October  8,  2015  and  claimed  asylum.  The  respondent  refused  his
    application on February 11, 2016 under paragraph 336 HC 395.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision  on  February  25,  2016  and  the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McCall (hereinafter
    called the Judge) on April 5, 2017. In a decision promulgated on  April
    21, 2017 the Judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on May 4, 2017 arguing  procedural
    unfairness and unsustainable findings. Permission to appeal  was  given
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hodgkinson on May 16, 2017.

 5. The case first came before me on November 3, 2017 and due to the nature
    of the challenge it was agreed that it was inappropriate  for  original
    counsel, Mr Tettey, to argue the case as there was no agreed record  of
    proceedings. The Presenting Officer, Mr Bates, disputed what was  being
    said with regard to procedural unfairness. I therefore gave  directions
    and this led to the case being relisted before me on the above date.

 6. At the resumed hearing today I gave permission to Ms Khan to advance an
    additional ground of appeal namely that the Judge had applied the wrong
    standard  of  proof  when  assessing  the  evidence.  A   Rule   15(2A)
    application had been served on the Tribunal and respondent.

 7. At the hearing Mr McVeety confirmed that the FTT Presenting Officer (Mr
    Holt) could not assist with whether the Judge had stated before hearing
    submissions that he would not be adjourning the case. A letter to  this
    effect had been served.

 8. Mr Tettey, who attended as a witness (but was not required to give  any
    evidence), provided a statement that which made the point the Judge may
    have had a fixed mind or given the appearance of having  a  fixed  mind
    over the issue of an adjournment.

 9. Having considered the Judge's decision and  the  additional  ground  of
    appeal Mr McVeety accepted that  the  Judge  had  materially  erred  in
    paragraphs [35], [44] and [52] when making findings on the standard  or
    proof required. The Judge applied "the balance of  probabilities"  test
    when of course the lower standard of proof should have been applied. It
    is on this basis only I find there is an error in law.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  I remit the appeal back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on this issue.


Signed                              Date     22/12/2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made.




Signed                              Date     22/11/2017


[pic]



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

