
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01762/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard via Skype                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2021                           |On 22 January 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     MS
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Knight, Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

  1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has appealed against  a  decision
     of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') promulgated on 12 February 2020,  in
     which it dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision  dated  13
     February 2019 to refuse his international protection and  human  rights
     claims.



Background

  2. The appellant claimed that he had a well-founded fear of persecution in
     Pakistan because his conviction in the UK  for  attempting  to  meet  a
     female child under 16 (in relation to which  he  was  sentenced  to  14
     months  imprisonment  on  21  July  2017)  became  known  to  religious
     extremists organisations in Pakistan, who have threatened him.  The FTT
     heard evidence from the appellant and considered reports from a country
     expert on Pakistan,  Dr  Farhaan  Wali:  an  addendum  report  dated  8
     November 2019 dealing with the statutory declarations  relied  upon  by
     the appellant and a full report dated 8 October  2019.   Unless  stated
     otherwise references to Dr Wali's report are to his full report.


  3. The FTT concluded that the appellant's evidence  was  unreliable.   The
     FTT was also not prepared to accept some of the  conclusions  contained
     in Dr Wali's report.   The appeal was dismissed  on  asylum  and  human
     rights grounds.


Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

  4. The grounds of appeal were prepared by Counsel.  The  four  grounds  of
     appeal entirely focussed upon the FTT's findings  regarding  Dr  Wali's
     reports vis a vis the asylum claim.  The grounds did not challenge  the
     FTT's findings regarding his family life pursuant to Article 8, ECHR or
     any other aspect of the human rights claim, and  I  need  say  no  more
     about this.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  UTJ  Sheridan  in  a
     decision dated 27 July 2020.


  5. At the hearing before me Mr Knight  relied  upon  a  skeleton  argument
     (undated but sent to the UT the day before the hearing).  This  strayed
     from  the  pleaded  grounds  of  appeal  and  sought  to  re-argue  the
     appellant's international protection and Article 8 appeal.  I  made  it
     clear that I considered the  raising  of  matters  that  were  not  the
     subject of the grounds of appeal at this very late stage inappropriate.
      Mr Knight confirmed that he only relied upon  submissions  challenging
     the FTT's approach to Dr Wali's evidence.  He  accepted  that  I  could
     ignore the parts of the skeleton argument  that  did  not  specifically
     address the four grounds criticising the FTT's approach  to  Mr  Wali's
     report.  Mr Knight made brief submissions mirroring  the  four  pleaded
     grounds.

  6. Mr Diwinycz confirmed that the SSHD had not submitted a rule 24 notice.
      He sought to take me to 'baili' to establish that  Dr  Wali  had  been
     criticised by the FTT in at least one FTT case, and that criticism  has
     been upheld by the UT.  I indicated that it was far too late  to  raise
     matters that could and should have been  set  out  in  advance  of  the
     hearing, or at the very least before Mr Knight began  his  submissions.
     In those circumstances Mr Diwinycz  invited  me  to  uphold  the  FTT's
     decision, for the reasons provided by it.

  7. After hearing from both representatives, I reserved my decision,  which
     I now provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

  8. This is a case in which the appellant  gave  extensive  oral  evidence,
     including under cross-examination -  see  [4]  to  [12]  of  the  FTT's
     decision.  Having considered that evidence, together  with  the  expert
     evidence of Dr Wali, the FTT  made  clear  robust  adverse  credibility
     findings regarding the appellant's  evidence  from  [29]  to  [32],  in
     particular finding that the appellant:


                   i) failed to provide any evidence from  his  brother  in
                      Pakistan or any cogent explanation for the failure to
                      provide this evidence, when he played a central  role
                      in relaying information in support of the appellant's
                      claimed risk in Pakistan;


                  ii) gave inconsistent evidence regarding  the  source  of
                      the threatening letters;

                 iii) failed to provide  a  credible  explanation  for  the
                      delay in claiming asylum;

                  iv) provided  evidence  regarding  his  conviction  which
                      demonstrated that he was prepared to  manipulate  the
                      system to his own advantage.


   9. These factual findings have not been  the  subject  of  any  challenge
      within the grounds of appeal, which solely address Dr  Wali's  country
      expert evidence.   The  grounds  of  appeal  challenge  four  discrete
      matters relevant to the FTT's findings on Dr Wali's evidence, to which
      I turn below.

Ground (i) - even-handed approach?

  10. I do not accept that the FTT attached less weight to Dr Wali's  report
      on the basis that he failed to outline  cases  capable  of  detracting
      from the cases he listed wherein the court accepted  his  evidence  as
      reliable.  The FTT has merely observed at [23]  that  whilst  Dr  Wali
      provided a list of cases in which the Tribunal accepted his reports to
      be reliable, he failed to identify any cases in which his reports have
      been criticised or the information therein rejected.  As a  matter  of
      fact this is unobjectionable and  accurate.   The  grounds  of  appeal
      however submit that it inexorably followed that the  FTT  reduced  the
      weight to be attached to the reports and in  effect  misconstrued  the
      discretionary guidance in SD (expert evidence)  Lebanon  [2008]  UKAIT
      00078 as a mandatory direction.


  11. The FTT was clearly aware that a country  expert's  failure  to  place
      material capable of  detracting  from  cases  in  which  the  Tribunal
      accepted the reliability of a country expert's evidence, "may  reflect
      on the weight to be given to the evidence which is the subject  matter
      of the expert's report(s)" and directed itself accordingly.   The  FTT
      understood the discretionary nature of the guidance.  At no  point  in
      the decision did the  FTT  draw  adverse  inferences  from  Dr  Wali's
      omission.  The decision is a detailed and absent a clear  misdirection
      I am not prepared to infer one.  The last  sentence  of  [23]  of  the
      FTT's decision could have been more carefully drafted.  Dr Wali  could
      have of course made it clear that he was unaware of a single  occasion
      in which his reports had been criticised or not accepted.

Ground (ii) - failure to provide adequate reasons for  rejecting  Dr  Wali's
evidence

  12. The FTT expressly  took  into  account  the  fact  that  Dr  Wali  was
      "qualified as a country expert" at [23] and was  "supportive"  of  the
      appellant's case at [24].  When the decision is read as a whole, it is
      tolerably clear that the FTT recognised that Dr Wali was  sufficiently
      qualified and had the requisite expertise to be a  country  expert  on
      Pakistan.  The FTT was not  obliged  to  accept  Dr  Wali's  evidence,
      simply because he was qualified to give that evidence.  The FTT was of
      course entitled  to  attach  limited  weight  to  Dr  Wali's  evidence
      provided it gave sufficient reasons for doing so.


  13. The FTT was clearly aware of the discretionary nature of the  guidance
      in AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT  673  (IAC)  and
      directed itself accordingly.  In any event, the FTT merely referred to
      some of the guidance in AAW and did not necessarily accept that it all
      applied to the instant case.

  14. The FTT did not accept that Dr Wali explained  in  sufficient  detail:
      (i) why it was plausible that the appellant's  conviction  would  have
      become known  to  religious  groups  in  Pakistan;  or  (ii)  how  the
      appellant could be tracked down if he relocated  to  another  part  of
      Pakistan.

  15. In relation to (i), Dr Wali addressed this  briefly  at  [23]  of  his
      report.  He did not explain to what extent online UK news material  is
      viewed in Pakistan and simply made the point that because the material
      is "accessible online", it "may be viewed across Pakistan".

  16. I am more troubled by (ii) because the FTT  failed  to  take  relevant
      evidence  into  account  and  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
      rejecting Dr Wali's evidence that  it  was  plausible  that  extremist
      groups  would  act  in  the  manner  claimed  by  the  appellant.   In
      particular,  Dr Wali described in detail why  extremist  groups  would
      view this appellant with significant hostility at [16-21],  such  that
      he would be targeted  for  killing  on  a  blacklist  at  [38-47]  and
      proactively tracked down via the intelligence network, corrupt  police
      officers and bribery at [48-53], [71-72] and [81-84] in the context of
      a country in which lack of security has resulted in targeted  killings
      by militants becoming common practice at [62].

  17. The FTT's concern that Dr Wali provided "no adequate explanation"  for
      the "important statements" in  support  of  the  view  that  extremist
      groups may be able to track the appellant  through  a  combination  of
      their intelligence network, bribery and the NADRA database  system  in
      the context of Pakistan,  is  impossible  to  reconcile  with  a  full
      reading of Dr Wali's report.  I am therefore satisfied that this  limb
      of ground (ii) is made out.

Ground (iii) - speculation

  18. At [25] the FTT appears to have rejected Dr  Wali's  comments  on  the
      reliability of the threatening letters sent by extremist groups on the
      basis  that  it  made  "absolutely  no  sense   that   any   terrorist
      organisation" would provide the  appellant's  family  with  notice  of
      their intention to harm him.  This finding betrays a lack  of  careful
      scrutiny of Dr Wali's report and is irrational.  Dr Wali described  in
      detail the varied motives of extremist groups in Pakistan:  their  aim
      is not merely to kill but to use violence and the threat  of  violence
      as a means of controlling local populations - see [37], [45], [53]  of
      Dr Wali's report.

Ground (iv) - document verification

  19. The FTT was entitled to  conclude  that  Dr  Wali  did  not  have  the
      relevant expertise in order to verify whether documents emanating from
      Pakistan were counterfeit.   The  FTT  considered  Dr  Wali's  claimed
      experience in this discrete field at [26] and was entitled to conclude
      that he did not have the requisite  qualifications  or  experience  to
      fully verify the authenticity of documents, as he claimed.  As the FTT
      explained, it is  difficult  to  see  how  Dr  Wali's  experience  was
      sufficient to enable him to distinguish an apparently cogent  document
      from one that was made to appear that way but was in fact counterfeit.




  20. Notwithstanding this, Dr Wali's  qualifications  and  experience  were
      clearly sufficient to enable him to comment on the plausibility of the
      use of different type of documents in Pakistan.  In this  respect,  Dr
      Wali explained the plausibility of the use of  statutory  declarations
      in Pakistan at [17-19] and  [27-30]  of  his  addendum  report.   This
      explains why it  was  necessary  for  the  statutory  declarations  to
      include obvious formalities and the FTT's finding that  there  was  no
      need for such formalities at [28] fails to engage with this  evidence.
      In addition, Dr Wali was entitled to explain the plausibility  of  the
      use of threatening letters from extremist groups.  As set  out  above,
      the FTT failed to take this evidence into account.

Conclusion

  21. I am satisfied that grounds (ii), (iii) and (iv) are made out for  the
      reasons I set out above.  These are  errors  of  law  which  played  a
      material role in the FTT's ultimate finding that the appellant's claim
      was incredible.  Although the FTT provided cogent reasons for doubting
      the appellant's credibility, it  was  obliged  to  assess  credibility
      holistically by taking into account Dr Wali's  evidence.   Whilst  the
      FTT addressed Dr Wali's evidence,  its  assessment  contains  material
      errors of law, which  in  turn  vitiated  the  overall  conclusion  on
      credibility.

Disposal

  22. The errors of law are such  that  the  decision  needs  to  be  remade
      completely.  This will require fresh findings of  fact.   I  have  had
      regard to [7.2] of the relevant Senior President's Practice  Statement
      and the nature and extent of the factual findings required in remaking
      the decision, and I have decided that the matter should be remitted to
      the FTT.

Decision

  23. The FTT's decision contains errors of law.  Its decision cannot  stand
      and is set aside.  The matter is remitted to the FTT, where it will be
      remade de novo by a judge other than FTT Judge Fisher.


Signed: Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated: 12 January 2021
