
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01549/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 July 2017                               |On 17 July 2017               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                Ja (pakistan)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Alam, Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mill sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  14  March
    2017) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise
    requiring international or human rights protection, on account  of  his
    claimed homosexual orientation.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  initially  refused  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on 20 April 2017.  As  his  reasons
    anticipate  the  Secretary  of  State's  subsequent  Rule  24  response
    opposing the appeal, is it convenient to set them out here:

       "I  appreciate  the  application  is  important  to  the  appellant.
       However, his appeals on asylum, Article 2 and Article 3 grounds were
       dismissed because he failed to establish that he was  a  homosexual;
       he and his witnesses were found to be lacking in  credibility.   The
       only challenge to this finding was to be found at  para  11  of  the
       grounds of application wherein it is stated that the Judge  declined
       to examine the material laid before him.   This  submission  has  no
       arguable merit because the Judge  considered  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant at [20] - [23] and [27], the evidence of his witnesses  at
       [24] - [26], and the documentary evidence  as  provided  at  [28]  -
       [33].  The Judge's credibility findings were  open  to  him  on  the
       evidence before him and were not unreasonable or irrational."

 3. On a renewed application for permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge
    Finch granted the appellant permission to appeal on 25 May 2017 for the
    following reasons:

        "The First-tier Tribunal Judge applied a  standard  of  proof  which
        appears to be considerably in excess of that of a reasonable  degree
        of likelihood.  He also did not  take  into  account  any  objective
        evidence when  considering  actions  taken  by  the  appellant.   In
        addition, he did not adopt the approach recommended  in  Karanakaran
        -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] EWCA  Civ  11.
        As a consequence, it is  arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Mill's decision did  contain  arguable  errors  of  law  and  it  is
        appropriate to grant permission to appeal."



The Error of Law Hearing

 4. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr  Alam  developed  the  arguments  advanced  in  the  permission
    application.  In reply, Mr Duffy submitted that in effect the appellant
    was mounting a perversity challenge.  He submitted that  the  threshold
    for this was very high.



Discussion

 5. Although not cited to me, I have had regard to Muse &  Others  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10 on challenges to the adequacy of a
    judge's reasons.  In South Bucks District Council v Porter  (2)  [2004]
    UKHL 33, cited with approval by the Court of Appeal at paragraph  [33],
    Lord Brown said:

         "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration."

 6. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, whose date of  birth  is  [  ]
    1992.  He entered the United Kingdom with valid entry  clearance  as  a
    student in September 2011.  His student visa was curtailed to expire on
    16 November 2011, and the appellant did not return to  Pakistan  before
    the expiry of his visa.  On 20 November 2015 he applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on private  life  grounds,  and  the  application  was
    rejected.  He made a further application for leave to remain in the  UK
    on private life grounds on 21 April  2016,  and  this  application  was
    under consideration when the  appellant  claimed  asylum  in  or  about
    January 2017.

 7. His claim was that he realised that he was a gay  man  in  Pakistan  in
    2008, when aged 15 or 16.  He did not have any relationships with other
    males whilst in Pakistan.  He said that he started attending gay  clubs
    in London in 2014, and he had embarked on a  relationship  with  a  man
    named "IK" who he had met here.  He said that this was  his  first  and
    only gay relationship.  He said that in October 2015 he  had  told  his
    family in Pakistan about his sexuality, and in response they  had  made
    threats to kill him if he returned to Pakistan.

 8. At the hearing of his appeal, the  Judge  received  evidence  from  the
    appellant, and from two supporting witnesses, "SK" and  "HA".   Neither
    of the two supporting witnesses claimed to have been  in  a  homosexual
    relationship with the appellant, although HA said that he had had  oral
    sex with the appellant at a club in London on  28  January  2017  in  a
    toilet cubicle, as the  Judge  noted  in  his  subsequent  decision  at
    paragraph [25].

 9. The Judge found that the appellant and his  supporting  witnesses  were
    not credible for the following reasons:  (a)  the  appellant  had  been
    inconsistent in his explanation as to why he was found  by  Immigration
    Officers in October 2016 behind the counter of a restaurant; (b) he had
    not availed himself of the opportunity to claim asylum at the  earliest
    reasonable opportunity; (c) the appellant was inconsistent  as  to  the
    trigger for him eventually making an  asylum  claim  -  in  his  asylum
    interview he said that he had told his family about  his  sexuality  in
    October 2015, as a result of which they had made direct threats against
    him, and in his oral  evidence  he  said  that  a  friend  of  his  had
    travelled to Pakistan in October 2015 and had made  the  disclosure  to
    his family; (d) SK contradicted both these two versions of  events,  as
    he was very clear in his oral evidence that it was  in  2014  that  the
    appellant had received threats from his family in Pakistan, and he said
    that he had advised the appellant in 2014 that he should therefore make
    an asylum claim; (e) even if the appellant's family did  not  find  out
    about his claimed homosexuality until October 2015, this was still some
    9 months before the appellant made his asylum claim; (f) SK claimed  to
    have been very good friends with the appellant since his arrival in the
    UK in 2011, but he was apparently unaware of the appellant's  sexuality
    until 2014 - whereas the appellant had said in his asylum interview, in
    answer to question 54, that his friend had known him to  be  homosexual
    since the time that he had met them; (g) the Judge found  that  SK  did
    not know the appellant well, despite his own and the appellant's claims
    otherwise, and he had not given evidence to support the  alleged  same-
    sex relationship which the appellant claimed to have had with IK;   and
    (h) the appellant had not been credible or consistent about the claimed
    relationship with IK - he had been unable  to  name  the  snooker  club
    where he claimed  to  have  met  him  in  August  2014  in  his  asylum
    interview, he had given vague details about where the man lived, and he
    stated that he had  started  dating  IK  in  October  2015,  which  was
    inconsistent with the parallel claim that both this family and that  of
    IK were told in October 2015 of their  relationship  as  it  had  grown
    stronger by then.

10. At paragraph [28], the Judge noted that  the  appellant  had  submitted
    various documents to support his asylum claim and the fact that he  was
    homosexual.  He directed himself that the  appellant  was  required  to
    show that documents could be relied upon and that  they  could  not  be
    seen in isolation, following Tanvir Ahmed.  At paragraph [29], he  held
    that the letter from Naz, a Sexual Support Group for ethnic minorities,
    was self-serving.

11. At paragraphs [30]-[31], he held that the  same  applied  to  a  ticket
    displaying his name to attend the London Pride 2016 event  on  25  June
    2016, and numerous other leaflets and emails received from a variety of
    LGBT sources.  At paragraph [32], the Judge said that the appellant did
    not claim to be actively involved in the gay  community.   However,  in
    his substantive asylum interview, he said that he had attended LGBT  UK
    when it was located in Normand Street,  Southwick.   In  fact,  it  was
    based some 1.5 miles away in  Aldersgate  Street,  London.   The  Judge
    observed  that  the  appellant  provided  no   explanation   for   this
    discrepancy.

12. At paragraph [34], the Judge gave his reasons for  not  accepting  that
    the appellant was gay.  In summary, he made a late asylum  claim  after
    having received an immigration decision; he was inconsistent about  how
    his family in Pakistan found out that he was gay; his witnesses who had
    claimed to know him well did not appear to do so and were not  credible
    and reliable; he had not independently established that he was in a gay
    relationship for more than one year; and he appeared to have a lack  of
    knowledge and/or participation in the LGBT  life  in  the  UK;  he  had
    failed to evidence that he was a  homosexual;  and  he  had  failed  to
    regularise his stay after overstaying and his  second  application  for
    leave to remain was made after his alleged sexuality was made known  to
    his family and others in Pakistan, and  some  time  before  his  asylum
    claim.  All of those factors undermined his claim.  He did not find the
    appellant to be a credible and reliable witness, and he did not rely on
    this evidence.

13. At paragraph [4] of his decision, the Judge had directed  himself  that
    the lower standard of proof applied.  I am not persuaded that the Judge
    has failed to apply the lower standard of proof in accordance with  his
    self-direction. In effect, the error of law challenge is that  he  must
    have applied too high standard of proof, as he  has  rejected  evidence
    which he ought not to have rejected.

14. But an error of law challenge on this basis is not sustainable for  the
    reasons given in Muse.  The reviewing court cannot  simply  infer  that
    the Judge has applied the standard  of  proof  incorrectly  and/or  the
    wrong standard of proof.  The party asserting such an error of law  has
    to identify something in  the  decision  which  is  indicative  of  the
    judicial decision-maker applying  the  wrong  standard  of  proof.  The
    appellant has failed to do this.

15. One discernible theme in Mr Alam's submissions was an argument  to  the
    effect that the evidence was so strong that it  was  perverse  for  the
    Judge to find that the core  claim  was  not  made  out  to  the  lower
    standard of proof.   However,  the  evidence  brought  forward  by  the
    appellant was not particularly compelling, on an objective  assessment.
    He had not produced any documentary evidence of threats  received  from
    his family in Pakistan, and his former claimed sexual partner  had  not
    come  forward  to  give  supporting   evidence   of   the   appellant's
    homosexuality.  The Judge accepted at paragraph [27] that it  might  be
    impossible  for  the  appellant  to  "engage"  an  ex-partner  to  give
    evidence, but it was open to him to find, as he did, that there was  "a
    vacuum of evidence" to support the existence of the relationship  which
    was said to have been sustained for some time.

16. Another theme of Mr Alam's submissions was that some  of  the  findings
    made by the Judge were inadequately reasoned.  However, this is not the
    same as the Judge failing to  apply  the  correct  standard  of  proof.
    Moreover, most of the Judge's findings were not specifically challenged
    as inadequately reasoned by Mr Alam.

17. Mr Alam submitted that the private life application which the appellant
    had made in 2015, and again at the beginning of 2016, had been made  on
    the basis that he was in a gay relationship.  This is  consistent  with
    the appellant having obtained from Naz a letter dated 12  January  2016
    confirming that he had first used their services  on  that  day  during
    which he had an HIV test, and confirming that he presented as a gay man
    of Pakistani heritage. But this does not detract from the finding  made
    by the Judge that the appellant  failed  to  provide  any  adequate  or
    credible explanation for why he did not claim asylum sooner than August
    2016.

18. Mr Alam submitted that the Judge wrongly rejected the evidence from Naz
    at paragraph [29], as Naz is (he submits) an independent  organisation.
    However, the author of the letter from Naz was not purporting  to  give
    expert evidence.  All he was doing was confirming  that  the  appellant
    had attended the service on the day in  question,  asking  for  an  HIV
    test, and that he presented as a gay man of Pakistani origin.   It  was
    open to the Judge to find that the letter was self-serving, as  it  was
    not a letter which presented as being issued in the ordinary course  of
    business. The appellant had clearly asked for the letter to be written.
     It was this open to the Judge to find that the timing  of  the  letter
    raised suspicions regarding the purpose for  which  the  appellant  had
    attended  the  Naz  service.   The  Judge  added  that  there  was   no
    indication, "as is sometimes seen in letters from the Naz Project  that
    the individual's claims  of  sexuality  are  believed/supported."   The
    Judge further observed that there was no evidence to suggest  that  the
    appellant had maintained contact with or used Naz services at any other
    time.  So, it was open to the Judge to attach  no  weight  to  the  Naz
    letter as materially advancing the core claim, for the reasons which he
    gave.

19. Mr Alam also submitted that the Judge had failed to  make  findings  on
    letters of support from witnesses who had not attended the  hearing  to
    give oral evidence.  However, the Judge was  not  obliged  to  consider
    every piece of evidence individually.  The evidence  of  the  witnesses
    who had attended the hearing, and who  had  been  tendered  for  cross-
    examination, had  much  greater  potential  probative  value  than  the
    evidence of those who had only provided letters of support.  The  Judge
    gave adequate reasons for finding that HA and SK were not credible  and
    reliable witnesses.

20. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Finch observed that  the  Judge
    did not take into  account  any  objective  evidence  when  considering
    actions taken by the appellant.  This was not a point developed  by  Mr
    Alam, and it does not appear to me to be a point of any merit.  All the
    appellant's relevant actions have been  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    objective evidence as to the situation which the appellant  would  face
    on return to Pakistan would only be relevant if  the  Judge  had  found
    that the appellant was gay.

21. At paragraph [35], the Judge found that the first test set down  in  HJ
    (Iran) was not met.  In the circumstances, he did not find it necessary
    to go on to consider the issue of sufficiency of protection or risk  to
    the appellant on return to Pakistan, other than  to  observe  generally
    that those who are homosexual were likely, at least, to face harassment
    and intimidation within Pakistani society.  But, in view of his primary
    findings, these matters were, he said, irrelevant to the  consideration
    of the appellant's case.  The position taken by the Judge  on  risk  on
    return does not disclose any error of law.

22. In the permission application, the  appellant's  representatives  cited
    the case of Karanakaran for the  proposition  that,  "an  asylum  claim
    could succeed even though the person assessing it might doubt  part  of
    the  account."   This  is  undoubtedly  right,   but   the   permission
    application fails to explain how this observation is  relevant  to  the
    decision under appeal.

23. The Judge has unequivocally stated that he attaches no credence to  the
    oral evidence of the witnesses before him, or to the  contents  of  the
    salient documents which were relied upon in support of the core  claim.
    It was open to the Judge to make these findings for the  reasons  which
    he gave, and no breach of the guidance given by the Court of Appeal  in
    Karanakaran is made out.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 16 July 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

