
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01128/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                |                                |
|On 22 August 2019                     |On 03 September 2019            |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                 KARZAN [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Holmes instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent: Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bannerman promulgated on 17 April 2019, which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of a protection claim  on  all
    grounds.

 3. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge failed to properly
    consider the risk for the  Appellant  travelling  through  Iraq  as  an
    accepted member of the KDP and whether a 15(c)-risk existed  in  Kirkuk
    on the basis of AA (Iraq) or that it was justified to depart from it on
    the evidence.

 4. On 3 July 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb gave permission to appeal.

 5. At the hearing Mr Tan conceded that there were errors  of  law  in  the
    Judges decision.



Finding on Material Error

 6. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law and I find that Mr Tan was correct
    in making that concession.

 7. At paragraph 77 of the decision the Judge finds that Article 15(c)  was
    not engaged by the security situation in Kirkuk which  is  contrary  to
    the guidance given in AA (Article 15 (c)) Iraq [2015] UKUT 00544. It is
    a matter of well established law that any failure to  follow  a  clear,
    apparently applicable country guidance case or to show why it does  not
    apply to the case in question is likely to be regarded as a ground  for
    review or appeal on a point of law.  The Court of Appeal has previously
    stated in R and Others v SSHD (2005) EWCA Civ 982 that it represented a
    failure to take a material matter into account. The starting point  for
    the decision of whether to go behind a CG case is  the  helpful  advice
    provided in SG (Iraq) v SSHD; OR (Iraq) v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940
    where the  CA  said  that  decision-makers  and  tribunal  judges  were
    required to take country guidance determinations into account,  and  to
    follow them unless 'very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence',
    were adduced justifying their not doing so (paras 43  -  50).  In  this
    case other than the brief assertion made  in  paragraph  77  that  'the
    situation may not be a good one' there is no engagement by the Judge in
    the nature of the evidence that persuaded him that departing  from  the
    Country Guidance was appropriate.

 8. The issue of the security situation in Kirkuk was relevant to the issue
    of a CSID which all of the caselaw is clear the Appellant would need to
    be able to survive in Iraq. The Judge appear to have accepted that  the
    Appellant did not have one.  If  the  Judge  had  determined  that  the
    Appellant could not return to Kirkuk he was then  obliged  to  consider
    whether the Appellant could obtain a replacement  CSID  card  within  a
    reasonable  period  of  time  on  his  return.  There  is  no  adequate
    assessment of the various options: obtaining the document in the UK, in
    the replacement civil status office in  Baghdad  by  reference  to  the
    caselaw and his particular  circumstances.  There  is  for  example  no
    assessment of what languages he speaks, whether there were male  family
    members available to assist and how that might impact on this task.

 9. If the Judge determined that the Appellant could obtain  a  replacement
    CSID having accepted that Kirkuk was unsafe he was obliged to  consider
    relocation to the IKR and whether that was reasonable by  reference  to
    the Appellants personal circumstances and the guidance in AAH. There is
    no engagement with his circumstances, his lack of family support in the
    IKR, his work experience,  the  challenge  of  obtaining  accommodation
    merely an assertion that there would be no harsh consequences.

10. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and  determine  these
    issues constitutes clear errors of law. These errors I consider  to  be
    material since had the Tribunal conducted  this  exercise  the  outcome
    could have been different. That in my  view  is  the  correct  test  to
    apply.

11. I have regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  Presidents  Practice
    Statement and the nature and extent of the factual findings required in
    remaking the decision, and I have decided that this is  an  appropriate
    case to remit to the FTT to make completely fresh findings of fact.

CONCLUSION

12. I therefore set aside the decision and  remit  it  to  the  FTT  to  be
    reheard before me. No findings preserved.


    Signed
    Date 24.8.2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
