
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01279/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 May 2019                       |On 4 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     ESC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West, instructed by Duncan Lewis, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia who was born on 8 June  1978.   He
    last came to the United Kingdom as a visitor on 23 December  2010  with
    leave valid until 23 June 2011.   Thereafter,  he  overstayed.   On  17
    October 2014, he was arrested, bailed and, thereafter,  absconded.   He
    was again arrested on 9 October 2017.

 3. On 10 October 2017, the appellant claimed asylum.   He  claimed  asylum
    and claimed to be at  risk  on  return  to  Gambia  for  four  distinct
    reasons:

      1) he had worked as an Immigration Officer  in  Gambia  and  had  been
         accused of issuing passports fraudulently to individuals  who  were
         not entitled to them;

      2) he was a supporter of the former government and  the  Alliance  for
         Patriotic Re-orientation and Construction ("APRC") party;

      3) as a result of his uncle being killed in June 2017; and

      4) he had been critical of the current  regime  in  a  WhatsApp  audio
         message which had been widely shared.

 4. On 10 January 2018, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.



The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    initially heard on 15  March  2018  and  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He sought permission to appeal against that decision and, on
    26 April 2018, the First-tier Tribunal reviewed its  own  decision  and
    set it aside.

 6. The appeal was, therefore, relisted for a de novo  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 20 June 2018.

 7. In a determination sent on 19 July 2018, Judge R Sullivan dismissed the
    appellant's appeal on all  grounds.   She  made  a  number  of  adverse
    credibility findings in respect of the appellant and his evidence.

 8. First, she did not accept that he had been employed as  an  Immigration
    Officer in Gambia and  that  he  had  been  accused  of  issuing  false
    passports.  Secondly, she did not accept that  the  appellant  was  the
    nephew of the individual, whom he claimed to be his uncle, and who  had
    died on 3 June 2017.  In any event, she also found  that  even  if  the
    relationship had been established it had not been shown that this would
    create a real risk to the appellant on return to the Gambia.   Thirdly,
    the judge  rejected  the  appellant's  account  that  the  relied  upon
    WhatsApp audio file had been uploaded or disseminated in the  way  that
    he claimed and so he had not established that he was at risk  from  the
    regime in Gambia as he claimed.  Finally, the judge was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant was an APRC member and was, therefore,  at  risk  of
    harm on return due to his political affiliation.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  20
    August 2018.  However, on 13 November 2018, on a  renewed  application,
    the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Finch)  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.

10. The Secretary of State did not file a rule 24 response.

The Submissions

11. Mr West, who represented the appellant, relied upon  the  two  sets  of
    grounds of appeal, in particular the more detailed grounds  filed  with
    the First-tier Tribunal application for permission dated 2 August 2018.
     He relied upon all five grounds.

12. First, he submitted that the judge had acted unfairly by raising issues
    concerning the reliability or authenticity of  a  number  of  documents
    which had not been raised at the hearing and, therefore, the  appellant
    had been unfairly  denied  the  opportunity  to  deal  with  them.   He
    submitted that in para 41(a) and (b) and para 43, the judge had  raised
    points in relation to the certificates from  the  Gambia  Armed  Forces
    Training School and the Gambia Immigration Department  and  photographs
    of the appellant in uniform.

13. Secondly, Mr West submitted  that  the  judge's  adverse  view  of  the
    appellant's credibility had been wrongly tainted by her reliance on the
    fact, at para 23, that the appellant was "a man willing to tell  lies",
    in that he had initially said at the hearing that he was working in the
    UK but had changed his evidence when the contents of email were put  to
    him which showed he made  financial  provision  for  relatives  in  the
    Gambia.

14. Thirdly, Mr West submitted that  in  finding  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to establish that he was related to the person, whom he  claimed
    to be his uncle and who had been killed on 3 June 2017, the  judge  had
    failed to take into  account  all  the  evidence,  including  that  his
    mother's name on her birth certificate was the  same  as  that  of  his
    claimed uncle, namely her brother, and that there was  an  APRC  letter
    (at page 73), referring  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  that
    individual as his uncle.  Further, there was  a  death  certificate  at
    page 53, relating to the individual which he  claimed  related  to  his
    uncle and which identified the informant by name and there was evidence
    at pages 57-58 from  that  individual  linking  the  appellant  to  the
    deceased.  Mr West submitted that the judge had  inadequately  reasoned
    that there were "no official documentary evidence" of any  relationship
    between the deceased individual and either of the appellant's  parents.



15. Fourthly, Mr West submitted that in relation to the judge's finding  in
    respect of the WhatsApp audio file, there were a number  of  supporting
    documents, in particular at pages 57-72 of the bundle,  supporting  the
    appellant's claim that the audio message had  been  posted  and  widely
    shared.  The judge had failed to take this evidence  into  account,  in
    particular  at  para  60  when  she  had  stated  that  there  was   no
    "documentary evidence that the critical message was posted to  WhatsApp
    by the appellant or, if it was, that it was widely shared".

16. Fifthly, Mr West submitted that the judge had wrongly  failed  to  take
    into account the expert evidence by Dr Kea in relation, in  particular,
    to the authenticity of the official documents upon which the  appellant
    relied.  Mr West pointed out that the judge had accepted  that  Dr  Kea
    was an expert in "the culture and politics  of  Gambia"  but  had  been
    wrong at paras 25 and 40  to  doubt  her  expertise  in  assessing  the
    documentation because she was not a "forensic document examiner".

17. On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Mr  Howells  made  a  number  of
    submissions in response  to  the  appellant's  grounds  and  Mr  West's
    submissions.

18. First, as  regards  ground  1,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  most
    important document considered by the judge was the appellant's  claimed
    ID card which the judge dealt with at  length  at  para  41(c)  of  her
    determination and in the light  of  the  appellant's  evidence  at  the
    hearing in relation to it.  Mr Howells was unable to  indicate  whether
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing had specifically  challenged  the
    authenticity of the two certificates referred to by the judge in  paras
    41(a) and (b) and the photographs referred to  at  para  43.   He  did,
    however, acknowledge that it did not appear that the  judge  had  asked
    any questions  about  these  documents  at  the  hearing.   Mr  Howells
    accepted that that was an error but, given the overall reasoning of the
    judge, was not material to her decision.

19. Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that the judge was entitled to take into
    account, as she stated at para 23, that the appellant had lied  in  his
    evidence before the Tribunal.  Mr Howells submitted that it  was  clear
    from the judge's detailed determination and reasons that  she  had  not
    taken that lie as the basis for finding his account not to be credible.
     Mr Howells submitted that the judge considered  each  element  of  the
    claim at length and made a finding in relation to  the  credibility  of
    each of the bases upon which the appellant put his claim.

20. Thirdly, Mr Howells submitted that the judge was entitled to find  that
    there  were  no   "official   documents"   establishing   the   claimed
    relationship between the appellant and his claimed uncle.  Whilst  that
    might not have been possible in a single document, it would  have  been
    possible by producing a number of documents.  In any event, Mr  Howells
    submitted that the judge had found at paras 53 and 54(f) that  even  if
    the appellant were related to the individual who had  been  killed,  he
    had not established that he was at risk on return to Gambia  by  reason
    of that relationship.  Mr Howells submitted that that finding  was  not
    challenged and therefore any error  in  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    evidence concerning the claimed relationship was not  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal on the basis  that  he  claimed  to  be  at  risk
    because of his uncle.

21. Finally, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had, in  fact,  considered
    the opinion of Dr Kea in relation to the authenticity of the  documents
    at para 41(c) and paras 42-43.  Mr Howells submitted that the judge had
    given good and sound reasons for not accepting the reliability  of  the
    documents.

Discussion

22. Whilst I do not accept Mr West's submissions in their  entirety,  there
    is in my judgment merit in a number of them (Grounds 1, 4 and  5)  such
    that I am satisfied that the judge's adverse findings are  not  legally
    sustainable.

    Grounds 1 and 5

23. First, and Mr Howells effectively  accepted  this,  the  judge  took  a
    number of points, adversely  to  the  appellant,  in  relation  to  two
    certificates relied upon in order  to  assist  him  in  establishing  a
    central feature  of  his  claim,  namely  that  he  had  worked  as  an
    Immigration Officer in the Gambian government.  So, at paras 41(a)  and
    (b) the judge said this:

         "a)  The certificates from the Gambia Armed Forces Training  School
             and the Gambia Immigration Department appear to relate to  the
             Appellant's attendance on the same training  course.   However
             one says that the course started on 4  October  2004  and  the
             other that it started on 20 October 2004.   Dr  Kea  does  not
             mention this difference.

         b)   The two certificates are both stamped  for  the  Gambia  Armed
             Forces  Training  School  and  have   the   same   signatories
             notwithstanding that one of them purports to be a  certificate
             from the Gambian Immigration Department rather than  from  the
             Gambia Armed Forces Training School.  Dr Kea does not  mention
             this anomaly or cast any light on key personalities in  office
             at either establishment in February 2005."

24. Then, at para 43 the judge added  this  in  relation  to  a  number  of
    photographs which were  said  to  show  the  appellant  in  appropriate
    uniform:

         "The Appellant has also provided photographs showing him in various
         uniforms with varying indications of rank and other  insignia.   In
         one photograph he is sitting with at least one senior officer.   Dr
         Kea has offered no view as to what the uniforms or several insignia
         denote and has not expressed a view about any feature of any of the
         photographs which may indicate its date."

25. Although the originals of these documents appear to have been handed up
    to the judge towards the end  of  the  hearing  (see  para  18  of  her
    determination), it was accepted before me that the documents  were,  in
    copy form, in the  respondent's  bundle.   Mr  Howells  was  unable  to
    indicate whether the Presenting Officer had challenged the authenticity
    of these documents at the hearing.  His  position  was  that  it  would
    appear that no questions were asked of the appellant either  in  cross-
    examination or by the judge in  relation  to  the  points  raised,  and
    relied upon by her, in paras 41(a) and (b) and 43.

26. It is axiomatic that fairness  requires  that  an  individual  have  an
    opportunity  to  deal  with  any  potentially  adverse  points  of  any
    significance which are raised by  the  evidence  and  which  the  judge
    subsequently  takes  into  account  in  reaching  his  or  her  factual
    findings; at least in respect of significant matters which,  otherwise,
    the  appellant  would  not  appreciate  might  be  taken  into  account
    adversely by the judge (see, e.g. R (Maheshwaran) v  SSHD  [2002]  EWCA
    Civ 173).  Here, it was a central plank of the appellant's case that he
    had been employed as an Immigration Officer and  the  two  certificates
    and photographs were significant elements of the evidence  relevant  to
    that issue.  It does not appear that they had been  challenged  by  the
    respondent at the hearing and, as a result, it is difficult to see  how
    the points taken by the judge adversely to  the  appellant  could  have
    been anticipated or foreseen by the appellant or his representative.  I
    accept, as Mr Howells submitted,  that  the  judge  also  rejected  the
    reliability of the appellant's ID card at para 41(c).  Nevertheless,  I
    do not  accept  that  the  unfairness  in  denying  the  appellant  the
    opportunity to deal with the adverse points taken in  relation  to  the
    two certificates at para 41(a) and (b) and the photographs at  para  43
    was not material, in the sense that it can be said that  the  appellant
    would not have been able to  offer  an  explanation  which  might  have
    affected the judge's overall view of the documentation relevant to  his
    claim to have been an Immigration Officer in Gambia.

27. Related to this is the issue concerning the  judge's  treatment  of  Dr
    Kea's evidence as to the genuineness of these documents.

28. At  para  25  of  her  determination,  the  judge  first  set  out  her
    "reservations" about Dr Kea's expertise in assessing the  documentation
    relied on.  The judge said this:

         "25. In considering the country evidence, given her  qualifications
             and experience, I accept the report of Dr  Kea  as  an  expert
             report concerning the culture and politics of Gambia.  I  have
             reservations about her expertise as  a  document  examiner  as
             will become clear."

29. Then at para 40, the judge set out Dr Kea's "expert view"  in  relation
    to the documents as follows:

         "40. The expert view is that 'the certificate  of  appointment/  ID
             card issued to the client is a genuine document.   The  layout
             and stamp are typical of Gambian ID  cards.   The  certificate
             issued by the Gambian Armed Forces  Training  School  and  the
             certificate issued by the Gambian Immigration  Department  are
             also genuine documents.   Similarly  the  layout,  format  and
             official stamp are typical of  official  certificates  in  the
             Gambia.  Based on my experience of working  and  carrying  out
             research in the Gambia  I  have  found  that  the  quality  of
             materials,   production,   and   presentation    of    printed
             documentation in the Gambia can be  below  the  standards  one
             would expect'.  Dr Kea is  an  anthropologist  rather  than  a
             forensic document examiner  by  way  of  background  and  last
             conducted  research  in  Gambia  in  October  2007.   She  has
             knowledge of Gambian culture and political economy but  it  is
             not apparent from the CV she offers to  what  extent  she  has
             examined  Gambian  identity,  armed  forces   or   immigration
             documentation.  In short Dr Kea  appears  to  be  saying  that
             because these Gambian documents are typical  of  such  Gambian
             documents they are genuine.   I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
             conclusion necessarily follows from that reasoning."

30. Then, in para 41(a) and (b), having  identified  the  issues  that  the
    judge saw with the two certificates relied  upon  and,  at  para  41(b)
    noting that Dr Kea did not deal with  the  anomaly  identified  by  the
    judge, at para 41(c) the judge dealt with the  appellant's  claimed  ID
    card as follows:

         "c)  The Gambia Immigration Services identity card  bears  a  typed
             date 2/4/01 but the photograph on it is  date  stamped  5  May
             2009.  It is an obvious difference but Dr Kea does not mention
             it.  Asked about this identity card the Appellant said that it
             was issued to him on 2 April 2001 and that  it  was  the  card
             originally issued to him.  The  rank  typed  on  the  card  is
             'A.I.CO'.  I asked the meaning of  the  abbreviation  and  the
             Appellant  said  that  it  meant  that  he  was   a   corporal
             immigration control officer.  He said that he was promoted  to
             Corporal in 2004 and had held no rank when he was appointed in
             2001.  In my view these answers were not consistent  with  the
             card having been issued to the Appellant  in  2001.   I  asked
             about the date stamp 5 May 2009 and after a notable pause  the
             Appellant said that it was dated when he updated the  picture;
             he had not mentioned this when earlier asked if there had been
             any amendment or alteration to  the  card  since  its  initial
             issue.  There is nothing visible on or around  the  photograph
             to suggest that an earlier photograph had been affixed  there;
             asked about this and in direct contradiction  to  his  earlier
             evidence  the  Appellant  said  that  he  had  been  given   a
             replacement identity card, that his original identity card had
             been a brown one and that the card he had  filed  in  evidence
             was his second identity  card.   Dr  Kea  says  nothing  about
             different colours of identity cards being used by the  Gambian
             Immigration  Service.   I  would  have   expected   a   person
             purporting to give expert evidence about the documentation  of
             the Gambian Immigration Service to know  something  about  the
             entry rank, promotion and documentation of staff  and  to  say
             something about differences in the colour  of  the  card  from
             time to time."

    Then at para 42 the judge said this in relation to Dr Kea's evidence:

         "42. I find that Dr Kea has not engaged meaningful with the details
             of  the  training  certificates  or  the  Gambian  Immigration
             Services identity card.  She ought, if she has the  expertise,
             to have explained it in her  CV  and  to  have  addressed  the
             discrepancies on the documentation.  I am not  satisfied  that
             she has the training, background or  experience  to  offer  an
             expert view about the authenticity of any of these  documents.
             It is not sufficient to say that they  are  typical  of  their
             sort."

31. It is difficult to know precisely what, if any, weight the judge placed
    on Dr Kea's opinion.  The judge appears to have 'topped and tailed' her
    conclusion in relation to the documents by doubting Dr Kea's expertise.
     Dr Kea's report is at pages 23-44 of the appellant's bundle.  It  sets
    out her expertise including her qualifications as an anthropologist and
    her current academic post in the University of Sussex.  It also  points
    out that she has written many expert reports in relation to Gambia  and
    cowrote the COI report for 2011.  Whilst she does not purport to be, as
    the judge noted, a "forensic document examiner",  she  does  appear  to
    have extensive knowledge of the Gambia, even though she has not visited
    there to carry out research until October 2007.  She has, as her report
    points out, visited there subsequently in September 2012 and  September
    2014.  The judge was not entitled to disregard  her  expertise  to  the
    extent that she was entitled to say, as an expert, that  the  documents
    were "typical" of those emanating from the Gambia.  Of  course,  as  Mr
    Howells submitted, the judge also engaged with Dr Kea's views, at least
    to some extent, in relation to some of the documents,  commenting  that
    she did not refer to a particular issue relied upon by the judge.  I am
    unable to discount, however, that given the judge's 'top  and  tailing'
    of her consideration of the documents and Dr Kea's report, that she has
    not given it due weight on the erroneous basis that Dr Kea's views were
    not entitled to some weight  as  an  expert  on  Gambian  politics  and
    culture including the typical  appearance  of  some  of  the  documents
    relied upon by the appellant.

32. Taken together, therefore, grounds 1 and 5, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge's adverse findings, at least in relation to the first limb of the
    appellant's claim, are legally unsustainable.

    Ground 4

33. I am also satisfied that ground 4 has merits.  The judge found that the
    appellant had not established that the WhatsApp audio message had  been
    posted or widely shared so as to create a risk to him.  The judge dealt
    with this at paras 55-62.  At para 60, in particular,  the  judge  said
    this:

         "60. Several of the  emails  from  the  Appellant's  relatives  and
             friends in Gambia refer to  them  having  heard  the  critical
             audio message or spoken to friends or associates who had heard
             it.  There is evidence that there retaliatory action was taken
             in the form of an attack on a business run by the  Appellant's
             ex-wife.   However  none  of  these  witnesses  has   provided
             documentary evidence that the critical message was  posted  to
             WhatsApp by the Appellant or, if it was, that  it  was  widely
             shared."

    Whilst it is true to say that the judge found  "discrepancies"  in  the
    appellant's evidence, she also stated at para  62  that:  "He  has  not
    provided reliable evidence of the uploading  or  dissemination  of  the
    single audio message on which this element of his claim is based."   As
    Mr West submitted, there was  supportive  evidence  from  a  number  of
    individuals at pages 57-72 of the bundle.  The judge appears,  at  para
    60 to have been focussed on the absence of "documentary evidence".   Mr
    Howells suggested that this might include evidence of the 'thread' of a
    WhatsApp message showing the dissemination of the message and/or  audio
    file.  At para 57, the judge refers to the absence  of  any  supporting
    evidence from the "other 300-[500] members of  the  WhatsApp  group  to
    which the message was sent".  But, at para  60,  the  judge  refers  to
    several emails from the appellant's relatives and friends who claim  to
    have heard the message or spoken to friends  and  associates  who  have
    heard it.  It is unclear whether the judge is, in  fact,  referring  to
    the evidence at pages  57-72  which  are  not  emails  but  rather  are
    statements or letters from individuals who, inter alia,  speak  to  the
    dissemination of the audio file and from others who had heard it.

34. Whilst the judge deals at some length with the evidence concerning  the
    claimed uploading and distribution of  the  WhatsApp  file,  I  am  not
    satisfied that in reaching her adverse conclusion that it had not  been
    established that it had been  uploaded  and  widely  disseminated,  she
    fully took into account and grappled with the evidence at  pages  57-72
    supporting that  as  having  occurred.   So,  for  that  reason,  I  am
    satisfied that ground 4 is  made  out  and  that  the  judge's  adverse
    finding in relation to the risk to the appellant as  a  result  of  the
    claimed dissemination of the WhatsApp file is flawed.

    Grounds 2 and 3

35. I do not, however, accept Mr West's submissions in relation to ground 2
    and ground 3.

36. As regards the ground 2, I accept Mr Howells' submission that the judge
    did not wrongly take into account that  the  appellant  had  sought  to
    mislead the Tribunal in his evidence as  a  matter  going,  in  general
    terms, to his credibility.  It would, of course, have been quite  wrong
    for the judge to reason that because he had lied  to  the  Tribunal  in
    respect of whether he was working in the UK, then none of his  evidence
    should be accepted.  It was, merely, a relevant matter in assessing his
    general credibility.  But, as Mr Howells submitted, it  is  plain  that
    having  referred  to  the  appellant's  lie  at  para  23,  the  judge,
    thereafter, went on to consider in detail the evidence relevant to each
    limb of the appellant's claim and to  reach  credibility  findings  and
    conclusions  based  upon  the  evidence.   She  did   not,   therefore,
    improperly take into account by giving it undue weight, the  fact  that
    the appellant had lied to the Tribunal in relation to  whether  he  was
    working in the UK.

37. As regards ground 3, I accept Mr Howells' submissions  that  the  judge
    cannot be criticised for  taking  into  account  that  there  were  "no
    official  documentary  evidence"  of  any  relationship   between   the
    appellant's claimed uncle and the appellant's parents.  In truth, there
    was no such evidence.  Even though Mr West sought to persuade  me  that
    there was evidence linking the appellant to the person whom he  claimed
    was his uncle, at its highest this amounted to a reliance upon the fact
    that the appellant's mother and his claimed uncle had the same surname.
     There was, however, no evidence before the  judge  that  this  was  an
    uncommon surname which made the coincidence unlikely  or,  as  Mr  West
    himself observed in his  submissions,  a  name  such  as  "Smith"  when
    seeking to establish a relationship between two individuals  with  that
    surname in the UK.

38. Even if I were persuaded by Mr West's submissions that  the  judge  had
    erred in law by failing to take into account the APRC letter  (at  page
    73) which spoke to the appellant's relationship with his claimed  uncle
    or the evidence from the  "informant"  on  his  claimed  uncle's  death
    certificate, in themselves this would not materially affect the judge's
    finding based upon the risk to the appellant on the basis of his uncle.
     As Mr  Howells  pointed  out,  the  judge  found  that,  even  if  the
    individual claimed to be his uncle was indeed his uncle, he had  failed
    to establish that there was a real risk to him on this basis  and  that
    finding is not challenged in the grounds.







    Conclusion

39. Nevertheless, for the reasons I have given above, I am satisfied on the
    basis of grounds 1, 4 and 5 that the judge materially erred in  law  in
    reaching her adverse findings and dismissing the appellant's claim  for
    asylum.

40. Both  representatives  acknowledged  before  me  that  if  the  judge's
    decision could not stand, the proper disposal  of  the  appeal  was  to
    remit it to the First-tier for re-hearing.  That, in  my  judgment,  is
    inevitable despite the fact that the  appeal  has  already  twice  been
    heard in the First-tier Tribunal.  It would not be appropriate,  in  my
    judgment, to leave intact any of the  judge's  findings  as  the  claim
    turns upon, in large measure, the credibility of the appellant and  his
    account.  The appellant's credibility must be assessed globally and, in
    particular, in relation to each of the  elements  of  his  claim.   The
    appeal must, in my judgment, be re-heard de novo.

Decision

41. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error of  law.
    That decision is set aside.

42. Having regard to the nature and extent of fact-finding required and  to
    para 7.2 of the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo re-hearing before a judge other than Judge Telford or  Judge  R
    Sullivan.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 30 May 2019
