
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01402/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 4 April 2018                      |On 30 April 2018                        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                asuncion [g]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sills, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Asuncion [G], born on [ ] 1966 is a  female  citizen  of
    the Philippines.  She arrived in the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor  in
    2005 and claimed international protection in July  2013.   She  claimed
    protection having been arrested in West Yorkshire on 30  November  2011
    and served with a notice IS151A as an overstayer.  By a decision  dated
    20 January 2017, the respondent refused  the  appellant's  claim.   She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis) which, in a decision
    promulgated on 25 March 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's international protection appeal had first become before
    Judge Shimmin who dismissed it in  a  decision  dated  27  March  2014.
    Subsequent  to  that  decision,  the  appellant's  circumstances   have
    changed.  The appellant is still married to a  man  who  lives  in  the
    Philippines.  On 13 August 2010, she entered into an  Islamic  marriage
    with Mr  Ali.   Before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  her  principal  argument
    concerned her inability to pursue her family life with Mr Ali  and  any
    jurisdiction other than the United Kingdom.  She continues to claim  to
    fear violence at the hands of her husband in the Philippines should she
    return to that country and should he discover that she has returned.

 3.  Judge  Shimmin  properly  based  his   decision   upon   the   earlier
    determination of  Judge  Shimmin.   Judge  Hillis  concluded  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk of violence at the hands of her Filipino
    husband.  He found [37] that there was "no new  reliable  evidence  ...
    show that the Philippine legal system actively  prosecutes  people  for
    the  offence  of  adultery  ...".   Again,  following  Judge  Shimmin's
    determination,  Judge  Hillis   [38]   found   that   there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles preventing the  appellant  "returning  to  the
    Philippines relocating to another area if necessary [away from the area
    occupied by the  appellant's  husband]  seeking  an  annulment  of  her
    marriage to enable her to marry Mr Ali at a Filipino  law  and  joining
    her there".  He had concluded (as had Judge Shimmin) at [35]  that  the
    appellant had "failed to show  she  will  not  be  able  to  obtain  an
    annulment of her marriage and naming her to legally formally  marry  Mr
    Ali in the secular ceremony and then be able to have him accompany  her
    to the Philippines".

 4. I find that the appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds should  be
    allowed.  I have reached that conclusion  for  the  following  reasons.
    First, I am satisfied that the appellant has proved that she  would  be
    unable to be joined by Mr Ali in the Philippines  unless  he  were  her
    lawful husband.  The Philippine Immigration Act 190 makes no  provision
    for unmarried partners to gain  entry  clearance  to  the  country.  In
    answer to question raised by Judge Jordan when granting  permission,  I
    am satisfied that the appellant cannot arrange for the entry of Mr  Ali
    to the Philippines as her partner; he may only join her as  her  lawful
    spouse.

 5. Secondly, I  find  that  both  Judge  Shimmin  and  Judge  Hillis  have
    underestimated the central problems faced by the appellant in obtaining
    an annulment of her marriage  from  her  existing  husband.   Both  the
    previous judges dealt with the possibility of obtaining an annulment in
    very short order, concluding that an annulment would  be  available  to
    the appellant "on the payment  of  a  fee".   That  is  a  gross  over-
    simplification.  Not surprisingly, the evidence indicates that,  as  in
    most jurisdictions, the annulment of  a  marriage  in  the  Philippines
    requires the petitioner to prove that  the  grounds  for  annulment  as
    required  by  statute  (sexual  incapacity  or  a  wilful  refusal   to
    consummate the marriage etc).  The appellant has  been  separated  from
    her husband for some time and there is no evidence which might  suggest
    that any of the grounds required to prove annulment  are  available  to
    this appellant.  Further, the evidence shows that it would be necessary
    to serve  the  annulment  application  upon  the  appellant's  husband.
    Serving  such  an  application,  especially  if,  for  example,  sexual
    incapacity were alleged, would  not  only  alert  the  husband  to  the
    presence of the appellant in  the  Philippines  but  might  conceivably
    provoke him into violence against the appellant.  In any  event,  I  am
    not satisfied that the appellant is able to prove any  of  the  grounds
    required for an annulment. In consequence,  I  find  that  that  remedy
    would not be available to her.

 6. It follows, therefore, that if  (i)  the  appellant  cannot  obtain  an
    annulment of her marriage, (ii) divorce is out  of  the  question,  and
    (iii) Mr Ali may only join her in the Philippines if he is  her  lawful
    spouse, then Mr Ali will not obtain entry clearance to the Philippines.
     There is no challenge  to  the  genuineness  and  subsistence  of  the
    appellant's relationship with Mr Ali.  She enjoys family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom with him.  Indeed, she may only  lawfully  enjoy  family
    life with Mr Ali in the United Kingdom since there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles preventing her from enjoying such family life with him in the
    country of her  nationality.   In  the  light  of  these  findings  and
    observations, I have concluded that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    law such that its decision falls to be set aside.  I  have  remade  the
    decision.  I find on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal (which includes that put before the First-tier  Tribunal)  the
    appellant has established that  there  exist  insurmountable  obstacles
    preventing her enjoying family life with Mr  Ali  in  the  Philippines.
    The appellant's  appeal  is,  therefore,  allowed  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on  23  March
2017 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appellant's  appeal  is
allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date     20 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





