
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal l
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01848/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 September 2019                           |On 19 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     DAM
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Bankfield Heath,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born in 1991 and  is  a  male  citizen  of  Iraq.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 24 January 2018  refusing  to  grant  him  international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal in a  decision  promulgated  on  17
    April 2019, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside. My reasons are as follows. The judge accepted that the appellant
    could not return to his home area of Iraq, Kirkuk  [103].  The  appeal,
    therefore, turned on the question of internal flight. The  judge  found
    [113] that the appellant has a father and older  brother  in  Iraq  who
    would be able to assist him to 'obtain the necessary documentation  and
    with accommodation and employments (sic).' At [115],  the  judge  found
    that the expert witness in the appeal, Dr George,  did  not  contradict
    the judge's conclusion that the appellant would be able to relocate  to
    the IKR; Dr George had found that the authorities in the IKR  would  be
    unable/unwilling to offer protection to the appellant claimed to be the
    subject of a blood  feud,  a  claim  which  the  judge  found  was  not
    credible.

 3. Whilst I have no reason at all to interfere with the judge's finding as
    regards the appellant's claim to be  involved  in  the  blood  feud,  I
    disagree with the judge that Dr George's evidence offers no support  to
    the appellant's claim that he could not relocate to the IKR. Dr  George
    found that the Baghdad-based authorities would be  unable/unwilling  to
    extend effective protection to the appellant. That  is  an  observation
    which is in line with the existing country guidance of AA (Iraq) [2017]
    EWCA Civ 944 and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq  CG  UKUT
    00212 (IAC). Although the judge found  that  the  appellant's  lack  of
    credibility led him to conclude that the appellant may have a  passport
    [108], the judge fails to explain clearly how  the  appellant's  father
    and brother, who are not living in Baghdad, would enable him to  obtain
    a CSID before the appellant enters Iraq  through  Baghdad.  Given  this
    lacuna in the analysis, it is likely that  the  appellant  would  enter
    Baghdad without a  CSID  or  the  immediate  prospect  of  transferring
    directly by air to the IKR (both parties are agreed that the  appellant
    would be unable to access the IKR overland from the  capital).  It  was
    necessary in this instance for the  judge  to  analyse  in  detail  the
    various stages of the appellant's relocation to the IKR; it  was,  with
    respect, not enough for the judge to observe that the  appellant  would
    have  a  significant  amount'  of  family  support  in   Iraq   without
    determining how that support would in practice  provide  the  appellant
    with the documentation (in particular, a CSID) which he  would  require
    immediately upon entry to Baghdad in order to avoid being exposed to  a
    real risk of harm.

 4. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision. Further, in  the  light
    of what I have said above, I find  that,  notwithstanding  presence  in
    Iraq of family members, there is a real risk that the  appellant  would
    be exposed to harm during any period he might remain  in  Baghdad,  the
    city to which the Secretary of State proposes to return him. That  risk
    arises because I find  that  it  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant will have  in  his  possession  upon  entry  to  Baghdad  the
    necessary documentation to enable him to access state support and other
    services. It follows that he should be granted humanitarian protection.
    The appellant should be aware, however, that the position is likely  to
    change possibly  in  the  short  term.  The  period  of  any  grant  of
    humanitarian protection remains a matter for the Secretary of State.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  set  aside.  I  have  re-made  the
decision. The appeal of the appellant against the decision of the  Secretary
of State dated  24  January  2018  is  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection
grounds.


Signed                              Date 2 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.










