
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01178/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 August 2017                        |On 27 October 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     V M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by S. Satha &
Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because this is a protection case and there is invariably a  risk  in  cases
of this kind that publicity will itself create a risk.

This  is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
dismissing the appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  respondent
refusing him international protection.

The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal were settled by Ms  Frances
Allen of Counsel.  They said unequivocally that the First-tier  Tribunal  so
erred that the decision has to be set aside and the case redetermined.   The
grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  having
refused permission, settled by Ms Charlotte Bayati adopt and  reinforce  the
points made in Ms Allen's grounds.

Broadly there are three areas of criticism.  I have decided not to make  any
findings on the second two.  These grounds contend  that  the  Tribunal  has
made findings of fact that are not justified on the  evidence  and  has  not
given proper consideration  to  the  medical  needs  in  the  event  of  the
appellant's return.

I decline to make findings on subsequent grounds because, having taken  time
to read the decision and the criticism of it carefully, I have come  to  the
conclusion the first ground is made out.

Something went wrong in this case.  The case was heard  on  9  January  2017
and on the day of the hearing  the  First-tier  Tribunal  received  a  small
bundle by facsimile from the appellant's  then  solicitors.   The  appellant
has subsequently instructed different solicitors.  The bundle  of  documents
that arrived on 9 January were accompanied by a letter dated 6 January  2017
which was in fact sent by facsimile on that day.  The  letter  contains  the
paragraph:

  "We refer to the above matter and wish to inform the Hon Court  that  our
  client has now obtained evidence from Accident & Emergency at  The  Royal
  Wolverhampton Hospital NHS Trust about his attempt to commit suicide  and
  we enclose herewith the same together with up to date medical record from
  his GP which please produce before the Hon Court."

This appears to be nonsense.  There is no evidence other than  this  comment
in the letter that  there  has  been  a  suicide  attempt  and  the  medical
evidence that was sent, as far as I can see, certainly does not support  the
contention that there was a suicide attempt.  Ms  Allen's  grounds  make  it
quite plain that this was explained  to  the  judge  at  the  start  of  the
hearing by her on her solicitors' instructions.  Whilst it is clearly  right
that Counsel was instructed to explain that the mistake had occurred, it  is
noteworthy that the appellant's then solicitors did not take the trouble  to
confirm those instructions in a suitably apologetic letter to the  Tribunal.
 I am perfectly aware that even the most careful  and  conscientious  person
can, occasionally, say something that is not  right.   Typically  it  occurs
when a solicitor is doing something in a hurry.   Nevertheless,  passing  on
the client's instructions accurately is a fundamental part of  the  job  and
when mistakes occur a proper explanation is generally a very good idea.

I will always want to give considerable weight to Counsel's grounds  and  Ms
Allen is an experienced immigration practitioner.  Clearly,  she  would  not
have said in the grounds that she explained something to  the  judge  unless
she was clear in her mind that that is what had happened.  It  is  not  what
the judge recorded.  The Decision and Reasons  refers  to  the  point  being
raised in evidence by the appellant.  I have read the Record of  Proceedings
as far as I can and it is quite clear that it  was  explained  at  an  early
stage that the reference to a suicide attempt in  the  covering  letter  was
wrong.  The judge's Decision and Reasons was written  up  quite  soon  after
the hearing, but  I  find  it  probable  that  he  misdirected  himself  and
overlooked the fact that the appellant's solicitors had made a  mistake.   I
can see no answer to the contention in the grounds that the judge  was  just
wrong  to  say  that  the  appellant's  solicitors  "should  submit  medical
documents referring  to  an  attempted  suicide  when  that  was  completely
irrelevant".  There were no  such  documents.   It  was  the  claim  in  the
accompanying letter that was irrelevant because it was completely wrong.

I can see no answer to the contention in the grounds that  if  the  decision
was allowed to stand the  appellant  would  have  a  well-founded  sense  of
grievance that his case may have not been decided fairly, even  if  in  fact
it was.  In the circumstances I have decided  that  I  must  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal and accede  to  Counsel's  grounds  that
the case be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

I have considered Ms Aboni's submissions.  As I find the decision is  unsafe
I think it best that I make no comment on them so that  the  judge  deciding
the case again comes with a completely fresh mind.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside the  decision  and  direct
that the case is heard again in the First-tier Tribunal before  a  different
judge.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 25 October 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |


