
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01970/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                                  |                                   |
|On: 20th November 2018                  |On: 20th December 2018             |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                      R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr K. Wood, Immigration Advisory Service
(Manchester)
For the Respondent:                Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant  is  a  national  of  Zimbabwe  who  seeks  international
    protection in the United Kingdom on the grounds that she  has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in Zimbabwe for reasons of  her  membership
    of a particular social  group  (gay  women).   The  Respondent  refused
    protection and in a determination dated the 9th April 2018  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge J. Austin) upheld that decision. The Appellant now
    has permission to appeal against that decision.


 2. The facts are now uncontentious.  My summary below is derived from  the
    Appellant's own evidence, the Respondent's refusal letter and the First-
    tier Tribunal decision. I have omitted matters not directly relevant to
    the issues before me:

              i) The Appellant is a lesbian


             ii) Her family reacted to news of her sexual  orientation  with
                 "disapproval and rejection".  She was told that  she  would
                 have to marry a widower in her family,  a  man  much  older
                 than herself. When the Appellant rejected this proposal she
                 was badly beaten and disowned.   She describes  herself  as
                 "broken beyond measure"  after  being  treated  in  such  a
                 degrading manner;

            iii) The Appellant enjoyed a successful career in Zimbabwe as  a
                 popular singer and  actor.  She  is  well-known  throughout
                 Southern  Africa  and  has  regularly  appeared  on  radio,
                 television and in film. She is particularly well-known as a
                 gospel  singer  and  has   appeared   in   Christian-themed
                 television programmes;

             iv) In mid 2016 the Appellant was 'outed' by a Christian Pastor
                 in whom she had confided. This took place  in  front  of  a
                 congregation of some 1000 Christians. The Tribunal accepted
                 that this would have been "humiliating" for the  Appellant,
                 who subsequently faced ostracization;

              v) In 2017 a newspaper in Zimbabwe  (and  associated  website)
                 published an article identifying the Appellant as gay.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's appeal. It found that
    lesbians suffer discrimination and difficulties, but  these  would  not
    rise to the level of serious harm. Being a lesbian is  not  subject  to
    criminal penalty. The Tribunal relied on the findings of  the  Tribunal
    in the country guidance case of LZ (Homosexuals) Zimbabwe CG [2011]  to
    the effect that there is a  limited  gay  scene,  and  that  there  are
    support groups available.  On the basis of that evidence  the  Tribunal
    found there to be no risk of harm to this Appellant. If she  wishes  to
    avoid prejudice and abuse she can  relocate  to  another  part  of  the
    country "where a more tolerant attitude prevails".


 4. Before me Mr McVeety accepted, on behalf of  the  Respondent  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed  for  material  error  of
    law, namely a failure to conduct an assessment of  risk  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant, a well-known figure in Zimbabwe, has since she left
    that country been 'outed' by a nationally- available newspaper/website.
    The  Tribunal  appeared  to  premise  its  risk  assessment  on  events
    occurring prior to that event.

 5. I accept that the Respondent's concession was well-made.  I  would  add
    that the Tribunal appears to have overlooked the uncontested fact  that
    the Appellant has already been subjected to past persecution by her own
    family. Being beaten and forced into marriage constitutes serious harm.
    It was, on the accepted facts,  harm  that  the  state  was  unable  or
    unwilling to protect the Appellant from. The starting  point  for  risk
    assessment was  therefore  that  past  persecution.   Were  there  good
    reasons to suppose that the harm  would  not  occur  again?  Since  the
    events narrated by the Appellant took place her family  have  continued
    to ostracise her, and she has been publicly, and nationally,  denounced
    as gay.  She is a celebrity who has  previously  been  associated  with
    Christian media and so the revelation is all the more 'scandalous'.  It
    is difficult, in those circumstances, to see how the real risk of  such
    harm reoccurring would be today be obviated.  There is nothing in  that
    conclusion that it is inconsistent  with  the  findings  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in LZ.  Although the Tribunal held that in general  terms  the
    "hysterical homophobia" faced by gay people in Zimbabwe does not  cross
    the threshold to persecution, it accepted that on  occasions  it  does.
    This, on the First-tier Tribunal's own findings, was such an  occasion.
     The Tribunal in LZ further found  there  to  be  no  sufficient  state
    protection where the line is crossed.   I am satisfied that in  failing
    to direct itself to that past serious harm, and failure of  protection,
    the Tribunal erred in law. It is reasonably likely that if she were  to
    return to her family in Harare the  Appellant  would  once  again  face
    persecution.


 6. The question, therefore, was whether the Appellant could reasonably  be
    expected to avoid persecution in Harare by relocating somewhere else in
    the country, where she could lead a relatively normal  life.   That  is
    not the test that the First-tier Tribunal appears to  have  applied  in
    this case: at paragraph 55 the Tribunal concluded that it was  open  to
    her to internally relocate because she  had  not  established  a  "risk
    throughout her home country".  That was a discrete error of law. As  Mr
    McVeety realistically acknowledged before me,  the general observations
    about internal flight in LZ cannot readily be applied to the Appellant.
    She is, unlike the appellant in  that  case,  'openly'  gay.    She  is
    unable to move around the  country  and  re-establish  herself  without
    being recognised. As her bundle illustrates, a simple  'google'  search
    of her name reveals articles discussing  her  sexuality  including  one
    based on a "tell-all" interview with one of her relatives,  who  states
    that she is "living in hiding for fear of being  victimised  by  family
    members".   This article, and ones like it, mean that  life  cannot  be
    relatively  normal  for  the  Appellant.  She  may  be  able  to  avoid
    persecution in other parts of Zimbabwe, but  it  is  reasonably  likely
    that in doing so she will be subjected to the "hysterical  homophobia",
    discrimination and harassment discussed in LZ. That would, in  all  the
    circumstances, be unduly harsh.


    Anonymity


 7. Having regard to the fact that this is a protection claim I am prepared
    to make the following direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".




    Decision


 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and  the
    decision is set aside.


 9. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows: the appeal  is  allowed
    on human rights and protection grounds.


10. There is an order for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          20th November 2018


