
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01641/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2018                             |On 2nd May 2018               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     q a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Imamovic, Counsel instructed by The Coventry
Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1st January 2002.  He
    entered the UK illegally on 17th July 2015 and claimed asylum  on  12th
    August 2015.  That application was refused for the reasons given in  an
    Asylum Decision dated 3rd February 2016.  The  Appellant  appealed  and
    his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Asjad  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 22nd May 2017.  She  decided  to  dismiss  the
    appeal for the reasons given in her Decision dated 6th June 2017.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  22nd  September
    2017 such leave was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal mainly because she found  the  Appellant
    to be lacking in credibility and therefore did not accept  his  account
    of events in Afghanistan.  She described his claim as  fabricated.   In
    her analysis  of  the  Appellant's  evidence,  she  identified  various
    inconsistencies and implausibilities.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mrs Imamovic argued that the Judge had  erred
    in law in this respect by failing to take into account the age  of  the
    Appellant when considering his credibility.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni argued that the Judge had made no such  material
    error of law.  She had directed herself  appropriately  and  had  given
    adequate reasons for her findings.  It had been open to  the  Judge  to
    find various inconsistencies and implausibilities in  the  evidence  of
    the Appellant.

 6. I find a material error of law in the decision of the Judge which as  a
    consequence I set aside.  The Appellant was 13 years  of  age  when  he
    first arrived  in  the  UK  and  interviewed  in  connection  with  his
    application for asylum.  He was still only 15 years of age when he gave
    evidence  to  the  Judge  at  the  hearing  before  her.    The   Judge
    acknowledged the age of the Appellant in paragraph 4 of  her  Decision.
    However, thereafter the Judge did not  refer  to  the  Appellant's  age
    again.  The Appellant was a vulnerable witness at all  material  times,
    but the Judge did not refer to this vulnerability nor the  Presidential
    Guidance relating to vulnerable witnesses in her Decision, and did  not
    apply the Guidance when considering the  issue  of  credibility.   This
    amounts to a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements as all  judicial
fact-finding remains to be done.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity which I  continue  owing
to the age of the Appellant.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date  30th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
