
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01260/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Determination & Reasons  Promulgated  |
|On 7th August 2017                    |On 25th August 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                     ML


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Masih, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant claims to be a national of Eritrea  born  on  [  ]  1995.
    She entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 3rd December  2014  and
    when encountered claimed asylum shortly  thereafter.   That  claim  was
    refused by the respondent by a decision  of  27th  January  2017.   The
    appellant sought to appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  that
    decision.

2.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Asjad  on  7th  March
    2017.  In a decision promulgated on 31st  March  2017  the  appeal  was
    dismissed in all respects.

3.   The appellant claims to be in danger upon return to Eritrea on  account
    of her Pentecostal faith.

4.   In the course of the determination the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found
    that she was not from Eritrea but was in reality from Ethiopia.

5.   The chronology which the appellant gave essentially was  that  she  was
    born in Mendefera in Eritrea and moved when she was 1 year old with her
    parents to Ethiopia for a better life.  In February 2000 the family was
    deported back to Eritrea and in June 2002 her father  was  arrested  by
    the Eritrean authorities.  At the end of July 2002 she, her sister  and
    mother  travelled  to  Sudan  on  foot  with  the  help  of  an  agent.
    Thereafter she lived in South Sudan, then in Khartoum, then  to  Libya,
    then she arrived through Italy and France to the United Kingdom.

6.   The Judge noted a number  of  photographs  said  to  be  taken  by  the
    appellant when she was in South Sudan. Enquiries revealed that  certain
    of those photographs were taken in Ethiopia but the  dates  stamped  on
    the photographs covered the period 2002 to February 2013, which did not
    correlate with the dates the appellant had given as to when she was  in
    Sudan.  The Judge, therefore, found that she had lied about  where  the
    photographs were taken  and  found  rather  that  they  were  taken  in
    Ethiopia.  They were happy posed photographs.  It cast doubt on whether
    she ever left Ethiopia because the last photograph was  dated  February
    2013.

7.   The appellant relies upon a document, which she says demonstrates  that
    she is Eritrean but it does not verify her  nationality,  as  it  is  a
    simple membership card purportedly issued in Sudan.

8.   When questioned about her nationality  in  interview  she  exhibited  a
    significant lack of knowledge in detail about Eritrea, particularly  as
    to when it became independent.

9.   The appellant gave conflicting evidence about the death of her  father,
    saying in interview that he died in 2000, which was  amended  to  2002.
    Significantly, when a key witness, [SK], gave  his  testimony  he  said
    that the appellant and her parents came to Sudan in 2002.

10.  At paragraph 16 the Judge says this:

         "I checked this testimony three times with  [SK]  and  he  accepted
         that this was his evidence.  When  I  clarified  that  it  was  the
         appellant's evidence that her father was in Eritrea and she claimed
         to have come to Sudan with her mother and sister, [SK] changed  his
         testimony and said that by parents he meant sister and mother.  But
         I do not accept that explanation as  credible.   As  noted,  [SK]'s
         testimony was checked by me three times as I wanted to clarify that
         his evidence was correct.  He affirmed that that was  his  evidence
         and it was only when the  anomaly  was  pointed  out  that  he  had
         tailored his evidence to fit in with the  appellant's  account.   I
         find that the inconsistency about the date of  her  father's  date,
         coupled  with  [SK]'s  inconsistent  testimony,  leads  me  to  the
         conclusion that the appellant's father was not killed  in  2002  at
         all and that this aspect of her testimony is also fabricated."


11.  It was the evidence that [SK] was the father of her second child.   For
    reasons set out in  paragraph  17,  the  Judge  found  the  appellant's
    testimony about her involvement  with  [SK]  full  of  inconsistencies,
    particularly  when   his   statement   was   considered;   particularly
    inconsistencies as to when they meet and indeed what relationship  they
    continue to have.  The Judge found that the appellant was in a  greater
    relationship with [SK] than she sought to indicate.  It is to be  noted
    that at the hearing before me the appellant attended and had  with  her
    her children, who were also attended to by [SK].

12.  The Judge for reasons set out in paragraph 17 did not accept  that  the
    appellant was truthful about the situation with her husband.

13.  The Judge found also that the appellant's  explanation  why  she  spoke
    little Tigrinyan was  also  inconsistent,  particularly  so  since  her
    parents were of Tigre ethnicity.  The Judge did  not  accept  that  she
    would not have learnt some of the language from them.

14.   Cumulatively the Judge did not believe the appellant and  particularly
    did not find that she lived in Eritrea but rather lived in Ethiopia and
    was an Ethiopian.

15.  In the course of the analysis, in particular paragraph  16,  the  Judge
    said this: "[SK] is himself an asylum seeker  and  also  claims  to  be
    Eritrean.  On the evidence available to me I do not find  that  he  has
    ever been to Eritrea and that he and the appellant lived in Ethiopia."

16.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that that was a misunderstanding of the situation.  [SK] was not simply
    an asylum seeker but had indeed been  granted  asylum.   His  residence
    card had been produced showing that it  is  valid  until  10th  October
    2021, having been issued in the UK  on  12th  October  2016.    He  has
    refugee leave to remain. The document does not specify his identity but
    he obtained asylum on the basis  of  his  contention  that  he  was  an
    Eritrean national who had entered the United Kingdom  clandestinely  on
    3rd December 2014 and claimed asylum.  Coincidentally that is the  date
    upon which the appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom.  He
    claims that they met up on the same lorry by  coincidence.   The  Judge
    did not accept that explanation for reasons that have already been  set
    out in paragraph 17 of the determination in particular.

17.   There  is  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Bell,
    promulgated on 4th July  2016,  which  noted  that  the  appellant  was
    accepted to be an Eritrean national who left the country illegally  and
    who is of service age.  He was also a low level member of  a  political
    opposition group.  There was very little analysis of the claim  in  the
    determination, the appeal being allowed on that  limited  but  accepted
    basis.  It was the evidence of the appellant that she knew  [SK]  since
    2002, when he was at his home in Sudan.  They last saw  each  other  in
    2009 when she left for South Sudan.  There is  little  indication  from
    her evidence that he was ever in Eritrea and there is no mention at all
    that he was involved with political activity  connected  with  Eritrea.
    His very brief witness statement indicates  that  he  fled  Eritrea  to
    Sudan in 1998 but gives no  detail  thereafter  as  to  what  political
    activity, if any, he had in Eritrea such as to found the claim that  he
    made. Rather he would seem to have been in Ethiopia or Sudan  with  the
    appellant since 2002.  Indeed on 1st January 2016  the  appellant  gave
    birth to their son, conceived she claims as a result  of  an  accident.
    He maintained that he was not in a relationship with her but  continued
    to have regular contact.  The Judge did not accept that the  truth  had
    been told about that relationship and the degree of contact that he and
    the appellant had had and over what period.

18.  The fact that he obtained refugee status on account of his claim to  be
    Eritrean without more, does not necessarily bind the authorities or the
    Judge to accept the reality of the situation.  Many Albanians  obtained
    refugee status by claiming they were from Kosovo.   Rather,  the  Judge
    looked at the detail of his connection  with  the  appellant  and  with
    other matters and concluded that neither  he  nor  the  appellant  were
    telling the truth about their circumstances, such that there  could  be
    any reliance upon it.   Even  if  [SK]  was  Eritrean  it  is  entirely
    apparent that he has had little contact with the country since he  left
    in the mid-1990s and in any event his association  with  the  appellant
    was entirely focused upon Sudan according to his  evidence  or  if  the
    photographic evidence was correct, upon Ethiopia.

19.  The decision of 27th  January  2017  by  the  respondent  sets  out  in
    considerable detail the challenges which are made to the credibility of
    the appellant.  Those matters, which were highlighted by the  Judge  in
    the determination, were perfectly proper matters to raise  in  concern.
    Whether or not [SK] was an asylum  seeker  or  a  person  with  refugee
    status does not, as I indicated, found a material error in the analysis
    which was conducted by the Judge.  The Judge was entitled  to  conclude
    that the appellant and he had not told the truth  about  their  current
    relationship or their general situation and relationship before  coming
    to the United Kingdom and accordingly little weight could be  given  to
    his evidence or to hers.

20.  Overall therefore I find that there is no material error  of  law.   In
    those circumstances this appeal is  dismissed.   The  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge remain intact, namely  that  the  appellant's
    appeal is dismissed in relation to asylum, humanitarian protection  and
    human rights.


Notice of Decision

The appeal stands dismissed. The original decision is affirmed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                 [pic]                 Date 24 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

