
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01618/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 June 2017                          |On 29 June 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    M A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on  [  ]  1994.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 August 2015 and claimed asylum.

 3. The appellant claimed to be from the minority Begedi clan.  He  claimed
    that in February 2014 Al-Shabaab had come to  his  home  in  Degli  and
    taken away his cousin  whom  they  had  accused  of  working  with  the
    government.  Two days later, his cousin was  killed.   Thereafter,  Al-
    Shabaab wanted  the  appellant  to  join  them  and  they  visited  the
    appellant on three occasions.  He was told they  would  return  in  two
    weeks and he would be taken for training.  Shortly after, the appellant
    left Degli and went to Mogadishu.

 4. Whilst in Mogadishu, in June 2014 the appellant  received  a  telephone
    call on his mobile saying that Al-Shabaab were waiting for him to  join
    them for training.  If he did not they would take  him  by  force.   In
    July 2014, they again called the appellant  threatening  to  kill  him,
    like his cousin, if he did not join them.  He had been living with  his
    aunt and he moved to live with his mother.

 5. In January 2015, the appellant met a boy from his  home  village  at  a
    mosque and the boy dialled a number on his  telephone.   The  appellant
    ran away.  He went to the police but they told the appellant that  they
    could not protect him.

 6. In February 2015, the appellant was approached  by  three  boys  whilst
    leaving school and told to go with  them.   They  had  a  gun  but  the
    appellant managed to escape and ran into a shop.  In  March  2015,  Al-
    Shabaab came to his home and he jumped through a  window  and  escaped.
    They returned two weeks later and again the appellant escaped through a
    window.

 7. In June 2015, the appellant left Somalia having received a text message
    saying that they were going to kill him.

 8. On 4 February 2016, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

    The Appeal

 9. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  22  September  2016,  Judge  Burnett   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

10. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but, on  10
    January 2017, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Plimmer)  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

11. On 10 February 2017, the Secretary of State filed a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the decision.



The Submissions

12. Mr Dieu, who represented the appellant, relied upon  the  four  grounds
    set out in the detailed skeleton argument submitted by the  appellant's
    legal representatives.

13. First, he submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  make  any  factual
    finding in respect of the appellant's claim that his  cousin  had  been
    killed by Al-Shabaab and that was the basis upon which he had left  his
    home area to live in Mogadishu and which underlay his claim that he had
    been wanted by Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu.

14. Secondly, Mr Dieu submitted that the judge had been wrong to doubt  the
    appellant's credibility on the basis that he  had  attended  a  private
    school - which was beyond  his  family's  means  -  when  in  fact  his
    evidence was that he had attended English classes for three days a week
    for one and a half hours each day.

15. Thirdly, the judge had been wrong to find implausible  aspects  of  the
    appellant's account that he had been sought by Al-Shabaab in  Mogadishu
    and had managed to escape from them on two occasions in the absence  of
    background evidence to support that assessment.

16. Fourthly, the judge had been wrong to conclude that the risk  of  being
    recruited by Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu was  "extremely  low  and  remote"
    when that was unsupported by the background evidence.

17. Mr Mills, who represented the Secretary of  State,  accepted  that  the
    judge had failed to make a finding in respect of the appellant's  claim
    that his cousin had  been  killed  by  Al-Shabaab  in  his  home  area.
    However, he submitted that was not the issue; rather it was his  safety
    and the reasonableness of him internally relocating to  Mogadishu.   He
    accepted, however, that a finding as to whether  his  cousin  had  been
    targeted in his home area as a teacher and, as the  appellant  claimed,
    government books had been found at  his  home,  might  be  relevant  to
    whether the appellant was at risk of being targeted in Mogadishu.

18. Secondly, Mr Mills submitted that whilst the judge  may  have  slightly
    overstated the fact that the appellant had attended a "private school",
    he was not wrong in principle that the appellant had paid for education
    in Mogadishu.

19. Thirdly, Mr Mills accepted that reasons based upon plausibility must be
    viewed with caution in the light of the Court of Appeal's  decision  in
    HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 which was a reminder of the need  to  be
    cautious about concluding that something that might not happen  in  the
    UK would not necessarily mean that it could not happen in  a  different
    country or culture.  Here, Mr Mills submitted that the judge had  given
    rational reasons for finding the appellant's account to be implausible.
     It was open to the judge to conclude at para 44 that it  was  damaging
    of the appellant's claim that Al-Shabaab had gone to great  lengths  to
    recruit the appellant in Mogadishu when they  could  have  more  easily
    recruited others in areas they control.  Further, it was  open  to  the
    judge to find that given that the Al-Shabaab was, in the judge's  words
    "a ruthless organisation", that it was implausible that he had  managed
    to escape them twice.

20. Finally, Mr Mills submitted that the judge had taken  into  account  at
    para 42 that there was  some  evidence  that  Al-Shabaab  recruited  in
    Mogadishu but that evidence was "equivocal".  The position in  MOJ  and
    Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) at para
    (vi) of the head note was that  there  was  "no  real  risk  of  forced
    recruitment to Al-Shabaab for civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including
    for recent returns from the west".

21. Mr Mills submitted that it was properly open to the  judge,  therefore,
    to doubt the  appellant's  account  and  make  an  adverse  credibility
    finding.

    Discussion

22. It is accepted that the judge  made  no  finding  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim that his brother had been targeted by  Al-Shabaab  in
    their home area because he was a  teacher  and  government  books  were
    found at their home.  As a result of  which,  it  was  the  Appellant's
    claim, that his cousin was killed and Al-Shabaab thereafter  sought  to
    recruit the appellant  in  both  his  home  area  and  Mogadishu.   The
    entirety of the judge's reasoning relates to what the appellant claimed
    happened to him in Mogadishu.

23. The appellant's case was, however, that what happened  to  him  in  his
    home area was, in effect, a trigger as to why he left his home area and
    what happened to him in Mogadishu.  The two were,  in  the  appellant's
    claim, inextricably linked.  By focusing upon only what happened to the
    appellant in Mogadishu, the judge failed to determine relevant  factual
    matters in respect of what the appellant claimed led to  him  going  to
    Mogadishu and being threatened there by Al-Shabaab.  I accept Mr Dieu's
    submission that this was  an  error  and  fatally  flawed  the  judge's
    ultimate adverse finding.

24. Its relevance can also be seen in relation to Mr Dieu's fourth  ground.
    Whilst the decision in MOJ and  Others,  upon  which  Mr  Mills  placed
    reliance, dealt with the general  risk  of  recruitment  Al-Shabaab  in
    Mogadishu - and concluded that there was no real risk - that was in the
    context of an individual who otherwise had  no  history,  such  as  the
    appellant claimed, with Al-Shabaab and, in particular, claimed  he  had
    previously been threatened if he did not join the organisation.  Whilst
    the judge recognised that there was some  evidence  of  recruitment  in
    Mogadishu (at para 42) he failed to put that evidence in the context of
    the  appellant's  claim  (if  he  accepted  it)  that  Al-Shabaab   had
    previously attempted to recruit him in his home area.  If the judge had
    accepted that aspect of the appellant's account, it would  be  relevant
    to, and might have affected, the judge's finding on whether given  that
    profile the appellant's account of being threatened  in  Mogadishu  was
    true and whether, as a consequence, he was at risk on return.

25. Merely to state, consistently with MOJ and Others,  that  the  risk  of
    being recruited in Mogadishu was "extremely low" (see para  43)  failed
    to place that evidence in  the  factual  context  which  the  appellant
    claimed (if the judge believed him).  Of  course,  the  judge  made  no
    finding in respect of that context and, therefore, failed  properly  to
    approach the evidence  concerning  the  risk  of  recruitment  of  this
    particular appellant by Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu.

26. In the result, I am satisfied  that  these  errors  are  of  sufficient
    significance that the judge's adverse credibility and factual  findings
    cannot stand.  It is unnecessary, as a result, for me  to  express  any
    view on grounds 2 and 3 relied upon by Mr Dieu.

Decision

27. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error of  law.
    That decision is set aside.

28. Both representatives invited me, if I found an error of law,  to  remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

29. Having regard to the nature and extent of the fact-finding involved and
    to para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,  I  am
    satisfied that the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge  other  than
    Judge Burnett.



                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date  28 June 2017





