
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01610/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th November 2019                          |On 22nd November 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                  Awas [S]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The applicant is a citizen of Afghanistan who claimed asylum fearing  a
    return to his home area.  He claimed  asylum  following  a  clandestine
    entry to the United Kingdom in 2015.

2.   That claim was refused by the respondent  in  a  detailed  decision  of
    10th January 2009.

3.   The applicant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowler on 28th  June  2019.   The
    Judge recognised that  the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness  but
    nevertheless concluded that there were a number of matters  adverse  to
    his credibility.

4.   Although it was accepted by the Judge  that  the  appellant  could  not
    return to his home  area,  the  Judge  went  on  to  consider  internal
    relocation and particularly to Jalalabad.

5.   The appeal was  dismissed.   Subsequently  permission  was  granted  to
    challenge that decision by way of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Thus
    the matter comes before me for that purpose.

6.   The grounds of appeal are detailed and it  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to
    set them out in this decision, it being the agreement  as  between  the
    respondent and the appellant that there are indeed material  errors  of
    law in the decision, such that it should be set aside.  In  particular,
    although adverse findings of credibility were made little consideration
    was given either to the medical context or to the general vulnerability
    of the appellant to be viewed in that light.

7.   Similarly, although the Judge thought  that  the  parties  should  have
    considered Jalalabad as an alternative location, that was not a  matter
    expressly  raised  with  either  party  at  the   hearing   for   their
    consideration or feedback.

8.   There was little consideration either to the issue of Kabul.

9.   In those circumstances it is clear  ,applying  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Direction, that this is a matter that should be sent  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.  A number of findings  it
    was agreed however  could  be  preserved  and  those  findings  are  as
    follows:-

    (1)  the appellant is from Wardak;


    (2)  that he received no formal education in Afghanistan;


    (3)  that he attended college in the UK;


    (4)  that he was shot following the drowning of his friend;


    (5)  that it is reasonably likely that a blood feud would have  started
         as a result; and


    (6)  that the appellant suffers from physical and mental health issues.

10.  Subject  to  those  matters  it  is  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the matter upon such issues and evidence as it determines  to
    be relevant.  Any further directions that are required will  be  issued
    by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

11.  The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The  decision
    is set aside to be remade by the First-tier Tribunal in due course.

12.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 19 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King TD



