
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01263/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Birmingham    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 6th February 2019   On 4th March 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     MSH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Mohzan of Burton and Burton, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant is a national of Iran born in January 1993. He
         claimed protection on the basis of imputed political opinion.

      2. He is from the Western Azerbaijan province near the border with
         Iraq. He says he gave a lift to a man and a woman he saw on the
         roadside. Shortly afterwards his car was stopped at a police
         checkpoint and the occupants were asked for their documentation.
         They were asked to step outside the vehicle whereupon his passenger
         produce a gun and shot one of the policeman. They then made him
         drive on. He decided to leave Iran and travelled on foot to Turkey
         with help from an agent.

      3. The respondent did not accept his account of the shooting incident
         and did not believe he would face any risk simply for leaving the
         country illegally. No other basis was seen for the grant of leave.

The First tier Tribunal

      4. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Hagan at
         Birmingham on 27 February and 28 March 2018.On the 1st occasion the
         appeal had to adjourn because of concerns about interpretation. The
         matter was relisted with different interpreter. The central issue
         in the appeal with the appellant's credibility. Part of the claim
         also related to the appellant's use of Facebook here on which he
         was critical of the Iranian regime. It was argued this would place
         him at risk.

      5. The judge did not find the appellant credible. The judge said the
         absence of documentation to support the claim was a neutral factor
         in the circumstance. The judge did not find the account to be
         particularly contradictory. He gave a simple account which was
         consistent. At paragraph 37 judge gave reasons for not finding the
         appellant credible. The judge highlighted his claim to have no
         contact details for family or friends. If the claim were genuine
         the judge felt the appellant would be anxious to know if the
         authorities had visited his home or if his family had experienced
         difficulties because of what had happened.

      6. The judge also referred to his claim about Facebook activity. The
         judge was unimpressed by his claim he could not use this medium to
         contact his family. He initially said he did not contact them
         because the authorities monitor Internet activity and then said
         there was no Internet in his village. The judge also referred to
         the material posted and questioned why, if the appellant was not
         politically active before, he would then start using Facebook to
         criticise the regime. The judge questioned why, if he believed such
         activity was monitored, that he would go out of his way to provoke
         the Iranian authorities.

      7. The judge acknowledged that attempts to bolster a claim by such
         activity could give rise to a situation in which protection was
         nevertheless justified. The judge accepted that the Iranian regime
         monitor Internet activities and check on Iranian nationals abroad.

      8. The judge also accepted that on return he would be questioned. The
         judge considered whether he would feel compelled to tell the truth
         if questioned and whether it would be reasonable to expect him not
         to do so. The judge referred to the negative credibility findings
         and concluded that if questioned he would lie. Finally, the judge
         considered whether if the authorities became aware of his
         activities here they would conclude they were opportunistic and
         concluded they would be.

The Upper Tribunal

      9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
         judge applied too high a standard of proof when assessing the
         appellant's credibility and erred in relying upon peripheral
         matters in doing so. It was also arguable that the judge erred in
         relation to his Facebook activities.

     10. Mr Mohzan has referred me to paragraph 29, stating that the judge
         did not set out the standard of proof applicable. At paragraph 26
         and 27 the judge refers to the burden of proof being upon the
         appellant to show substantial grounds for believing he faces a real
         risk. The judge also refers to the decision of Karanakaran [2000]
         EWCA Civ 00011.At paragraph 33 the judge specifically refers to the
         low standard applicable. If paragraphs 39 onwards of that decision
         are considered it sets out the correct standard of proof and gives
         guidance on the approach to assessing credibility. I see nothing
         elsewhere in the decision to suggest the judge has imposed too high
         a standard of proof. Although the judge does not specifically state
         the applicable standard of proof it is now so well established
         that, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, I would take it
         as having been correctly applied. Consequently, I find no merit in
         this challenge.

     11. The 2nd challenge relates to paragraph 31-35 of the decision. The
         judge found that the claim made was not inherently plausible but
         was broadly consistent with what might happen in Iran. The judge
         made the valid point that this does not mean the events actually
         happened. The judge at paragraph 35 accepted the account could be
         true or it might not be. Mr Mohzan contended that the judge did not
         reached a conclusion on this. This however is not correct if regard
         is had to paragraph 37 where the judge concluded it was fabricated
         and gives reasons for rejecting it.

     12. Mr Mohzan criticises the judge for focusing upon the appellant's
         claim of not having contact with his family and said this was a
         peripheral issue. However, a judge is entitled to take secondary
         issues when assessing the truths of the core of the claim. As the
         judgement stated, this was a very simple claim and the judge was
         perfectly entitled to approach the matter obliquely to determine
         its truth. He also suggested the judge was giving a personal view
         in stating the appellant would want to find out about his family. I
         find the judge's comments here are entirely appropriate.

     13. Mr Mohzan then sought to argue that paragraph 41 indicates a
         material error of law. The judge questioned why, if the appellant
         believed his family were at risk following the checkpoint incident,
         he would then post antiregime material on Facebook. He said the
         appellant had produced around 70 pages illustrating his Facebook
         activity and suggested that the judge did not have adequate regard
         to this material.

     14. Mr Diwnycz opposed the appeal. He questioned whether the permission
         to appeal was restricted to the question of the Facebook. If the
         permission is considered the emphasis seems to be upon paragraph 6
         which refers to the Facebook account. However, for completeness I
         have considered the areas raised and find no merit in them.

     15. I am in agreement with Mr Diwnycz that the judge gave detailed,
         sustainable reasons, for finding the appellant's account lacked
         credibility. The judge did focus upon his claim about not
         contacting his family. This had been raised in cross-examination
         and by the judge. The judge observes that a lack of education or
         illiteracy does not inhibit an individual's intellectual capacity.
         Mr Diwnycz observed that whilst it was not raised at hearing the
         ability to maintain a Facebook account appears to fly in the face
         of the claimed illiteracy. Furthermore, he observed that the
         appellant's name has been spelt differently in the Facebook
         account. Finally, he submitted that the Facebook account can be
         deleted and so it did not present a risk for the appellant on
         return.

     16. I have considered the decision in its entirety. I see nothing to
         suggest the judge applied the wrong standard of proof. The judge
         found the claim made was a simple straightforward one which,
         consistent with country information, might have occurred. However,
         this is not the same as finding the claim to be true. I find no
         fault with the judge using peripheral matters to assess credibility
         when it is difficult to challenge the central claim. In this
         instance the judge focused upon the claim the appellant said he had
         no contact with his family. In the circumstance the judge found
         this was a contra indicator of his credibility. I find no fault
         with this.

     17. The judge also considered in detail the appellant's Facebook
         activity and the risk this would present on return to Iran. The
         judge analysed this in detail at paragraph 39,40 and 42. The judge
         acknowledged that opportunistic activities may still create a real
         risk and has properly evaluated this. The judge does not reject the
         genuineness of the Facebook posts but concluded they would not
         place the appellant at risk. Reasons are given which are adequate.

     18. Ultimately I find this is a carefully prepared decision which
         analyses the claim made and makes rational and sustainable
         findings. I find no material error of law established.

Decision.

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Hagan. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly     Date: 27th February 20191`
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.

