
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01285/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 August 2016                   |On 22 August 2016                    |
|                                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     SI
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms H Masood, Counsel instructed by Law Dale
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


 1. By my decision promulgated on 27 June 2016 (appended to this decision),
    I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  I  hereby
    remake the decision of the FtT.


 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  [  ]  1982.  In  his
    asylum application,  made  on  6  January  2016,  he  claimed  to  fear
    persecution for three  reasons:  1)  his  sexual  orientation;  2)  his
    political affiliation; and 3) threats he received over an unpaid  loan.
    The respondent rejected his application in its entirety.


 3. At the error of law hearing, I found that the FtT had made an error  of
    law in respect of its consideration of the  appellant's  sexuality  but
    not with regard to the other parts of  the  appellant's  asylum  claim.
    Accordingly, the only aspect of the asylum claim at issue before me  at
    the rehearing was the appellant's claim to be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Bangladesh because he is homosexual. I also heard  submissions  on  the
    appellant's claim that his removal from the UK would breach  Article  8
    ECHR.


Evidence and findings of fact


 4. At the rehearing of the appeal I heard oral evidence from the appellant
    and his partner.


 5. The consistent  and  unchallenged  evidence  before  me  was  that  the
    appellant has, since 2011, been in a homosexual relationship  with  his
    UK national partner and that they are now cohabiting civil partners. In
    his submissions, Mr Walker, on behalf of the respondent, accepted  that
    the evidence of the appellant's partner was credible and  that  he  and
    the appellant have been in a homosexual relationship since 2011.


 6. Having considered the evidence before me, both written  and  oral,  and
    having regard to the submissions of Mr Walker  as  to  the  appellant's
    partner's credibility, I make the following findings of fact:


          a. The appellant is homosexual.


          b. The appellant is in a genuine and subsisting homosexual
             relationship with a UK citizen with whom he has entered into a
             civil partnership.


          c. The appellant has not revealed his sexuality to family
             members, both in the UK and Bangladesh, as he fears they would
             react negatively due to their cultural and religious
             attitudes.


          d. The appellant's partner, who was born on 21 July 1943, helps
             support his step brother who has Parkinson's. He visits his
             step brother, who lives alone, 3 or 4 times a week.


          e. Both the appellant and his partner consider it unlikely the
             partner would move to Bangladesh if the appellant were removed
             from the UK, given the attitude to homosexuality in that
             country and how they anticipate they would be perceived if
             they lived together even if they tried to conceal their
             homosexuality.


 7.  The  objective  country  evidence  about  Bangladesh  adduced  by  the
    appellant describes a situation in which homosexuality is unlawful  and
    where the authorities fail to provide protection to homosexuals  in  an
    increasingly hostile cultural  and  religious  environment.  Ms  Masood
    referred to a number of reports and  articles  in  her  submissions  to
    support her  contentions  about  the  risks  faced  by  homosexuals  in
    Bangladesh. Mr  Walker  did  not  express  any  disagreement  with  her
    submissions or seek to argue that the situation in Bangladesh is  other
    than that described by Ms Masood.


Submissions


 8. Ms Masood made detailed submissions about the appellant's sexuality and
    the  risks  he  would  face,  in  consequence  of  his  sexuality,   in
    Bangladesh. She also  argued  that  the  appellant,  who  has  a  civil
    partner, is able to satisfy the conditions  of  both  Appendix  FM  and
    Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.


 9. Mr Walker,  although  not  conceding  the  appeal,  accepted  that  the
    evidence as to the appellant's  sexuality  was  credible  and  did  not
    challenge the country  information  evidence  as  to  the  position  of
    homosexuals in Bangladesh. In respect of the Article 8 claim, Mr Walker
    acknowledged the appellant is in  a  civil  partnership  and  that  the
    relationship had been in existence since 2011.


Consideration


10. Following the approach of the Supreme Court in HJ  (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC
    31, there are a series of questions to address where  a  person  claims
    asylum on the basis of his sexuality (see paragraphs [35] and  [82]  of
    HJ where the applicable test is set out).


11. The first question is whether the appellant is homosexual or  would  be
    treated as homosexual in Bangladesh. I am satisfied, for the reasons  I
    have given, that the appellant is homosexual and  therefore  that  this
    stage is satisfied.


12. The next question to ask is whether homosexuals in Bangladesh who  live
    openly are liable to persecution. The objective country evidence before
    me, which was not challenged by Mr Walker, supports the view that there
    is  a  real  risk  of  persecution  to  an  openly  homosexual  man  in
    Bangladesh.


13. The next question to ask is what the appellant  would  do  if  he  were
    returned to Bangladesh. My finding in respect of this question is  that
    he would conceal his homosexuality and live discreetly.  The  appellant
    has not revealed his homosexuality, or that he has entered into a civil
    partnership, to his family (either in  the  UK  or  Bangladesh)  and  I
    consider it very unlikely  that  he  would  voluntarily  disclose  this
    information upon return to Bangladesh. Indeed, one of the  concerns  of
    the appellant about his civil partner moving to Bangladesh with him  is
    how  they  would  manage  to  live  together  whilst  concealing  their
    homosexuality.


14. The next question to ask is why the appellant would live discreetly  in
    Bangladesh and whether a material reason for so doing would be  a  fear
    of persecution that would follow  if  he  were  to  live  openly  as  a
    homosexual. Whilst part of the reason the appellant would  be  discrete
    is to avoid conflict with family and  to  maintain  relationships  that
    might be irreparably damaged by a revelation that would be  subject  to
    strong disapproval, the evidence of appellant - which  I  accept  -  is
    that a significant reason for discretion would be to avoid the  adverse
    attention, threats and risks that he fears will  ensue  if  it  becomes
    known in Bangladesh that he is homosexual.


15. Accordingly, I am satisfied,  applying  the  lower  standard  of  proof
    applicable in asylum cases, that the appellant has a well founded  fear
    that he will be persecuted in Bangladesh as a consequence of his sexual
    orientation.


16. Having found that the appellant is entitled to protection as a refugee,
    it is not necessary for me to determine  his  appeal  under  Article  8
    ECHR. However, for completeness,  I  have  considered  the  appellant's
    claim under Article  8  and  find  that  he  is  able  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.


17. In order to meet the requirements under EX.1(b)  of  Appendix  FM,  the
    appellant must show, on the balance of probabilities, that  (a)  he  is
    the partner of a British citizen; (b) he has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  with  his  partner;  and  (c)  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with his partner continuing outside the UK.


18. The appellant is in a civil partnership with a British citizen. A civil
    partner falls within the definition of a "partner".  I have found,  and
    am satisfied, that the  appellant  and  his  civil  partner  have  been
    together for several years and their  relationship  is  subsisting  and
    genuine.  The  remaining   question   is   whether   there   would   be
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.


19. The appellant's partner is an openly homosexual man  in  his  70s  with
    minimal connection to Bangladesh. Given the attitude towards and  legal
    position  of  homosexuals  in  Bangladesh,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    obstacles the appellant's partner would face  in  continuing  his  life
    with the appellant in Bangladesh (where he would most  likely  have  to
    conceal his sexual orientation and have living arrangements that  would
    not lead to people suspecting he was in a homosexual relationship  with
    the appellant) are so serious that  they  could  not  realistically  be
    overcome and therefore that the  insurmountable  obstacles  test  under
    EX.1(b) is met.


Notice of decision


For the reasons I have given above, I allow the appellant's appeal  on  both
asylum grounds and under the Immigration Rules.

|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 19 August 2016                |

