

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01029/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 25 May 2018                                |On 30 October 2018           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     MAR

                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.     This  is  the  claimant's  appeal  to   the   Upper Tribunal.    On
17 January 2017 the Secretary of State decided to make a deportation order
in respect of him and to refuse a claim for international protection  and  a
human rights claim.  The claimant appealed but in a  decision  sent  to  the
parties on  11 September 2017,  the  First-tier Tribunal  (the  tribunal)
dismissed that appeal.  The claimant then obtained permission to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal and, in a decision sent to the parties on 6 March 2018,
I set aside the tribunal's  decision  whilst  preserving  a  number  of  its
findings  and  conclusions.   I  directed   a   further   hearing   in   the
Upper Tribunal which would be  concerned  with  the  question  of  how  the
Upper Tribunal would remake  the  decision.  That  hearing  took  place  on
25 May 2018.  Thereafter, given that new Country Guidance had been  issued
by the Upper Tribunal in AAH (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)  Iraq  -
CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) I directed the parties to provide further submissions,
if wished, in light of that decision and  to  indicate  whether  they  would
like a further hearing.  Both provided further written submissions and  both
indicated that they did not seek a  further  hearing.   I  have,  therefore,
decided this appeal on the basis of the written material before  me  and  on
the basis of what was said at the hearing of 25 May 2018.

2.    The claimant, it is not disputed, is a national  of  Iraq  of  Kurdish
ethnicity.  It seems to have been accepted by all concerned that he is  from
Kirkuk.

3.    The claimant entered the United Kingdom (UK) in a clandestine manner.
 He has given his date of entry as 26 February 2004.  He claimed asylum and
attended a screening interview on 3 March 2004.  On 15 April 2004 his claim
was refused.  He attempted to appeal that decision but was out-of-time.   In
January 2006 he went to the Republic of Ireland and claimed asylum under  a
different identity.  However, he was returned to the  UK  under  the  Dublin
Convention on 5 May 2006.  On 8 May 2006 he was convicted  at  Sheffield
Magistrates Court of battery  and  failing  to  surrender  to  custody.   He
received a 12 months conditional discharge.  In February 2007 he  went  to
Sweden and, once again, applied  for  asylum  under  a  different  identity.
Once again, he was returned to the UK.  Upon his return, on 10 April 2007,
he made a further claim for asylum which was refused on  6 September 2007.
There followed a succession of further representations made by  and  on  his
behalf to the Secretary of State.  All were refused until 24 November 2011
when he was granted three years discretionary leave to  remain  in  the  UK.
That grant of leave, seemingly without  any  attempt  to  have  it  renewed,
expired on 24 November 2014.

4.    On 13 March 2015 the claimant was convicted, at Leeds Crown Court, of
wounding with intent to do grievance bodily harm, assault and two counts  of
possessing an offensive weapon in a  public  place.   He  received  a  total
sentence of six years and six months.  It was that offending which led  to
the making of the deportation order.  He sought  to  resist  deportation  on
the basis that he was entitled to  international  protection  and  that  his
deportation would  breach  his  rights  under  Article 8  of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) principally on  the  basis  of  a  claimed
relationship with a female British citizen.   But  the  Secretary  of  State
took the view that he was not entitled to international protection and  that
deporting him would not breach his rights under Article 8.  So, he appealed
to the tribunal.

5.    His appeal was heard on 23 August 2017.  There were a lot of  issues
raised by the appeal and so a lot of matters which the tribunal  was  called
upon to decide.  It had to consider, first of all, whether in light  of  the
claimant's offending and given the content of Article 33(2) of the  Refugee
Convention and  Section 72  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002, he was excluded from refugee protection.  It was also required to
consider, again in light of his offending,  whether  given  the  content  of
paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules, he was excluded from  humanitarian
protection.  On the assumption that he was not so excluded it  was  required
to consider whether he was entitled to asylum or to a grant of  humanitarian
protection.  It was also required to consider whether deporting him to  Iraq
would bring about a breach of his rights under Article 3 of the  ECHR.   Of
course, potentially he might succeed under Article 3 even if excluded  from
a grant of asylum and from a grant of humanitarian protection.  Finally,  it
was required to consider whether his deportation would bring about a  breach
of his Article 8 rights with respect to family and/or private life  in  the
UK.

6.    The tribunal decided that the claimant was,  in  fact,  excluded  from
protection under the Refugee Convention and that he was also  excluded  from
a grant of humanitarian protection.  The claimant  has  made  no  subsequent
challenge to that part of the tribunal's decision.

7.    The tribunal, although it had found the claimant to be  excluded  from
the above, said that it would,  for  completeness,  go  on  to  address  the
question of whether or not the claimant might face persecution  upon  return
to Iraq.  It was, of course, obliged to do that in any event because it  had
to consider the position under Article 3.  As  to  that,  it  rejected  the
claimant's argument that he would face a risk of reprisals from  persons  in
Iraq due to what he claimed was his father's previous involvement  with  the
Ba'ath Party.  But it did accept that, if he were to  return  to  what  was
accepted as his home area of Kirkuk, he would be at risk on the  basis  that
conditions there were such as to bring him within the terms of  Article 15c
of the Qualification Directive (2011/95/EU).  That meant it had to go on  to
consider whether he would be able to  internally  relocate  to  a  different
part of Iraq.  It considered, in particular, whether he  would  be  able  to
relocate to the part of Iraq which is under Kurdish  administrative  control
(I shall call it the "IKR"). It decided that he could do  that  for  reasons
which it set out in a passage from paragraphs 89-99 of its written reasons.
 That was partly because of its view that the claimant  was  in  touch  with
his family (though no clear finding was made that his family were  still  in
Iraq), partly because  he  appeared  to  have  financial  resources  at  his
disposal (the tribunal had in  mind  his  ability  to  fund  his  travel  to
Ireland and Sweden) and partly because he would,  it  thought,  be  able  to
obtain an important identity document normally referred to  as  a  CSID.   I
should add that the tribunal also rejected the  claimant's  contention  that
deportation would breach his Article 8 rights.

8.    The claimant asked for  and  obtained  permission  to  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal.  His grounds, in summary,  were  to  the  effect  that  the
tribunal had failed to address the implications of the fact  that  he  would
be returned to Baghdad; had failed to consider matters  touching  upon  "the
safety and reasonableness of relocation" to the IKR and had failed  to  have
regard   to   previous   Country Guidance   decisions   but   particularly
AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) as adjusted by the Court
of Appeal) and BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC).  As
indicated,  no  challenge  was  made  to  the   tribunal's   reasoning   and
conclusions  concerning  exclusion  from   asylum   or   from   humanitarian
protection.   No  challenge  was  made  to  the  tribunal's   findings   and
conclusions regarding the lack of risk faced by  the  claimant  due  to  his
father's claimed involvement with the Ba'ath Party. No challenge  was  made
with respect to the findings and conclusions concerning Article 8.

9.    Permission to appeal was granted.  Thereafter, as noted, I  set  aside
the tribunal's decision.  I did so because I decided that the  tribunal  had
erred with respect to its  consideration  as  to  internal  relocation.   In
explaining why I was setting aside the tribunal's decision I said this:

      "13.  I have decided that, notwithstanding  the  tribunal's  generally
           careful  and  thorough  approach,  it  did  err  in   law   when
           considering the ability of the claimant to  live  in  Iraq  away
           from his home area of Kirkuk.


      14.   I accept Ms Wilkins submission that the tribunal did not assess
           the matter of difficulties  the  claimant  might  experience  in
           Baghdad.  There had never been any suggestion that he  was  from
           the IKR (as I say it seems to have been accepted that he is from
           Kirkuk) so on the face of it, Baghdad would represent  the  only
           potential place of return.  But the tribunal's written  decision
           is silent about any of that and on one  reading  at  least  does
           appear to contemplate, although this is  not  expressly  stated,
           that return would be returned direct to the IKR.  In my judgment
           the tribunal was required to  either  explain  why  it  was  not
           considering the question of difficulties in Baghdad (at least in
           the sense of initial difficulties prior to his making his way to
           the IKR) or to actually  carry  out  an  assessment  as  to  the
           nature, substance and extent of any such difficulties that there
           might be.  Its failure to do so is sufficient,  of  itself,  for
           the tribunal's decision to be set aside.  Nevertheless, I  shall
           consider the arguments concerning his ability to relocate to the
           IKR.


      15.   As to  that,  the  key  paragraphs  of  the  tribunal's  written
           decision are those running from 96-99.  Here  the  tribunal  did
           consider a range of factors.  But it is not obvious that it  had
           had regard to the relevant passages concerning relocation to the
           IKR as contained in AA.  Perhaps its most  relevant  finding  is
           that he has 'resources at his disposal'.  But I do not read what
           the tribunal had to  say  about  that  as  being  indicative  of
           anything more than an ability on his part to meet initial  costs
           enabling him to settle and perhaps find accommodation within the
           IKR.  As to anything beyond that the tribunal did not  consider,
           for example, matters such as whether he would be permitted  (his
           not being from that region) to live there on anything more  than
           a short-term basis or  whether  he  had  prospects  of  securing
           employment  there.    Such   would   appear   to   be   relevant
           considerations in light of what was said in AA.  So, although  I
           think this is really quite marginal, I have concluded  that  the
           tribunal did err in failing to adequately consider relocation to
           the IKR."

10.   I also decided it was appropriate to preserve part of  the  tribunal's
findings and conclusions.  So, I went on to say this:

      "16.  Having decided to set aside the tribunal's decision I have  also
           decided to preserve certain of  its  unchallenged  findings  and
           conclusions.  I will preserve its reasoning and its  conclusions
           concerning the exclusion of the claimant from refugee protection
           and from  humanitarian  protection.   Such  was  comprehensively
           reasoned and not the  subject  of  further  challenge.   I  will
           preserve its reasoning, findings and conclusions concerning  the
           claimant's assertions that he would be at risk  upon  return  in
           consequence of his father's claimed  previous  involvement  with
           the  Ba'ath Party.   I  will  also  preserve  the   tribunal's
           reasoning, findings  and  conclusions  to  the  effect  that  he
           remains in contact with his family members (though as  I  say  I
           note there is no clear finding as to  the  current  location  of
           such  family  members).   I  shall   preserve   the   tribunal's
           reasoning, findings and conclusions with respect to Article 8 of
           the ECHR."

11.   So, the issues to be resolved at the hearing  of  25 May 2018,  were
narrow ones.  I was focusing only upon the claimant's  ability  to  live  in
Baghdad or,  if  he  could  gain  admittance  to  it,  the  IKR.  A  central
consideration with respect to that, it was agreed between the  parties,  was
whether the claimant had a CSID card or, if not, whether he  would  be  able
to obtain one within a reasonable time of returning to Iraq.

12.   The claimant gave evidence before me.  In his  evidence  in  chief  he
simply adopted the content of a witness statement of 22 May 2018.   It  is
appropriate, therefore, for me to summarise the  relevant  content  of  that
statement.  I do not seek to summarise all of it because, in my  view,  some
of it is not relevant to the narrow issues which I am required to  consider.


13.   In his statement the claimant says that he has never lived in  Baghdad
or in the IKR. He knows no-one in Baghdad.  His  main  language  is  Kurdish
Sorani  and  he  speaks  a  very  limited  amount  of  Arabic.   He   is   a
Sunni Muslim.  He does not remember very much about documentation  in  Iraq
but thinks he had a birth certificate when he  was  living  there.   But  he
does not have it now.  Until these court proceedings he had never  heard  of
a CSID card.  He does not have  one.   Documentation  was  not  regarded  as
being so important when he was living in Kirkuk in  the  past.   His  father
passed away in 2003.  He does not know the whereabouts  of  his  family  now
but he did hear, at one point, that his mother and  some  of  her  relatives
were living in  Turkey.   His  family  had  been  well  off  in  Iraq.   His
travelling to Ireland and Sweden had been financed by friends of his.

14.   The claimant was cross-examined.  In cross-examination  he  said  that
he had entered Ireland and Sweden clandestinely.  Friends had  assisted  him
with  associated  costs.   His  family  had  been   fairly   well-off   but,
nevertheless, he had had limited education in Iraq because he had  had  some
mental health difficulties  after  being  injured  as  a  result  of  a  car
accident.  He has not been able to contact his family and is  not  in  touch
with them now.  He has never had any family in Baghdad.

15.   Having heard  the  oral  evidence  I  received  submissions  from  the
representatives which I will now summarise.  Mr McVeety, for the  Secretary
of State, pointed out that the claimant had not always been truthful in  the
past.  He accepted that if he was unable to obtain a CSID document he  would
be "in real difficulty" but he argued that he  would  be  able  to  get  one
because it appears he has had some form of  identity  documentation  in  the
past and I should accept that he  knows  where  his  family  are  and  could
obtain assistance in becoming documented from them.  Further, he comes  from
a wealthy background and appears to have access to  funds  enabling  him  to
travel abroad (to Ireland and Sweden).  If he is able to obtain a  CSID  any
stay in Baghdad (the point of return) would be minimal and he could use  his
CSID card when travelling internally to the IKR.

16.   Ms Smith, for the claimant, argued  that  without  a  CSID  card  the
claimant would face Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment but that, even if that was
not  right,  requiring  him  to  take  advantage  of  an   internal   flight
alternative would be unduly harsh.  I should accept the  evidence  that  the
claimant has not had a CSID card in the past.  But even if he did have  such
a document, it would be unreasonable to speculate that such would  still  be
in his possession or his family's possession.  It is  well  documented  that
there has been mass displacement of people who used to live in the areas  of
Kirkuk and  Mosul  where  the  claimant's  family  were  located.   In  such
circumstances it is unlikely that documentation would have been retained  by
them.  If the claimant's  family  have  relocated  to  Turkey  it  would  be
difficult for him to trace them now.  It is very  unlikely  that  they  will
still be in Kirkuk or Mosul given the upheavals which have  taken  place  in
those parts of Iraq.  Even if his  family  had  funds  in  the  past  it  is
unlikely that they would have them now such as to be able to enable them  to
support the claimant.  He would be returned to  Baghdad  but  could  not  be
expected to live there, particularly, without a CSID card.  Without  such  a
card  he  could  not  successfully  travel  from  Baghdad  to  the   Kurdish
administered area.  Even if he could accomplish that travel and was able  to
gain admittance to  that  part  of  Iraq  he  would  not  be  able  to  find
employment and would have no family or other support there.

17.   It is against  the  above  background  that  I  must  now  remake  the
decision in this case.  The  only  issues  for  me  are  those  of  how  the
claimant would fare in Baghdad or in the IKR.  Intrinsically  tied  up  with
that is the issue of what documentation the claimant has or  what  he  might
be able to obtain within a reasonable time period if returned.

18.   This is not a case where I feel able to  uncritically  accept  all  of
what the claimant has to say  about  his  situation.   He  has  demonstrated
dishonesty on a number of occasions in the past.  He has made  false  asylum
claims in different countries under different identities  as  has  been  set
out above.  The claimant had clearly, on the  tribunal's  previous  findings
which I had preserved, sought to  overstate  the  strength  of  his  claimed
relationship  with  his  UK  based  girlfriend  in  order  to  buttress  his
Article 8 argument.  He has convictions and  although  those  are  not  for
offences of dishonesty, they are probative as  to  his  character.   I  have
proceeded, therefore, on the basis  that  his  word  cannot  necessarily  be
trusted and that he will be prepared to mislead if  he  sees  an  advantage,
from an immigration context, in doing so.

19.   Despite the above, it does not follow  that  everything  the  claimant
says is untruthful.  What it does mean, though, is that  any  assertions  he
does make which it might be in his interests to make have  to  be  carefully
scrutinised.

20.   The claimant says that he does not possess a CSID  card.   Such  cards
are of considerable importance in Iraq.  In AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State
for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944 this was said:

      "39.  The position with a CSID is different.  It is not merely  to  be
      considered as a document which can be used to achieve entry  to  Iraq.
      Rather, it may be an essential document for life in Iraq.  It  is  for
      practical purposes necessary for those without  private  resources  to
      access food and basic services.  Moreover, it is not a  document  that
      can be automatically acquired after return to Iraq.  In  addition,  it
      is feasible that an individual could acquire a passport or a  laissez-
      passer, without possessing or being able to obtain a CSID.  In such  a
      case, an enquiry would be needed to establish whether  the  individual
      would have other means of support in Iraq, in  the  absence  of  which
      they might be at risk of breach of Article 3 rights."

21.   Mr McVeety, as I have noted above, has  accepted  that  the  claimant
would be in difficulties if unable to obtain a CSID card.

22.   The claimant says that he does not have one and that he has never  had
one.  He does acknowledge having had, at one point, some  form  of  identity
document which he says he thinks was probably a birth certificate.

23.   The claimant was an adult at the time he left  Iraq.   Notwithstanding
what he has to say in his most recent witness statement about  documentation
not being considered important when he was living in Kirkuk  (see  above)  I
have concluded that he would have had a CSID card when in Iraq.  But he  has
not been  in  that  country  since  2004.   It  is  now  2018.   During  the
intervening  period  he  has  travelled,  clandestinely,  to  a  number   of
countries and embarked upon the no doubt difficult journey from Iraq to  the
UK.  Given all of that I have concluded that, in all probability,  the  card
will now no longer be in the  claimant's  possession.   I  find,  therefore,
that he does not have a CSID card.

24.   I have next asked myself whether the claimant will be able  to  obtain
a CSID card within a reasonable period following his return to  Iraq.   Here
I have had particular regard to what was recently said  about  that  by  the
Upper Tribunal in the Country Guidance case of AAH, cited above.  In AAH  a
number of relevant considerations as to the ability to  obtain  a  new  CSID
were identified.  I shall now consider them in light  of  the  circumstances
of this case.

25.   There has been, in the past,  an  operating  Civil  Status  Office  in
Kirkuk.  It seems to me that there  is  little  room  for  doubt  that  that
office would have had  identity  details  containing  the  claimant  in  its
records.  However, as I understand it that office has not been operating  as
a result of the difficulties experienced in Kirkuk which led  to  its  being
accepted that persons there faced an Article 15c risk (see above).  So,  it
may be that the office is still not operating; but even if it  is  it  would
not be reasonable to expect the claimant to go to a part of  Iraq  where  he
would face an Article 15c risk; and in any event, for reasons  I  shall  say
more about below, the claimant would not be able to travel from  Baghdad  to
Kirkuk so as to access that office.  So, I find he would not be able to  ask
that office to verify his identity and issue him a new CSID card.

26.   But even if that office was open and he were to be able to get  there,
whilst I have concluded that he did once possess a  birth  certificate,  and
indeed a CSID document, I have found that he  will  subsequently  have  lost
all of his documentation.  It was explained in AAH that a person  without  a
current CSID would be assisted in demonstrating his identity and  getting  a
new one, by other identity documentation including a  passport  or  a  birth
certificate.  But, as I say,  I  have  found  he  does  not  have  any  such
documentation.

27.   There is the possibility of his attempting to obtain a  CSID  document
in Baghdad.  There is, in fact, a Central Registry in Baghdad  and  details
are sent from other offices to that registry.  That was the expert  evidence
of Dr. Fatah in AA (Iraq), cited above.  However, it was said  in  AA  that
the evidence did not demonstrate that the Central Registry in Baghdad  was,
in practice, able to provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.   But  there
might be the prospect of family assistance in obtaining a CSID card.

28.   As to  that,  the  Upper Tribunal  in  AAH  said  that,  because  the
registration system used in Iraq  is  patrilineal,  certain  male  relatives
might be able to help with the redocumentation process.  That  leads  me  on
to consider the claimant's contention that he no longer has family in  Iraq.


29.   The tribunal which heard the claimant's appeal on 23 August 2017 and
went on to dismiss it, did not believe the claimant had lost touch with  his
family.  It noted information contained in an OASYS report, which  had  been
prepared by a probation officer who had become involved with  the  claimant
as a consequence of his offending, to the effect that his  family  had  left
Iraq but had travelled to Turkey.  When I set aside the tribunal's  decision
I preserved its finding to the effect that  the  claimant  had  remained  in
contact with his family members but I noted that what had been said  in  the
tribunal's written reasons did not amount to  a  clear  finding  as  to  the
current location of those family members.  The matter  was  not  visited  to
any significant extent in the oral evidence before me though in his  witness
statement of 22 May 2018, the claimant sought  to  maintain  his  position
that, in fact, he was  not  in  touch  with  his  family  at  all.   He  did
acknowledge having received some second-hand information to the effect  that
his family had gone to Turkey but asserted he had not been able  to  contact
them there.

30.   Given  the  difficulties  there  have  been  in  Kirkuk  and  in  Iraq
generally, it is certainly not implausible that his family would  have  left
Kirkuk and, indeed, would  have  left  Iraq.   Given  the  evidence  in  the
probation report I find that that is what happened  and  that  the  claimant
knows that that is what happened.  I also find that  he  has  maintained  at
least some degree of ongoing contact with them.  But as to  where  they  are
now, that is a more difficult issue.  I am not assisted by what  I  find  to
be the claimant's lack of candour on the  point.   Of  course,  many  people
will have fled Iraq because of the instability in that  country  and,  while
some of them will have returned, others will have chosen not to.  Given  the
ongoing difficulties  that  there  have  been  in  Iraq  I  conclude  it  is
reasonably likely that  the  claimant's  family,  having  successfully  made
their way to Turkey, have stayed there.  So, I conclude that they  will  not
be immediately on  hand  to  assist  the  claimant  in  any  redocumentation
process.  But even if they were, given what I have found to be his  complete
absence of documentation, I find that they would not be  in  a  position  to
afford concrete assistance.  In any event, whatever remains of  his  family,
I think it reasonably likely at least that there  are  no  appropriate  male
family members remaining. As to possible assistance they might  be  able  to
provide with, for example, informing the claimant as to the relevant  volume
and page number of his records  kept  in  the  Central Registry,  there  is
simply no reason to conclude that such relatives would have that  knowledge.
 It may be that information they are themselves able to provide  might  lead
to a person searching the registry records finding relevant entries for  the
claimant  but,  putting  everything  together,  I  find   that   to   be   a
significantly remote possibility and, in any event, there is the point  made
above that the Central Registry in Baghdad does not seek to issue CSIDs  to
those in need of them in any event.

31.   So, I have concluded that it is reasonably likely  that  the  claimant
does not have a CSID document and it is reasonably likely that he  will  not
be able to obtain one within a reasonable time period.

32.   The claimant will, as  I  have  said,  be  returned  to  Baghdad.   In
AA Iraq consideration was given as to what factors might be relevant to the
question of whether or not it would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to
expect or require a claimant, not from Baghdad, to relocate  there.   As  to
those, I have already concluded that the claimant does not have a CSID  card
and will not be able to obtain one.  He has said that whilst he  does  speak
some Arabic, his ability to do so is extremely limited.  That would  not  be
implausible for an Iraqi Kurd from Kirkuk.  He was not  challenged  on  that
point before me.  I accept that he is not  generally  able  to  converse  in
Arabic and that his limited command of that language is  not  likely  to  be
useful to him.  I have found it is reasonably likely that he does  not  have
family in Iraq.  It follows that he does not have family in Baghdad.   Given
that he is from Kirkuk there is no reason for me to  conclude  that  he  has
friends who might  be  able  to  support  or  accommodate  him  in  Baghdad.
Similarly, there is no reason to suppose he might be able to find a  sponsor
who would be able to  assist  him  in  accessing  hotel,  hostel  or  rental
accommodation.  He is, as a Kurd, from a minority community and  it  may  be
that his position  as  Sunni  Kurd  creates  further  difficulties  in  that
regaard.

33.   In light of the above I would conclude that,  in  fact,  the  claimant
would be destitute upon return to Baghdad, his  not  being  able  to  access
services due to the lack of a CSID card and his being bereft  of  family  or
other support.  As to the evidence that his family was  once  wealthy,  that
was in 2004.  Much has altered in Iraq and I find it reasonably likely  that
whatever family members there are in Turkey, and I  accept  that  there  are
some, will not be able to provide him with finance  such  as  to  stave  off
such destitution.

34.   There is then the question of whether or not he will be able  to  make
his way to the IKR. There is the possibility of  a  journey  by  air  or  by
road.  As to the former, the  tribunal  in  AAH  decided  that  a  potential
traveller by air from Baghdad to any of the airports in the IKR  would  have
to possess a valid passport or a CSID.  I have concluded that this  claimant
possesses neither.  Without such documentation the  claimant  would  not  be
able to board a plane (see paragraph 114 of AAH).

35.   As to journey by road, the tribunal in AAH  received  expert  evidence
from Dr. Fatah regarding potential difficulties that  might  be  caused  by
road blocks.  At paragraph 111 it was pointed out  that  a  CSID  or  valid
Iraqi passport would be required  before  a  claimant  could  leave  Baghdad
airport by road.  At paragraphs 114 and  115  the  Upper Tribunal  in  AAH
explained that even if a  claimant  without  appropriate  documentation  was
able to find a way out  of  the  airport  the  difficulties  then  faced  in
travelling from Baghdad to  the  IKR  would  be  substantial.   There  would
likely be numerous checkpoints and there would be the risk of  detention  of
any person trying to get through them without being documented.  This  could
potentially happen at each check point.  Whilst  documented  male  relatives
might be able to attend such a checkpoint where  a  traveller  is  detained,
vouch for him and thereby secure his release from detention,  I  have  found
that this  claimant  does  not  have  such  relatives  in  Iraq.   In  those
circumstances I would conclude that embarking upon such a journey  with  the
risk  of  persistent  and  perhaps  extensive  detention  would  not  be   a
reasonable way to secure access to a place of internal  refuge.  So,  it  is
not necessary for me to consider whether, if  he  got  there,  the  claimant
could actually enter the IKR.

36.   I have concluded, in light of the  above,  that  if  the  claimant  is
returned to Baghdad he will face destitution there.  Such would  breach  his
rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.  I have concluded that he will  not  be
able to avoid such destitution by going  to  the  IKR  because,  practically
speaking, he would not be able to get  there.   Further,  the  treatment  he
would be at risk of in attempting to do so would also breach  Article 3  of
the ECHR.

37.   The claimant does not, though,  succeed  on  asylum  grounds  or  upon
humanitarian protection grounds.  He is excluded from such protection.   So,
he succeeds on human rights grounds only.

38.   I realise  that  the  outcome  might,  when  looked  at  from  certain
perspectives, be viewed as unattractive.  That is because the  claimant  has
been less than honest and because he has committed offences in  the  UK  one
of which was of significant gravity.  But nevertheless, the  legal  position
is that he cannot be deported if there would be a real  risk  of  Article 3
ill-treatment upon return.  That is why his appeal succeeds.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error of  law  and  has
been set aside.

In remaking  the  decision,  I  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision of 17 January 2017 on human  rights  grounds
(Article 3 of the ECHR) only.

Direction  regarding  anonymity  -  rule 14  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                           Date: 23 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is payable and no fee has  been  paid,  there  can  be  no  fee
award.


Signed:                           Date: 23 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
