
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/01906/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 October 2019                   |On 23 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 WALID BELAL
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria, born on 20 August 1982.  He says
    that he arrived clandestinely in the UK in 2014.  He sought asylum on 7
    August 2018, claiming to be at risk  because  he  and  his  wife  (also
    Algerian) married in the UK on 24 March 2015 without the consent of her
    family.

 2. The respondent refused the claim by  letter  dated  10  February  2019,
    giving these reasons:- no Refugee Convention category; nationality  and
    relationship with wife accepted;  facts  of  claim  not  substantiated;
    delay,  and  failure  to  claim  in  other  countries,   also   against
    credibility; in any  event,  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
    relocation both available; no other basis on which to grant leave.

 3. The appellant appealed to the FtT, on generic grounds.

 4. FtT Judges Cowx and Buchanan dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 18 June 2019.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT.  Mr  Caskie  began
    his submissions by referring to the terms of the refusal of  permission
    on 26 July 2019 by FtT Judge Welsh:

         "The grounds assert error ... in relation to whether:

         (1)      the appellant is a member of a particular social group;

         (2)      the appellant's account is credible;

         (3)      whether there is sufficiency of protection in Algeria;

         ... the alleged flaws are only capable of  being  material  if  the
         appellant's account is credible.

         ... there is no merit in the second ground.   The  judges'  reasons
         ... are evidence-based and logical ..."

 6. The appellant sought permission from the UT on similar grounds, set out
    in the attachment to his application dated 15 August 2019, paragraphs 1
    - 16.

 7. UT Judge Sheridan granted permission on 21 August 2019.

 8. Mr Caskie submitted firstly on the credibility grounds at 4 a - c and 5
    - 13, accepting that these were crucial.

 9. Paragraph 4 a aims at paragraph 9.19 of the decision, where  the  panel
    said that no evidence such as an airline ticket or booking was  adduced
    to establish that the appellant's wife arrived in the UK  on  24  March
    2015.  The ground says that the onus in establishing the  date  was  on
    the SSHD, and the panel should have had regard to "the failure  of  the
    SSHD to adduce evidence".

10. Mr Govan pointed out that the SSHD did  not  raise  the  issue  in  the
    refusal letter and that the appellant had  never  asked  the  SSHD  for
    assistance in establishing the date.

11. No contentious issue had been put to the panel by which it  might  have
    perceived a shifting onus.  All the panel said was  that  the  date  of
    arrival was "not  a  determining  factor"  but  "part  of  the  factual
    matrix".  That involved no error of overlooking  that  the  onus  might
    have shifted to the respondent.

12. Paragraph 4 b of the grounds says that the FtT should  have  taken  the
    short time between the arrival of the appellant's wife  and  conception
    of their child as indicative of a prior relationship,  or  should  have
    given reasons to the contrary.  However,  there  was  no  dispute  over
    there having been  in  a  relationship.   The  issue  was  whether  the
    evidence established that the  wife's  family  was  against  it.   This
    ground is misconceived, and leads nowhere.

13. Paragraphs  4  c  and  5  of  the  grounds  run  together,  challenging
    paragraphs 9.8 and 9.9 of the decision.  Their first point  might  have
    been better put to the effect that the difference between the appellant
    and his wife over the length of their initial relationship (either from
    early 2009 to mid-2009, as he said, or for almost a year, as she  said)
    was of little account.  Both were rather general  descriptions  of  the
    period involved.  The grounds try to dig deep in  looking  to  cultural
    norms or the age of the appellant's wife to  explain  the  discrepancy,
    such as it was.  On the second point, as the  appellant  and  his  wife
    said they kept regularly in touch, it was obviously  within  reason  to
    consider that she would know at least roughly when he had been in which
    countries.

14. It might be thought that although there was  an  inconsistency  on  the
    first point, it was not very significant;  on  the  second  point,  the
    panel's finding, "cause to  doubt  the  veracity  of  the  detail",  is
    restrained, and goes no further than is justified.

15. Paragraph 6 of the grounds, challenging 9.10 of the  decision,  is  not
    arguably more than insistence on an alternative view of the facts.   It
    was  well  within  reason  for  the  panel  to  consider  that  if  the
    appellant's family were so irate at the relationship that the appellant
    had to flee from Algeria, even when she was 5 years older they were not
    reasonably likely to  agree  to  her  travelling  alone  to  visit  the
    appellant's brother in London.

16. Paragraph 7 of the grounds, 9.10 of the decision: it was far  short  of
    perversity to consider it illogical to plot reunion in the UK when  the
    appellant had not yet succeeded in unlawful entry.

17. Paragraphs 8 - 10 of the grounds, 9.12  -  9.14  of  the  decision:  no
    further reasons were required  for  finding  it  implausible  that  the
    appellant's brother would not ask why he left Algeria and what  he  had
    been doing, or discuss the risk involved.

18. Paragraph 11 is convoluted, and makes no clear  point.  Mr  Caskie  had
    nothing to add to it.  It is accepted that the panel had  good  reasons
    to doubt the documentation offered to vouch  a  formal  marriage.   The
    panel did not question the relationship.  The  dubious  nature  of  the
    documentation rationally detracted from the claim.

19. As to paragraph 12, it is hard to see why the appellant's brother might
    not  have  accepted  the  relationship.   The  panel's  view  that  his
    acceptance would be "wholly inconsistent" does seem to go rather far.

20. Paragraph 13 says there was no evidence to support the  observation  at
    9.26 that there was nothing to  prevent  the  appellant  and  his  wife
    seeking reconciliation;  but  the  point  was  obviously  open  on  the
    evidence the appellant supplied, and nothing further was needed.

21. Overall, Mr Caskie argued that the panel looked  only  for  reasons  to
    dismiss the appeal (paragraph 16 of the grounds), left out  of  account
    considerations on the other side, and failed to provide  an  adequately
    reasoned decision.  Mr Govan countered that while a  few  imperfections
    might be found, the decision, read as a whole, thoroughly explained why
    the account had not been found reliable.

22. For the reasons given above, I have not found the individual grounds to
    disclose any significant error on a point of fact.  Their  high  points
    are on the import of the discrepancy over the  period  of  the  initial
    relationship, and the possibility  of  acceptance  by  the  appellant's
    brother.  By probing into points of detail, plausible disagreements can
    no doubt be found with any extended resolution of the facts of a  case.
    The decision is a detailed and thorough analysis.  It does not overlook
    the alternative interpretation,  but  explains  why  it  is  not  found
    reliable even to the lower standard.

23. I do not find that the appellant's disagreements with  certain  of  the
    credibility findings add up to error on a point of law in  the  overall
    conclusion.

24. Mr Caskie said that  the  finding  of  sufficiency  of  protection  was
    inadequately supported, because it founded only on the  policy  section
    of the respondent's note, not on the evidence section.  That may be  an
    astute observation in  principle,  but  paragraph  14  of  the  grounds
    discloses no eventual error.  As Mr Govan pointed out, the  appellant's
    submission in the FtT on sufficiency of protection was one  generalised
    sentence, and he tendered no evidence.   It  was  he  who  put  in  the
    respondent's note.  Having chosen to rely on that as all  his  evidence
    on sufficiency of protection, and having offered no contrary  analysis,
    it is far-fetched now to complain that the panel went  wrong.   He  has
    not referred to anything before the  panel  which  might  realistically
    have led to another answer.  Any error was theoretical.

25. As to paragraph 15 of the grounds, if the account was credible, it  did
    not automatically follow from there being a computerised identity  card
    scheme, and significant corruption, that the family of the  appellant's
    wife either could or would trace them in Algeria.

26. The case accordingly failed, even  if  the  appellant  had  been  found
    credible, on sufficiency of protection and on internal relocation.

27. The grounds at paragraphs 2 and 3, on particular social group, are  the
    best taken.  I find the panel's analysis hard to follow.  The appellant
    is part of the same extended family as his alleged persecutors, but  it
    is not clear why that would exclude a  legal  category  of  protection.
    That was not the reasoning on which the respondent relied at pages  4-5
    of the refusal letter.  Mr Govan did not  adopt  the  analysis  in  the
    decision, but said that the point was immaterial.   However, success on
    this ground is an abstract legal  matter  which  does  not  affect  the
    outcome.

28. The decision of the FtT stands.

29. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      18 October 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
