
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01041/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 31 July 2019                               |On 9 August 2019             |
|Extempore decision                            |                             |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     MMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, Solicitor with JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge Swinnerton of the First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 26 April 2019 dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the respondent dated 21  January  2019  to
    refuse his asylum and humanitarian protection claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 16 January  1980.   He
    claims  that  he  cannot  return  to  Bangladesh  on  account  of   his
    homosexuality, on the basis that he will either be persecuted  for  his
    open expression of his sexual orientation, or that he will be compelled
    to live a discreet life in conflict with his true sexual identity.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. Judge Swinnerton found that the appellant had not given a truthful  and
    accurate account of his claimed sexuality and rejected the  element  of
    the account that he was gay.  As such the  judge  considered  that  the
    appellant would not suffer persecution upon his return  to  Bangladesh.
    The judge reached these findings having heard from the  appellant,  his
    aunt, Mrs H, and a friend of the appellant, Mr O.  The judge noted that
    there were a number of witness statements  in  the  appellant's  bundle
    provided by witnesses who had not attended the Tribunal.  The judge had
    concerns about the internal consistency of the appellant's account.  He
    said that he was "troubled" by the point in time at which the appellant
    said that he had started to live an  openly  gay  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His evidence was that he had first declared his homosexuality
    to Mrs H in July 2015, and that that was about the point  at  which  he
    started to live an openly gay life,  and  informed  his  aunt,  Mrs  H.
    Slightly  earlier  in  the  year,  in  May,  the  appellant   began   a
    relationship with a man called Mr M.  The judge  ascribed  significance
    to the fact that the appellant's aunt, in whom the  appellant  confided
    regularly, had never met Mr  M,  had  not  heard  of  him  and  had  no
    knowledge of him at all.  This was despite the fact that the revelation
    by the appellant of his homosexuality to  Mrs  H  coincided,  in  broad
    terms, with the beginning of his relationship with Mr M, and  in  light
    of the role Mrs H performed as his confidante  and  mediator  with  the
    rest of  the  family.   As  such,  the  fact  that  Mrs  H  lacked  any
    significant degree of  knowledge  about  his  relationship  with  Mr  M
    presented credibility concerns.

 4. At [21] the judge  had  some  further  credibility  concerns  with  the
    omission of what he considered to be key aspects of Mrs  H's  evidence.
    A central tenet of the  appellant's  case  was  that  he  would  suffer
    persecution at the hands of his family in Bangladesh, given  that  they
    knew of his homosexuality.  Mrs H had provided a statement in which she
    described trying to reason with the appellant's family  in  Bangladesh.
    She had sought to urge them to accept him.  Her statement said that her
    visit to Bangladesh was  a  "recent"  one  and  in  oral  evidence  she
    clarified that that visit took place in February  2019.   In  her  oral
    evidence, Mrs H mentioned for the first time a  visit  she  claimed  to
    have made to Bangladesh in 2016 or 2017  in  which  she  discussed  the
    appellant's homosexuality with his mother.  The judge  had  credibility
    concerns over the absence of any references in her  statement  prepared
    for the proceedings concerning the 2016  or  2017  visits.   The  judge
    noted the appellant placed significant weight on the reaction to Mrs  H
    revealing his homosexuality to the wider family.  As  such,  considered
    the judge, the visits by Mrs H in 2016 or  17  to  Bangladesh  entailed
    what  must  have  been,  even  on  the  appellant's  account,  a   very
    significant meeting at a significant point in time for Mrs H,  for  the
    wider family and of course for the appellant himself.  However, due  to
    the fact that Mrs H did not mention that visit or those family meetings
    in her witness statement, the judge had credibility concerns.  This was
    of particular concern for the judge, given the critical role played  by
    Mrs H in the overall narrative provided by the appellant.

 5. The appellant previously held leave to remain  in  this  country  as  a
    student, although that had been curtailed in February 2015.  The  judge
    did not accept the appellant's  explanation  for  having  waited  until
    September 2017 upon being arrested for immigration offences to make his
    claim for asylum.  The explanation given by the appellant  as  outlined
    at [22] was that the appellant had been told by a friend not  to  claim
    asylum as he would otherwise be sent back  to  Bangladesh.   The  judge
    found that explanation to lack credibility and said that he did not see
    any reason why the appellant could  not  claim  asylum  at  an  earlier
    stage.

 6. Turning to the appellant's narrative of what has taken  place  in  this
    county since he started to live an openly homosexual life, at [23]  the
    judge said that it was significant that Mr M had not provided a  letter
    of support or any form of statement for the purposes  of  the  hearing.
    Although the appellant claimed to have had  between  20  to  25  casual
    sexual relationships, only one of those individuals, Mr O, had attended
    the hearing and his evidence was that he had had casual  sex  with  the
    appellant on four occasions since 2017.  The judge was  concerned  that
    Mr O only knew the appellant within the confines  of  the  clubs  where
    they had met, and that he knew very little about  his  family  and  his
    wider circumstances.  The judge rejected  the  explanation  that  Mr  O
    provided for why  he  was  unable  to  see  the  appellant  on  further
    occasions, namely that he worked for 60 hours each week.  He considered
    that that explanation lacked credibility.  The judge could not see  why
    working 60 hours weekly would prevent the appellant from seeing  Mr  O.
    That was one of the factors that led the judge to conclude  that  there
    had been very little by way  of  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    claimed homosexual activity in the United Kingdom.

Permission to appeal

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by a Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  on
    the basis that it was, "arguable (just) that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred  in  his  treatment  of  the  evidence  of  the  supporting
    witnesses and that his  findings  lacked  clarity".   The  grounds  for
    appeal also criticised the judge's treatment of what he perceived to be
    the delay in the appellant's claim for asylum, although the  permission
    decision did not consider that aspect of  the  permission  application.
    Equally, the permission decision did not restrict the grounds on  which
    this appeal could be argued.  As such Mr Reza legitimately pursued  the
    point before me.

Discussion

 8. In the recently reported case  of  Durueke  (PTA:  AZ  applied,  proper
    approach) [2019] UKUT 00197 (IAC), Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  held  the
    following at (iii) of the headnote:

         "Particular care should be taken before granting permission on  the
         ground that the judge who decided the appeal did not  'sufficiently
         consider' or 'sufficiently analyse'  certain  evidence  or  certain
         aspects of a case. Such  complaints  often  turn  out  to  be  mere
         disagreements with the reasoning  of  the  judge  who  decided  the
         appeal because the implication is that the  evidence  or  point  in
         question was considered by the judge who decided the appeal but not
         to the extent desired by the author of the  grounds  or  the  judge
         considering  the  application  for  permission.  Permission  should
         usually only be granted on such grounds if it is possible to  state
         precisely how the assessment of the judge who decided the appeal is
         arguably lacking and why this is arguably material."

    It appears that that reported case had not been published by  the  time
    the Deputy Judge granted permission to appeal in the present matter, so
    I am without the benefit of  the  necessary  detailed  analysis  as  to
    "precisely"  why  permission  was   granted   on   the   grounds   that
    "insufficient  weight"  had  been  given  to  certain  aspects  of  the
    evidence.

Submissions

 9. In order to expand on the grant of permission, it is necessary to  turn
    to the grounds.  The appellant originally attended the Tribunal on  two
    earlier occasions with the  three  additional  witnesses  who  did  not
    attend by the time the substantive hearing took place.   On  the  first
    occasion the matter was listed before  the  First-tier,  the  appellant
    unfortunately became ill in court and the matter had to  be  adjourned.
    On the second occasion,  the  judge  became  ill  and  the  matter  was
    adjourned again.  On  those  first  two  occasions  the  appellant  was
    prepared to give evidence with a total of five supporting witnesses.

10. By the time the matter finally reached the substantive  hearing  before
    Judge Swinnerton, three of the witnesses  who  previously  attended  on
    those first two occasions were now unable  to  attend.   One  of  those
    witnesses was the appellant's cousin P, a friend of his  who  was  also
    gay, S, and a  Bangladeshi  gay  rights  activist,  MK.  The  appellant
    applied for a further adjournment on that  occasion.  That  application
    was rejected and no part of the grounds  advanced  before  me  or  upon
    which permission to appeal was obtained seek to challenge  the  judge's
    decision to refuse to adjourn the matter on that occasion.

11. It is against that background that Mr  Reza  contends  that  the  judge
    failed to  make  "sufficient"  findings  concerning  the  three  absent
    witnesses.  Although they did not attend to give oral evidence, submits
    Mr Reza, each had provided a written statement  or  a  letter  and  the
    judge did not engage with the contents of those documents in sufficient
    depth.  The remainder of Mr Reza's arguments  relate  to  the  analysis
    conducted by the judge in relation to the facts.

12. Mr Tarlow submits that the  judge  reached  findings  of  fact  he  was
    entitled to reach, and that the grounds of appeal disclose no  material
    error of law.

Discussion

13. As Mr Reza accepted in oral argument, in order to challenge a  decision
    on the basis of a material error of fact it is necessary to demonstrate
    that the judge below reached a finding that was irrational, perverse or
    not open to him or her on the facts or evidence  before  the  court  (R
    (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982
    at [9]).  Failure to give adequate reasons can be a basis upon which  a
    decision can  feature  a  material  error  of  law,  but  only  if  the
    inadequate reasoning or the weight ascribed to the  immaterial  matters
    or the lack of weight ascribed to material matters renders the decision
    perverse or irrational.  This represents the established legal position
    that there may not be an appeal to this Tribunal on a point of fact but
    only on a point of law.

14. Turning to the submissions advanced in relation to the evidence of  Mrs
    H, I do not consider the judge's analysis to have been irrational or to
    have led to a perverse conclusion.  In her statement Mrs H  wrote  that
    she was quite well-known within  the  Bangladeshi  community  and  that
    although she knew  about  the  appellant  and  his  sexuality  and  was
    prepared to tolerate it, she did not endorse it.  She wrote this:

         "As a result I  never  have  met  with  any  of  [the  appellant's]
         boyfriends.  He did tell me that he has  boyfriends  with  whom  he
         visits different clubs.  However, I was never  interested  to  talk
         about it much".

15. The submission by Mr Reza is  that  the  judge  reached  an  irrational
    conclusion by ascribing significance to the fact that in her  evidence,
    Mrs H said that she knew very  little  about  any  of  the  appellant's
    boyfriends.  She had addressed her  lack  of  knowledge,  submitted  Mr
    Reza, by stating that she tolerated the appellant's homosexuality,  but
    did not want to find out the details.  I do not consider that  to  have
    been an irrational conclusion on the part  of  the  judge.   The  judge
    found that the role that Mrs H played in relation to the appellant  was
    that of a confidante, and, accordingly,  he  had  credibility  concerns
    over the lack of her knowledge of any detail concerning the appellant's
    relationships.  The judge's findings that it would have been reasonable
    for Mrs H to note some more of the detail about his relationships was a
    finding that was open to the judge to reach, especially in light of Mrs
    H's evidence that she had performed something of  a  mediator  role  on
    behalf of the appellant in relation to his wider family  in  Bangladesh
    and that she had urged the family to accept him.  As  such,  the  judge
    rightly noted that, given the relationship that the appellant had  with
    Mrs H and her wider role in relation to the extended family,  he  would
    have expected Mrs H to  have  known  more  about  the  details  of  the
    relationships which lay at the heart of the  appellant's  newly  openly
    homosexual  lifestyle.   Another  judge  may  have   approached   their
    treatment of Mrs  H's  evidence  differently,  but  nothing  about  the
    treatment of Mrs H's evidence by this judge featured any perversity  or
    led to an irrational conclusion.

16. Mr Reza submits that Mrs H's earlier visits to Bangladesh that were not
    mentioned in her statement were not concealed from  the  Tribunal.   He
    submits that her evidence featured  no  contradictions.   She  made  no
    attempt to hide information in her oral evidence, he  submits;  it  was
    simply the case that she expanded upon her  written  statement  orally,
    revealing that she had visited Bangladesh on an additional occasion  to
    that described in her statement.  I do not consider this to have been a
    finding that was not open to the judge to  reach.   His  finding  that,
    were it the case that the family had reacted in the way  the  appellant
    claimed, and had Mrs H assumed  the  conciliatory  and  mediatory  role
    which she said she  did,  she  would  have  provided  more  detail  was
    rational.  It was a finding that was open to the judge to reach on  the
    evidence.

17. In relation to the appellant's  relationship  with  Mr  O,  his  casual
    partner he claimed to have met in a club,  nothing  about  the  judge's
    treatment of this aspect of the evidence features any irrationality  or
    perversity.  It is necessary to step back and examine the nature of the
    case advanced by the appellant as a whole.   The  appellant  claims  to
    have had a serious relationship with Mr M and around 20  to  25  casual
    sexual relationships  with  other  men.   The  judge  was  legitimately
    concerned that the evidence presented to the Tribunal  was  limited  in
    comparison.  Mr O's evidence  was  limited  to  a  discreet  number  of
    interactions in the context of a club.  Mr Reza is, of course, right to
    say there is no legal  requirement  for  relationships  to  take  place
    outside such confines.  However, it  must  also  be  acknowledged  that
    there is no rule of law preventing a judge from rejecting such evidence
    in these circumstances.  The nature of the judge's credibility concerns
    on this occasion related to the relative lack of depth of the  evidence
    advanced on behalf of the appellant in contrast to the breadth  of  the
    basis of his claim.  The limited context of the interactions  that  the
    appellant claims to have had with the only  witness  who  was  able  to
    support his claimed homosexuality from  a  practical  perspective  must
    therefore be viewed against that background.  Again, another judge  may
    have approached this assessment of the facts differently, but there  is
    nothing about the approach adopted by  this  judge  that  features  the
    necessary  irrationality  or  perversity  which  the   appellant   must
    establish in order to succeed in this appeal.

18. In relation to Mr M, the appellant's  claimed  long-term  partner  from
    whom  he  has  since  separated,  Mr  Reza  contends  that  the   judge
    unreasonably expected some form of statement or letter  confirming  the
    relationship to have taken  place.   Mr  Reza  contends  that  such  an
    explanation was unreasonable in light of the fact the relationship  had
    ended and the appellant was  no  longer  in  contact  with  him.   With
    respect to Mr Reza, that is another disagreement with a finding of fact
    reached by the judge which was properly open to  him  to  reach.    The
    appellant's  evidence  had  not  been  that  the   relationship   ended
    acrimoniously, but that Mr M had moved to another city and he had  lost
    touch.  The underlying concern of the  judge  was  that  there  was  no
    supporting evidence of the sort one could reasonably be expected to  be
    generated by a relationship of some  length  in  this  country.   While
    another judge may have approached  his  analysis  of  Mr  M's  evidence
    differently, it is necessary to recall that  the  judge  conducted  his
    assessment of the evidence in the case in the round.  At [19] the judge
    specifically underlined the fact he had considered the entirety of  the
    evidence in  the  case  to  the  lower  standard  before  reaching  his
    decision.  As such the judge's findings in relation to  Mr  M  must  be
    placed in the context of his wider analysis of the  case  as  a  whole.
    The concerns that the judge had had (as set out at [24]  when  he  drew
    the various strands of the evidence together) were that  there  was  an
    overall absence  of  evidence  demonstrating  that  the  appellant  had
    satisfied the judge to the lower standard that he was gay.

19. In relation to the three witnesses who were unable to attend the  judge
    was entitled to place less weight on their  evidence  given  they  were
    unable to attend the Tribunal.  I accept that  they  had  attended  the
    Tribunal  on  previous  occasions,  but  the  fact  that  they  did  so
    previously did not bind the judge to accept their evidence  in  written
    form at face value on a later occasion when they did not  attend.   Had
    they attended, credibility assessments  would  have  been  required  of
    their evidence in any event.  The judge noted at [15] that Mr Reza  had
    relied upon the witness statements of Mr H and Ms MK, and added at [19]
    that he had considered all the documentation that  had  been  provided.
    It is trite law that it is not necessary for a judges of the First-tier
    Tribunal to consider in detail in their decisions every aspect of every
    piece of evidence.  This Tribunal is seized with the task of  assessing
    whether the judge in the First-tier Tribunal fell into a material error
    of law, not whether they recited each and every piece of  evidence  and
    expressly made findings upon it.  Decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal
    which are beset by unnecessary detail  are  not  in  the  interests  of
    justice.  See Lord Justice Haddon-Cave in  PA  (Iran)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 2495 at [42]:

         "There is an increasing tendency for  First-Tier  judgments  to  be
         overly long and to contain unnecessary detail.  This  can,  itself,
         cause problems of consistency and cogency. Laborious recitation  of
         every piece of evidence is not necessary or  desirable  and  simply
         adds to the already heavy burden on First-Tier judges. It  is  only
         necessary to refer to evidence that is relevant  to  the  issue  or
         issues for determination. Length is no substitute for analysis."

20. The judge's analysis of the  evidence  of  the  absent  witnesses  must
    therefore be assessed by reference  to  his  overall  analysis  of  the
    entirety of the evidence of the case conducted in the round.   In  this
    respect, the judge had the benefit of hearing live  evidence  from  the
    appellant, from Mrs H and from Mr O.   The  judge  outlined  legitimate
    credibility concerns surrounding the claimed lack of knowledge  on  the
    part of Mrs H, and the fact  that  she  omitted  key  elements  of  the
    narrative  that  she  advanced  before  him  in  her  written   witness
    statement.  These were all findings which were  properly  open  to  the
    judge to reach and there is no material error of law in  the  means  by
    which the judge reached those findings.

Delay

21. Mr Reza relied on the case  of  A,  B  and  C  v  Staatssecretaris  van
    Veiligheid en Justitie C-148/13 to C-150/13 of the Court of Justice  of
    the European Union.  Mr Reza's submission based is that it was improper
    for the judge to ascribe the significance that he did to the late claim
    in asylum advanced by the appellant, given the established difficulties
    that asylum seekers on grounds of sexual orientation  experience.   The
    relevant operative part of the reasoning of that judgment in the  Court
    of Justice is at [4].  It states as follows, with emphasis added:

         "Article  4(3)  of  Directive  2004/83  and  Article  13(3)(a)   of
         Directive 2005/85 must be interpreted as precluding in the  context
         of that assessment the competent authorities from finding that  the
         statements of the applicant  for  asylum  lack  credibility  merely
         because  the  applicant  did  not  rely  on  his  declared   sexual
         orientation on the first occasion he  was  given  to  set  out  the
         grounds of persecution".

22. In response to this submission two observations are relevant.

23. First, the delay in the appellant claiming asylum  was  one  factor  of
    many credibility concerns which the judge had appellant's case.  He had
    not reached his credibility findings "merely" because the appellant had
    delayed making his claim until  his  arrest  in  2017  (see  the  added
    emphasis, above).

24. Secondly, the reasons given by the appellant for  not  claiming  asylum
    did not relate to his perceived difficulties with coming out as  a  gay
    man  against  a  strict  Islamic  background  within  the   Bangladeshi
    community.  At [22],  the  judge  records  the  reasons  given  by  the
    appellant for why he did not claim asylum earlier as being that he  had
    been informed by a friend that if he were to claim asylum he  would  be
    returned to Bangladesh early, and that he had been  unable  to  find  a
    solicitor.  At no part of the case advanced  either  before  me  or  in
    submissions today, or as recorded by Judge Swinnerton  below,  had  the
    appellant claimed that he had been unable  to  make  his  claim  at  an
    earlier stage due to difficulties arising from his cultural or  Islamic
    background.

25. As such I find there is nothing in this aspect of the submissions  made
    by Mr Reza which demonstrates that the  findings  of  the  judge  below
    featured some material error of law in relation  to  the  harm  to  the
    appellant's credibility arising from the delay in making the claim.

Conclusion

26. For these reasons the findings of Judge Swinnerton were open to him  to
    reach on the evidence that he  had  received.   I  find  that  he  gave
    sufficient reasons for rejecting the core of the  account  provided  by
    the appellant and was entitled to reach that conclusion on the evidence
    that he had.  This appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

27. Judge Swinnerton made an order  for  anonymity  and  in  light  of  the
    sensitive nature of the matters outlined in this decision,  I  consider
    it appropriate to maintain that order.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.  The decision of Judge Swinnerton stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]               Date 2 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
