
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01416/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House in London       |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On   3 June 2019                     |On   26 July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      Y
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rhodri-Jones (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal") which it made  following  a
hearing of 14 March 2019 and which it sent to the parties on 21 March  2019.
The decision of the Tribunal was to dismiss the claimant's appeal against  a
decision of the Secretary of State, made on 30  January  2019,  refusing  to
grant him international protection.

2.     The  background  circumstances  are  straightforward   and   may   be
summarised quite briefly: The claimant is a national of  China  and  he  was
born on 12 February 1975. He entered the UK  on  26  September  2006  having
obtained entry clearance. He  was  granted  leave  for  temporary  purposes,
taking him up to 25 September 2011. Although he had returned to China (as  I
understand it for visits) on three occasions after his  initial  arrival  in
the UK, he did not do so after 2009. He claimed international protection  on
24 October 2018 and  it  was  that  application  which  lead  to  the  above
decision of the Home Secretary, to the appeal to the tribunal and  now  this
appeal. In making his claim he said that on his last trip back to  China  he
had become involved in a fight with a person  I  shall  call  CS  but  that,
unbeknown to him at the time, CS is, as it was  put  by  the  tribunal  "the
head of underground gambling  as  well  as  being  a  loan  shark,  a  money
launderer and head of a Triad gang". The claimant says he won the fight  and
so CS now wishes to harm him. He says he has subsequently  received  threats
from him.

3.    The Tribunal did not believe the claimant. In its written  reasons  it
analysed the evidence from paragraph 13 to 21 and then set out its  findings
and conclusions from paragraph 23 to 29. It is right to  point  out,  as  Mr
Kotas stressed before me, that the tribunal did make certain comments  about
the reliability or otherwise of certain emails the claimant was  seeking  to
rely upon, in the  section  which  it  devoted  to  a  setting  out  of  the
evidence. When it came to explain why it did not  believe  the  claimant  it
said this:

             "23. The appellant claimed asylum  in  October  2018.  On  his
             account the had already received an important note  which  was
             central to his claim and which related to  2009.  It  was  not
             produced until this morning. He was  asked  in  the  screening
             interview whether he had any relevant documents and he replied
             "none" -A10-6.2. He was asked  whether  he  intended  to  have
             additional documents sent to him from China and again he  said
             "None". He has been represented by solicitors since  at  least
             13 February 2019 when the notice of appeal  was  filed  and  I
             note that the continued existence of this note is not referred
             to in his recent statement.


      24. I have already commented on the timing and contents of the email.


             25. I have looked at the  documents  in  the  context  of  the
             evidence  as  a  whole  and  I  have  applied  the  well-known
             principles  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  concluded  they  are  not
             documents upon which reliance should properly be placed.


             26. The appellant also relies on marks on his face  and  wrist
             which date back to a fight that allegedly  happened  in  2009.
             There is no medical evidence to support his contention and  in
             any event they could have been inflicted simply because he was
             in a fight. That does not mean that his claim must be accepted
             as I would also have  to  accept  that  his  assailant  was  a
             current real risk to him.


             27.  Even on his own his case, the appellant's last  visit  to
             China was 2009 and the last communication  that  he  had  from
             [CS] was 2015  and  was  an  indirect  message.  There  is  no
             evidence of any current threat and even the last email  hardly
             suggests commitment to a vendetta.


      28.  I conclude the appellant is not a credible witness".

4.    The successful application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal  followed.  Two  grounds  were  offered.  The  first,  in  summary,
amounted to a contention (at least on my  reading)  that  the  tribunal  had
erred in concluding the claimant could not succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE
of the Immigration Rules simply on the basis that it had  concluded  he  was
not entitled to humanitarian protection. There was  also  as  part  of  that
ground a related contention that the matters relevant to article  8  of  the
European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (ECHR)  had   not   received   full
consideration. The second ground was to  the  effect  that  the  credibility
assessment had been inadequate. The granting Judge relevantly said this:


             "1. It is arguable that the judge has set out an  insufficient
             analysis leading to the conclusion that the appellant is not a
             credible witness at paragraph 28  of  the  decision  following
             conclusions reached by the judge in relation to the  existence
             or otherwise of a continuing risk based  upon  the  chronology
             and the last communication constituted by an indirect message.
             It is arguable that the essential  foundation  for  concluding
             that the appellant lacked credibility is set out at  paragraph
             23  of  the  decision  following  from  which  the  judge  has
             proceeded to apply Tanveer Ahmed. The judge has then proceeded
             to consider the evidence of marks on the appellant's face  and
             wrist. This did not mean as the judge states at  paragraph  26
             that the appellant's claim must be accepted.  It  is  arguable
             that the essential foundations for the conclusions as to  lack
             of credibility do not bear the weight  placed  upon  them  for
             reaching the conclusion as to the lack for credibility".


5.    Permission having been granted the matter was  listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal  (before  me)  so  that  it  could  be  considered
whether or not the tribunal had erred in law and, if  it  had,  what  should
flow from that. Representation at that hearing was  what  was  stared  above
and I am grateful to each representative. Mr Rhodri-Jones realistically,  in
my view, focused largely upon ground two rather than  ground  one.  To  some
extent certain of what he argued fell (in my view) to  be  characterised  as
attempted re-argument with the tribunal's  findings  and  conclusions.  That
sort of material, of itself, is not capable of demonstrating legal error  on
the part of the tribunal. But he also contended in effect,  that  the  level
of  reasoning  with  respect  to  the  credibility  assessment  was  legally
inadequate. He asked me to set aside the tribunal's decision and  either  to
remit or to remake the decision myself after a  further  hearing.  Mr  Kotas
sought to defend the tribunal's decision determinedly. He pointed  out  that
what comprised the credibility  assessment  was  not  limited  to  what  the
tribunal had said from paragraph 23 of its written reasons onwards.  Rather,
there had also been a number of pertinent observations regarding  the  email
evidence which had been made at an earlier point in  those  reasons.  As  to
what I had suggested to Mr Kotas might represent a failure on  the  part  of
the tribunal to form any view as to the oral evidence it had heard from  the
claimant, he argued that such a point had not  been  specifically  taken  in
the grounds and that, in any event, the oral evidence had been  referred  to
in the written reasons. He said the case was a simple one  and  it  was  not
possible to detect any aspect of  the  case  which  had  not  been  properly
considered by the tribunal. He urged me to dismiss the appeal.

6.    I will, albeit briefly, explain why I am not persuaded by ground  one.
The tribunal noted at paragraph 2 of its written reasons that all  that  had
been  said  with  respect  to  article  8  either  within  or  outside   the
Immigration  Rules,  was  he  that  should  succeed  under   paragraph   276
ADE(1)(vi) "based on  the  same  factual  basis  as  his  other  claims  for
international protection".  Notwithstanding a point made in the  grounds  to
the effect that it has been authoritatively decided  that  the  question  of
entitlement  to  humanitarian  protection  and   the   question   of   "very
significant obstacles to their reintegration into their country  of  origin"
are separate issues, the case under article 8 had clearly been  put  to  the
tribunal on the limited basis mentioned above and on the basis that  it  had
to assessed on the same facts as the humanitarian protection  appeal.  Since
the tribunal rejected the claimed  factual  account  it  followed  that  the
claimant could not succeed under 276(ADE) so long as the tribunal's  factual
findings were sound (a matter to which I shall return soon). In  short,  the
tribunal dealt appropriately with the article 8 argument  on  the  basis  of
how it had been put to it.

7.    As to ground two, I agree with Mr Kotas that paragraph  23-28  is  not
the only source of the tribunal's  reasoning.  The  tribunal  did  find  the
content of some emails which  the  claimant  had  asserted  underpinned  his
claim, to be unpersuasive. That is apparent from what it said  at  paragraph
18 of its written  reasons.  It  was  those  concerns  which  fed  into  its
conclusion at paragraph  25  of  its  written  reasons  that  the  documents
provided by the claimant were not ones upon which reliance  should  properly
be placed.

8.    In truth, though, the tribunal's  reasoning,  as  to  credibility,  as
touched upon in the grant of permission, was somewhat sparse. There  was  no
evaluation as to the oral evidence which the claimant had  provided  to  the
tribunal. It is true there are references to what he actually  said  in  the
written reasons but there is no  assessment  as  to  its  persuasiveness  or
otherwise. The passage from paragraph 23 suggests that the sole point  which
the tribunal thought actually damaged the  claimant's  credibility  was  the
late production of a "note". The concerns regarding the emails did not  lead
the tribunal to, for example,  conclude  that  the  claimant  had  concocted
them. In a sense, therefore, what the tribunal had to say about  the  emails
was a neutral factor. They did not benefit the claimant's case but they  did
not harm it. Faced with all of that it was necessary, in my  judgement,  for
the tribunal to fall back upon other considerations such as, as I  say,  the
nature of his oral evidence and perhaps  the  consistency  or  otherwise  of
that as compared with his written evidence. Further, there was  no  specific
consideration as to the  plausibility  or  otherwise  of  the  key  or  core
aspects of his claim. I  appreciate  that  the  standard  the  tribunal  was
required achieve, with respect to the quality of its reasons,  was  no  more
than adequacy. But in my judgement the tribunal, for  the  reasons  set  out
above, failed to reach that standard on this particular occasion.

9.    Mr Kotas sought to argue that even if I were to  reach  such  a  view,
the tribunal's decision remained sound. That  is  because  what  he  says  a
sustainable alternative finding appearing at paragraph 27 of the  tribunal's
written reasons. Essentially, what the tribunal said at that  point  in  its
written reasons, was that even if the account was true, there was no  reason
to think that there remained a current threat given that, on the  claimant's
own account, the last threating communication had been in 2015. If  that  is
to be characterised as an alternative finding, and on  balance  I  think  it
probably is, it is a very short one consisting, as  it  does,  of  a  single
sentence. It would have been, in my view, open to the tribunal  to  conclude
that a lack of recent threats,  was  indicative  of  such  a  threat  having
diminished or even having been extinguished. But there had to  be  reasoning
to justify any such conclusion. It did  not  inevitably  follow  that  since
there had not been a threat later than 2015,  on  the  assumption  that  the
claimant's account was true, the threat had gone away.  It  was,  therefore,
if the tribunal was seeking to rely upon such an  alternative  finding,  for
it to explain why it did think that the particular person aggrieved  by  the
claimant's conduct, given the position of influence he  was  said  to  have,
and given the previous expression of an  adverse  interest,  no  longer  had
such an interest. The tribunal might not have had to say very  much  at  all
in order to get the point home but it had to say something.

10.   In light of the above I have concluded that the tribunal  did  err  in
law  in  making  a  legally   inadequate   and   unsustainable   credibility
assessment. I have concluded  that  that  error  was  material  because  the
alternative finding was not adequately explained  and  because  it  was  not
inevitable, had the tribunal  concluded  that  the  claimant  had  told  the
truth, that his appeal would nonetheless have failed.

11.   Having decided to set  aside  the  tribunal's  decision  I  have  also
decided  to  remit.  That  is  because,  my  having  found  the  credibility
assessment to be unsustainable, I am not able to preserve anything from  the
tribunal's original findings and conclusions. So,  there  is  a  requirement
for further fact finding. That task is best undertaken by  the  tribunal  as
the expert fact-finding body in the field.

12.   So, there will be complete rehearing before a differently  constituted
tribunal (a different Judge of the First-tier Tribunal).  At  the  rehearing
the tribunal will not be limited to the basis upon which I  have  set  aside
the decision. It will consider all aspects,  both  fact  and  law,  entirely
afresh.  Further, it will not be limited to a consideration of the  material
which was before the previous tribunal. It will consider any  new  evidence,
both written and oral, which it might receive. I  note  that  the  tribunal,
rightly in my view, did not ask itself whether the claimant  might  be  able
to take advantage of an internal flight alternative in  China  or  might  be
able to obtain protection from the authorities, on the assumption  that  his
account is true. I say the tribunal was right  not  consider  these  matters
because they were not raised in the Secretary of State's written reasons  of
30 January 2019. No doubt if the Secretary of State does now  wish  to  take
any such points he will ensure that that is made clear to the  tribunal  and
to the claimant's representatives in advance of  the  next  hearing  and  in
sufficient time for the claimant's representatives to prepare  to  meet  any
such arguments.

13.   The claimant should not assume merely because I  have  set  aside  the
tribunal's decision and decided to remit, that he is  ultimately  likely  to
succeed. He might but, then again, he might not. All of  that  will  now  be
for the tribunal's own good judgement.

14.   Other than what  I  have  said  above,  I  shall  make  no  directions
regarding the rehearing of the appeal. Any listing  and  related  directions
are best left to a Tribunal Judge to prepare and issue.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside. The case is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
reconsideration.

The claimant was granted anonymity by the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  continue
that grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008. Accordingly, no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  name  or
otherwise identify  the  claimant.  This  applies  to  all  parties  to  the
proceedings. Any breach may lead to contempt of court proceedings.



M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated:  25 July 2019

