
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01648/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Determined on the papers             |On 24 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     MA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a determination promulgated on 12 November 2018, I found an error of
    law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill promulgated on  1
    June 2018, in which the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse his protection and human rights claim dated  16  September  2015
    was dismissed.  A copy of that decision is enclosed as  an  annex,  the
    contents of which set out the background to this appeal and  shall  not
    be repeated save where is necessary.   Further  to  the  error  of  law
    decision, the parties confirmed that no  further  evidence  was  to  be
    relied upon  and  therefore  the  Appellant  requested  his  appeal  be
    determined on the papers, with both parties making written  submissions
    on the appeal.





Applicable law

 1. It is for an Appellant to show that he is a refugee.  By Article  1A(2)
    of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person  who  is  out  of  the
    country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a well-founded fear
    of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality or membership
    of a particular  social  group  or  political  opinion,  is  unable  or
    unwilling to avail him or herself of the protection of the  country  of
    origin.

 2. The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to asylum is decided  on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities.   This  was  expressed  as  a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That  basis  of  probability
    not only applies to the history of the matter and to the  situation  at
    the date of decision, but also to the question of  persecution  in  the
    future if the Appellant were to be returned.

 3. Under the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006, a person  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
    refugee if they fall within the definition set out in Article 1A of the
    Refugee Convention (see above) and are not excluded by Articles 1D,  1E
    or 1F of the Refugee Convention  (Regulation  7  of  the  Qualification
    Regulations).

 4. The current country guidance in relation to Sri Lanka is set out in  GJ
    & Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00319  (IAC)
    and summarised in the headnote to the determination.  It was found that
    the focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern has changed since  the
    end of the civil war in May  2009  and  the  present  objective  is  to
    identify Tamil activists in the diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil
    separatism and to destabilise the unitary of the Sri Lankan state.  The
    current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution  or  serious
    harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise  are  as
    follows:

         (7)(a)   Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
         the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they  are,  or
         are perceived to have a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-
         conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a  renewal  of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka.


         (b)      Journalists (whether in print or  other  media)  or  human
         rights activists, who, in either  case,  have  criticised  the  Sri
         Lankan government, in particular its human rights  record,  or  who
         are  associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri  Lankan
         government.


         (c)  Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned and
         Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri  Lankan  security
         forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in  alleged  war
         crimes.  Among those who may have witnessed war crimes  during  the
         conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only those
         who have already identified  themselves  by  giving  such  evidence
         would be known to the Sri Lankan  authorities  and  therefore  only
         they are at real risk of adverse attention or persecution on return
         as potential or actual war crimes witnesses.


         (d)  A person whose name appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
         accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against  whom
         there is an extant court  order  or  arrest  warrant.   Individuals
         whose name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at the  airport
         and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
         pursuance of such order or warrant.


 5. The Tribunal also found as follows:

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.


         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.


 6. In ME (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1486, the Court of Appeal further noted  the  relevance  of  a
    person's arrest after the cessation of the conflict  in  Sri  Lanka  in
    paragraph 16 as follows:

         "The following are, in my judgment,  the  pertinent  points.   ME's
         arrest took place long after the cessation of the conflict  in  Sri
         Lanka.  That led (or ought to have led) to the conclusion  that  he
         was perceived at that time as being of significant interest to  the
         authorities.  He  was  therefore  a  person  who  had  fallen  into
         category (a) of the risk categories identified  in  GJ.   It  would
         have needed an exceptionally strong case to persuade the  FTT  that
         he had now ceased to be  at  risk.   The  mere  fact  that  he  was
         released without charge and without reporting restrictions was  not
         enough, because the authorities not only made two subsequent visits
         to his home; but they also searched it.  The conclusion that should
         be drawn from that is that ME was still  a  person  of  significant
         interest; and moreover, that  the  authorities  perceived  that  he
         might have more to tell them.  ..."


 7. Paragraph 339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provide  for  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection  in  circumstances  where  a  person  does  not
    qualify as a refugee but can show  substantial  grounds  for  believing
    that they would, if returned to their country of return,  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm.  The applicant must be unable or  owing
    to such risk unwilling to avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  that
    country.

 8. This appeal is also brought under the 2002 Act  because  the  Appellant
    alleges that the Respondent has in making his decision acted in  breach
    of the Appellant's human rights.  The Appellant relies upon Articles  2
    (Right to Life) and 3 (Prohibition of Torture).  The burden of proof of
    demonstration that the Appellant's removal would breach this  country's
    obligations under the Convention  rests  upon  the  Appellant  and  the
    standard of proof is the lower standard, that  there  is  a  reasonable
    chance or likelihood that harm will come to the Appellant if removed.

The Appellant's claim

 9. In summary, the Appellant's claim is that he has a well-founded fear of
    persecution in Sri Lanka on the basis of his imputed political opinion,
    namely having been accused of assisting with the LTTE.  His account  is
    as follows.

10. The Appellant went to visit a friend in the  Eastern  Province  of  Sri
    Lanka in 2009 for a holiday, during which time  he  was  asked  by  his
    friend to deliver a parcel to the uncle of someone he met on this trip,
    in Colombo.  The Appellant agreed and didn't ask  any  questions  about
    the contents of the parcel as he trusted his friend,  dropping  it  off
    before work the following day.  Two weeks later, on 28  May  2009,  the
    Appellant states that four or five plain clothes police  officers  came
    to his home and charged him with transporting parcels for the LTTE.  He
    was arrested, dragged out of his house and detained.  During the period
    of detention, the Appellant was interrogated on a daily basis about the
    parcel, his involvement with the LTTE and so  on.   The  Appellant  was
    tortured on a daily basis, stripped naked; placed on blocks of ice with
    cold water poured on him; beaten with batons and iron rods,  not  given
    sufficient food and was sexually assaulted.  The Appellant did not have
    any access to a lawyer, there was no formal investigation  and  he  was
    not presented at court.

11. The Appellant was released from detention with the  help  of  an  agent
    arranged by his family,  with  a  bribe  paid  by  his  brothers.   The
    Appellant was released on 18 June 2009 on  condition  that  he  had  to
    report once a week at the local  police  station.   The  Appellant  was
    traumatised following his release and suffered a mental breakdown on 14
    July 2009.  He was treated in hospital with Electric Compulsive Therapy
    and given medication.  He was diagnosed with psychosis and  depression.
    The Appellant resigned from his job on 10 September 2009 as he was  not
    able to function at all, suffering from flashbacks and nightmares.

12. The Appellant reported to his local police station for two months after
    release from detention but then went into hiding and stopped reporting.
     He travelled to an agent's house  in  Colombo  and  stayed  there  for
    approximately three or four months and ultimately came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a student in January 2010.

13. The Appellant visited Sri Lanka in the summer of 2012 to see his  wife,
    staying for four weeks and encountered no problems  whilst  there.   He
    returned again in August 2013 with no  problems  on  entry.   While  at
    home, he received a letter from the authorities saying that he  was  to
    appear in court on 29  August  2013  in  relation  to  charges  brought
    against him.  The Appellant states that he ignored  this  letter  given
    that it had by then been four years since his detention and he  thought
    it was all over.   However,  the  authorities  came  to  look  for  the
    Appellant three or four  days  later,  showing  his  family  an  arrest
    warrant for questioning the Appellant regarding his  non-appearance  in
    court related to the 2009 charges.  A copy of the  arrest  warrant  has
    been produced from the Magistrate Courts in  Colombo  dated  29  August
    2013 with particulars of the alleged offence and reason  for  issue  of
    arrest warrant being stated as 'not appearing at the court hearing'.

14. The Appellant was arrested and detained  again.   He  was  interrogated
    about the parcel delivery and people involved in this and was  tortured
    again in a similar way to previously.  The Appellant was released  with
    the assistance of an agent after five days and payment of a bribe.   He
    stayed in hiding in Colombo for two weeks until returning to the United
    Kingdom  with  the  assistance  of  an  agent.   The  authorities  have
    subsequently visited the Appellant's family home in Sri Lanka.

15. The Appellant had a student visa valid to 2014, did not know about  the
    asylum procedure and therefore did not claim  asylum  until  8  October
    2014 on the basis that he could not safely return to  Sri  Lanka.   The
    Appellant does not support the LTTE, nor does any of his family and  he
    strongly disagrees with the way that they fight for their  cause  given
    that his father was paralysed from a bombing carried out by  the  LTTE.
    The Appellant states that he is not against the Sri Lankan  government,
    although he is angry and upset that he was falsely accused by  them  of
    helping the LTTE, being detained and tortured on two occasions for this
    reason.

16. The Appellant fears return to Sri Lanka on the basis that he  would  be
    arrested and tortured again by them for the same reasons  that  he  has
    been in the past.  The Appellant, in his written statements,  also  set
    out his mental health problems and treatment.  The  Appellant's  bundle
    contains extensive medical records in relation to the same.

17. The Respondent's reasons for refusing the Appellant's claim are set out
    in the error of law decision in the annex  and  need  not  be  repeated
    here.

The Appellant's brother's evidence

18. The Appellant's brother came to the United  Kingdom  in  2002  and  was
    naturalised as a British citizen in 2014.  In his written statement, he
    describes being told by his elder brother in Sri Lanka on 28  May  2009
    that the Appellant  had  been  taken  by  the  Terrorist  Investigation
    Department on terrorism charges, following which the family arranged an
    agent to assist with the Appellant's release, which took  place  on  18
    June 2009.  Upon release, the Appellant was a changed man, he lost lots
    of weight, was traumatised and soon became completely unable to  speak.
    He was diagnosed with depression on 14 July 2009 and resigned from  his
    job in September that year as  he  could  not  cope.   The  Appellant's
    brother suggested he should leave Sri Lanka, continue with his  studies
    abroad and try to forget about what happened.  The Appellant obtained a
    student visa in December 2009 arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  2010.
    The Appellant had a mental health breakdown in August  2011,  suffering
    from depression and a further episode of mutism.  He  was  referred  to
    the crisis team for ongoing care for his mental health.

19. The Appellant returned to Sri Lanka in August 2012,  staying  for  four
    weeks to see his wife and family and returned  to  the  United  Kingdom
    without any problems.  He returned again to Sri Lanka in  August  2013.
    The Appellant's brother received a phone call from his elder brother on
    2 September 2013 to say that the Appellant  was  in  trouble  with  the
    Terrorist Investigation Department coming for him again.  An agent  was
    arranged to get the Appellant  out  of  prison,  which  happened  on  7
    September 2013 and the Appellant stayed with the agent until  he  could
    safely return to the United Kingdom.   On  return,  the  Appellant  was
    struggling to continue with his studies and had a further mental health
    relapse.

Medico-legal report from Dr RK Sinha

20. In a report dated 2 January 2017, Dr  Sinha,  and  Independent  Medical
    Practitioner, set out the  Appellant's  account,  medical  history  and
    assessment of the  Appellant's  mental  and  physical  state  following
    examination.  The report sets out a history of mental  health  problems
    since 2010, following the Appellant's first detention and  mistreatment
    in  Sri  Lanka.   The  Appellant's  symptoms  indicated   a   recurrent
    depressive disorder, which  was  compatible  and  consistent  with  the
    Appellant's claimed history, reported symptoms and  observations.   The
    Appellant also has trauma  -related  symptoms  but  did  not  meet  the
    criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD.

21. Dr Sinha also recorded a number of scars on the Appellant, two of which
    the Appellant claimed were caused by being burnt  with  the  end  of  a
    heated metal rod,  which  Dr  Sinha  found  were  consistent  with  the
    attributed cause.

22. There was concern that if removed to Sri Lanka, the Appellant's  mental
    state  may  deteriorate  significantly,  with  increased  symptoms   of
    depression and trauma and an increased risk of suicide.

Psychologist report from Dr Rachel Thomas

23. In a report dated  21  May  2018,  Dr  Thomas,  a  Consultant  Clinical
    Psychologist, sets out her  assessment  of  the  mental  state  of  the
    Appellant.  Dr Thomas describes the Appellant's  history  as  including
    chronic mental health conditions ongoing from more  than  eight  years,
    with  evidence  of  different  diagnoses  over  the  years,   including
    schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, recurrent depressive  disorder
    with psychosis, major depressive disorder with  post-traumatic  traits,
    as well as an episode of mutism.  He has been in receipt of primary and
    secondary mental health care both  in  Sri  Lanka  and  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Dr Thomas' view is that at the time of  her  assessment,  the
    Appellant had a chronic, depressive illness and the report sets out his
    symptoms.   In  particular,  the  symptoms  include  short-term  memory
    impairment, lack of concentration and  suicidal  ideation.   It  is  Dr
    Thomas' view that the Appellant's ability to give evidence in court was
    questionable (and should only be done with specific measures being  put
    in place first) and noted that his GP had already said that he was  not
    fit to do so.

24. Dr Thomas considered the Appellant to be credible psychiatrically, with
    self-reported symptoms and personal history being consistently  matched
    with  his  effect  throughout  the  consultation  and  with  subjective
    presentation.   The  Appellant  is  recorded  as  having  presented   a
    considered and balanced view of his psychiatric symptoms,  which  would
    be most unusual for  someone  attempting  to  fabricate  a  psychiatric
    order,  where  symptoms  are  normally  reported  in   extremis.    The
    Appellant's  presentation  was   also   highly   congruent   with   the
    psychological research and evidence in terms of the usual psychological
    profile of victims of abuse/exploitation, both in terms of symptoms and
    in terms of clinical presentation at assessment.  The symptoms suffered
    are said to be consequent on the experience of  cumulatively  traumatic
    life events.

25. At present, the Appellant has a number of  protective  factors  in  the
    United Kingdom, including safety  and  support  from  his  brother  and
    family and the hope of being reunited with his wife in a  situation  of
    external safety.  If forcibly removed  to  Sri  Lanka,  the  protective
    factors would be negated and Dr Thomas considered that the risk  of  an
    enacted suicide attempt would be high.  Dr Thomas's view is that  given
    how psychiatrically unwell and traumatised the  Appellant  is  already,
    with existing suicidal ideation, he would be unable to tolerate further
    traumatisation likely to be  produced  by  return  to  his  country  of
    origin.  Although the Appellant has accessed mental health treatment in
    Sri Lanka in around 2010, Dr Thomas considers that  given  his  current
    psychiatric state he would be  too  frightened  and  re-traumatised  to
    access them on return now, with an increased fear of the authorities in
    Sri Lanka.  He would be vulnerable to further abuse and/or exploitation
    and his ability to seek protection would be highly  impoverished  given
    his lack of trust in authority figures and his  degree  of  psychiatric
    illness and traumatisation.

26. In conclusion, Dr Thomas stated that the Appellant is a traumatised man
    who presented in  a  manner  entirely  consistent  with  an  individual
    suffering from moderate symptoms  of  Major  Depressive  Disorder  with
    additional post-traumatic traits; the principal cause  of  which  being
    traumatic experiences of torture in Sri Lanka which were considered  to
    be psychologically credible.  In  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the
    Istanbul Protocol, the Appellant's psychiatric presentation was  highly
    consistent  with  a  typical  psychological  profile  of   victims   of
    abuse/maltreatment in accordance with the  Protocol.   The  Appellant's
    psychological profile is also congruent with that of victims  of  abuse
    and  torture  according  to   the   existing   psychological   research
    literature.  Recommendations were also made for future treatment.

Opinion of Kumaravadivel Guruparan

27. Mr Guruparan is a Senior Lecturer and Head of the Department of Law  at
    the University of Jaffna in Sri Lanka who was called to the bar in  Sri
    Lanka in December 2010 and who has had an  extensive  practice  in  the
    Civil Appellate,  District  and  Magistrates  courts  in  the  Northern
    Province, as well as appearing in  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fundamental
    Rights cases.  He prepared a report dated 21 March 2018 in relation  to
    the arrest warrant relied upon by the Appellant.

28. Mr Guruparan stated that the arrest warrant relied upon  is  consistent
    with such documents issued by the Magistrate Courts in  Sri  Lanka  and
    that the original arrest warrant in Sinhala is in the usual  form  with
    internally consistent details contained on it.  He stated that  through
    a lawyer in Colombo, a motion was filed on 14 March 2018 in the Colombo
    Magistrates Court seeking a certified copy of the arrest warrant  along
    with the entire case record, however the Registry stated they could not
    provide the copies unless the last date on  which  the  case  was  last
    called or the next date on which the case is to be called is  provided.
    The Court Registries are not digitised, with any searches having to  be
    conducted physically and files cannot realistically be located  without
    this information.  In the circumstances, it was  not  possible  for  Mr
    Guruparan to obtain a certified copy of the arrest warrant and from his
    experience it would be very difficult or impossible to be  able  to  do
    so, particularly where the document is at least  five  years  old.   He
    further commented that corruption is low within the judicial system  in
    Sri Lanka and it would be extremely unlikely for a person to have  been
    able to fraudulently obtain an arrest warrant.

Expert report from Frederica Jansz

29. In a report dated 29 April 2018, Ms  Jansz  was  asked  to  provide  an
    overview of political and security developments in Sri Lanka which  are
    relevant to the Appellant's claim.  The report deals firstly  with  the
    arrest warrant relied upon by the Appellant, the  difficulties  in  the
    Respondent's approach to the TID (Terrorist  Investigation  Department)
    in Sri Lanka, notably corruption and breach of court orders, as well as
    its ability to more easily trace a certified copy of an arrest  warrant
    through their own records but with the same difficulties  of  obtaining
    one through the Court Registry as described in Mr  Guruparan's  opinion
    (of which she had had sight).

30. Ms Jansz sets out the current risk to persons associated with the  LTTE
    in Sri Lanka, by reference to the powers in the Prevention of Terrorism
    Act 1979,  which  remain  in  force,  including  with  the  regulations
    following the end of the Civil War; and by  reference  to  the  country
    guidance in GJ; including  that  there  remains  a  risk  of  arbitrary
    detention and torture of those with perceived links to the LTTE.  Given
    the risk is from the state authorities there is no internal  relocation
    option in Sri Lanka, albeit the Appellant would be less vulnerable away
    from Colombo and the airport, but could  still  be  subject  to  police
    checks to locate his whereabouts.

31. In her instructions, Ms Jansz was also asked to comment on treatment or
    therapy available mental health issues such as depression in Sri Lanka.
     She states that although mental health care is in theory available  in
    Sri Lanka, the type of support systems available are extremely  limited
    in quantity and quality, making  access  to  services  very  difficult,
    particularly for a person like the Appellant.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

32. The Respondent accepts the application of the Presidential Guidance  on
    vulnerable witnesses from 2010 to  this  Appellant,  in  light  of  his
    accepted mental health issues.  However, it is not accepted  that  even
    applying this guidance, discrepancies in the Appellant's account cannot
    be attributed to vulnerability and further, cannot be disregarded.  The
    Respondent continues to rely on discrepancies identified by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mill, set out in paragraphs 30 to 37 in the decision and
    in  relation  to  which  no  error  of  law  has  been  found.    These
    inconsistencies include, in paragraph 30, that the Appellant stated  he
    was released from detention in Sri Lanka on 18 June 2009, reported on a
    weekly basis at a local police station for around two months  and  then
    went into hiding for about two  months  before  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom with the assistance of an agent.  However, he did not  actually
    travel to the United Kingdom until  January  2010,  some  three  months
    later than claimed.  Further, in paragraph 36, it  is  noted  that  the
    Appellant stated that he did not disclose any further torture upon  his
    return  in  September  2013  to  his  GP  because  he  was  not   aware
    consultations were in confidence and his brother recommended he did not
    divulge this information.   However,  the  Appellant's  brother  denied
    offering any such advice about withholding  information.   Finally,  in
    paragraph 37 there was an inconsistency in the claim  as  to  when  the
    arrest warrant was produced, either in August 2013 at the time  of  the
    Appellant's arrest, or alternatively, when the authorities attended the
    Appellant's home in Sri Lanka with it in 2015, some  two  years  later.
    The remaining points made in paragraph 30 to 37 of  the  decision  deal
    with  an   assessment   of   plausibility   rather   than   identifying
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's claim

33. In relation to the opinion of Mr Guruparan, the Respondent submits that
    this is of extremely limited value and that  little  weight  should  be
    attached to it.  Mr Guruparan is personally known  to  the  Appellant's
    father, such that his partiality is questioned and in  any  event,  the
    evidence is based on  opinion  rather  than  reference  to  any  source
    material or detailed explanation for the assertions made.  There is  no
    conclusion as to  whether  the  arrest  warrant  is  genuine,  only  an
    explanation of the difficulties in obtaining a certified  copy  without
    enclosing copies of any of the correspondence in relation  to  attempts
    to obtain the same.

34. Further, Mr Guruparan asserts that corruption is very  low  within  the
    judicial system in Sri Lanka, but without any  supporting  evidence  or
    explanation.   The  Respondent  states  that  this   is   contrary   to
    information readily available, for example a report  from  the  Colombo
    Telegraph dated 7 December 2016 on judicial corruption which is  quoted
    in full in the written submissions made.  It refers  to  a  significant
    judicial corruption and the Government of Sri  Lanka  being  forced  to
    concede that the people of Sri Lanka have no trust  and  confidence  in
    the justice system.  In light of this, it is entirely conceivable  that
    a false document could be procured from the Sri Lankan judiciary.

35. In relation to Dr Thomas' report, the Respondent  states  that  as  the
    report was based on the Appellant's account, it should be  assessed  as
    having little value given the Appellant's  lack  of  credibility,  when
    assessing all of the  evidence  in  the  round.   Dr  Thomas  does  not
    consider any alternative causes  or  any  explanation  as  to  why  her
    opinion is the only feasible conclusion in the  circumstances.   As  to
    the risk of suicide recorded by Dr Thomas, the  Respondent  notes  that
    the possible positive effect on the Appellant being reunited  with  his
    wife and other family members in Sri Lanka  is  not  considered  by  Dr
    Thomas, nor is the possibility that the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
    continue speaking to his wife and brother, whether or not in the United
    Kingdom.  Further, the Appellant's wife would be able to assist him  in
    accessing psychiatric treatment in Sri Lanka return.

36. The Respondent submits that Dr Sinha's report, from January 2017,  does
    little to assist the Appellant's claim given the passage  of  time  and
    lack of further information becoming available.

37. In relation to  the  Appellant's  brother's  evidence,  the  Respondent
    submits that this does not enable the Appellant to discharge the burden
    of proof upon him with regard to his credibility.

38. In relation to Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    the Respondent's position is that the Appellant does not meet the  high
    threshold applicable to such cases.  In particular the Appellant has no
    clear plans to commit suicide if returned, has not  explained  how  his
    mental health needs cannot be met in Sri Lanka, nor has  he  given  any
    specific details as to how  the  background  evidence  he  relies  upon
    applies to his own case.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

39. The written submissions on behalf of the Appellant, repeat and rely  on
    those made previously in the skeleton argument on his behalf and in the
    grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Further submissions are then made in response to those
    submitted on behalf of the Respondent.

40. In relation to the evidence of Mr Guruparan, the submission  on  behalf
    of the Appellant is that the  newspaper  extract  relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent does not undermine the reliability of the opinion  given  or
    the reasons for it.  The extract relates more to concerns about bias in
    the high judiciary and in particular the failure of the  constitutional
    principle of  the  separation  of  powers  and  does  not  concern  the
    reliability of documentation processes within court buildings.   It  is
    submitted that the opinion should be given sufficient weight  in  light
    of Mr Guruparan's qualifications and experience.

41. The medical reports from both Dr  Sinha  and  Dr  Thomas  set  out  the
    Appellant's poor mental  health  and  the  report  from  Dr  Thomas  in
    particular  sets  out  the  Appellant's  associated  difficulties   and
    impairments.  The Appellant's claim and the  credibility  of  the  same
    must be assessed against this background  and  it  must  be  determined
    whether any lack of clarity, consistency  or  plausibility  could  have
    been affected by cognitive impairment, trauma or memory  problems.   In
    particular, the  assessment  of  plausibility  of  the  claim  must  be
    assessed against the backdrop  of  someone  suffering  from  a  serious
    mental illness, which would  affect  the  assessment  undertaken  by  a
    person of apparent risk-taking  in  Sri  Lanka,  i.e.  by  ignoring  an
    official letter.  Further, the account  of  torture  in  2013  and  its
    aftermath must be assessed in the  context  of  recall  of  trauma  and
    supporting evidence from the Appellant's brother, which was not in fact
    inconsistent with  the  Appellant's  claim  (the  Appellants  brother's
    evidence was that he told the Appellant that if he did not want to talk
    about what happened to him he did not have to, as opposed  to  advising
    him not to disclose details to his GP).

42. The medical reports both specifically consider the possibility that the
    Appellant is feigning his symptoms and rejected for  credible  reasons.
    The other  points  raised  by  the  Respondent  are  merely  points  of
    speculation and do not undermine the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    report.   The  reports  both  clearly  find   the   Appellant   to   be
    psychiatrically credible,  with  causation  being  trauma  cumulatively
    suffered in Sri Lanka.  The Appellant's mental health was found  to  be
    highly consistent and typical of the psychological profile  of  someone
    who has been tortured.

43. The evidence from the Appellant's brother remains  material,  providing
    support to the Appellant's claim, specifically in light of  his  mental
    health.

44. Overall it was submitted that the Appellant has made a credible  claim,
    supported by evidence from his brother  and  various  experts,  showing
    that he would be at real risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  due  to  his
    perceived links to the LTTE and post-conflict arrest and detention.

45. In the alternative, the Appellant claims  that  his  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would breach Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  The report from Dr Thomas confirms that  forced  removal
    of the Appellant to Sri Lanka carries a high risk  of  enacted  suicide
    attempt and that given the Appellant's current mental state,  he  would
    be unable to tolerate further traumatisation which would be produced by
    return  to  Sri  Lanka  and  would  almost  certainly   precipitate   a
    psychiatric crisis.

46. Appellant relies upon the guidance in GJ as to the  lack  of  available
    mental health care in Sri Lanka, supported by the more recent report of
    a Home Office Fact Finding mission regarding the  treatment  of  Tamils
    and people who have a real perceived association with the former  LTTE,
    dated July 2016.  It is submitted that in circumstances where Sri Lanka
    does not have the mental health  facilities  to  treat  or  manage  the
    Appellant's mental  health  needs  suicide  risk,  he  is  at  risk  of
    treatment engage in Article 3.

Findings and reasons

47. At the outset I record that the Appellant falls within  the  provisions
    of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable
    adult and sensitive appellant guidance, on the basis  of  his  accepted
    poor mental health dating back at least to 2010.  As  such  I  consider
    his claim  and  evidence  in  accordance  with  that  guidance  and  in
    particular take into account the assessment from  Dr  Thomas  that  the
    Appellant's ability to give a coherent account of his  claim  would  be
    affected by "much-heightened anxiety, cognitive impairment  (especially
    very poor short-term  memory),  suicidal  ideation  and  post-traumatic
    hyper-arousal".  There are extensive medical records available  showing
    a long history of severe  mental  illness,  with  a  number  of  severe
    episodes or breakdowns.

48. In terms of consistency of the Appellant's claim,  there  is  only  one
    inconsistency which casts doubt on the credibility  of  the  claim  (in
    relation  to  the  timing  of  knowledge  of   the   arrest   warrant),
    particularly when applying the Joint Presidential Guidance Note,  which
    is sufficient to undermine the credibility of  his  claim.   The  first
    inconsistency relied upon by the Respondent, as to the length  of  time
    between his first detention in Sri Lanka from the end of May  2009,  to
    his departure from the United Kingdom is not  highly  material  to  the
    issue  of  credibility  and  in  any  event  is   not   a   significant
    inconsistency when considering a claim by someone  with  severe  mental
    illness, cognitive impairment and short-term memory problems.   Nothing
    in particular turns on the length of time between these events.

49. The second inconsistency is as to the Appellant's explanation as to why
    he did not disclose the torture in 2013 to his GP  at  the  time.   The
    Appellant's submission that the Appellant's brother's evidence on  this
    point was more nuanced than that recorded by Judge Mill in the decision
    (which is supported by the handwritten record of proceedings that in re-
    examination the Appellant's brother said if  you  don't  want  to  talk
    about it don't) shows that there was not  really  an  inconsistency  on
    this basis at all between the two accounts and in any event there is  a
    plausible and credible explanation for the lack of  detailed  reporting
    of torture at this time (and in relation  to  further  details  of  the
    torture in 2009 being revealed  by  the  Appellant  many  years  later,
    specifically the sexual abuse suffered) being  the  Appellant's  mental
    health and trauma suffered.  As Dr Thomas explains in her report, it is
    not uncommon for individuals in situations of trauma not to be able  to
    disclose the full details until a later time  and  doing  so  does  not
    necessarily undermine the credibility of such claims.  It  is  not  the
    Appellant's claim  that  he  suffered  from  any  significant  physical
    injuries during detention in  2013  for  which  medical  treatment  was
    required, but he and his brother claim that he suffered a  relapse  and
    deterioration in his mental health.  Overall, I do not find that  there
    is any inconsistency or lack of credibility in the explanation given as
    to the Appellant's lack of disclosure to his GP in 2013 of  his  claims
    to detention and torture in Sri Lanka that year.

50. The third inconsistency relied upon by the Respondent is as to the date
    on which the Appellant and/or his family  were  aware  of  or  saw  the
    arrest warrant dated  29  August  2013.   In  the  Appellant's  written
    statement, this was said to have been shown at the time the authorities
    attended the Appellant's home in Sri Lanka in 2013 at the time  of  his
    arrest, and on the other  account,  given  by  the  Appellant  and  his
    brother, was that the family only learned  of  the  arrest  warrant  in
    2015, some two years after it was issued, when  the  authorities  again
    came looking for the Appellant and a  copy  was  subsequently  obtained
    through  one  of  the  Appellant's  brothers.   There  is  no   express
    explanation as to this inconsistency and it can not be explained by the
    Appellant's vulnerability or impairments.

51.  The  Appellant's  claim  was  that  he  received  a  letter  from  the
    authorities requiring him to attend a court  hearing  in  August  2013,
    which he ignored, with an arrest warrant being obtained  on  29  August
    2013 and him being arrested and detained three or four days later on  2
    September 2013; followed by a copy of an arrest warrant being  obtained
    in 2015.  It would be reasonable to infer that the  Appellant's  arrest
    and detention on 2 September 2013 was pursuant to the warrant issued on
    29 August 2013 and therefore that the Appellant  at  least  would  have
    knowledge of it at the time.  This is consistent with  the  Appellant's
    written statement, but not with the later evidence of it being produced
    only two years later.

52. The key issues in this claim  are  as  to  whether  the  Appellant  was
    arrested, detained and tortured in September 2013 and  whether  or  not
    there is an outstanding arrest warrant for him in Sri Lanka.   However,
    at the outset I deal with the earlier part of the Appellant's claim  of
    arrest, detention and torture by the Sri Lankan authorities in 2009.

53. I find to the lower standard of proof that the Appellant was  arrested,
    detained and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities in May/June 2009 on
    the basis that he has provided a consistent account of this part of his
    claim; it is accepted that he has suffered from chronic  mental  health
    problems since this time, found by  Dr  Thomas  to  be  psychologically
    credible and consistent with him being a victim  of  abuse/torture  and
    caused by cumulative  traumatic  experiences  in  Sri  Lanka.   Similar
    findings were made by Dr Sinha in the earlier report.

54. The Respondent's primary submission in relation to Dr Thomas' report is
    that should be given little weight as it is based  on  the  Appellant's
    account and his claim lacks credibility,  when  assessing  all  of  the
    evidence in the round.  However, it is clear from the  express  reasons
    given in the report  that  in  addition  to  the  Appellant's  account,
    objective assessment has been made of the Appellant's presentation  and
    mental health with clear findings that he is  psychiatrically  credible
    and that his presentation  is  consistent  with  what  is  known  about
    victims of abuse/torture.   For  these  reasons  I  attach  significant
    weight to the main conclusions in the report as to  the  state  of  the
    Appellant's mental health and the attributable cause  being  cumulative
    trauma in Sri Lanka.  I deal separately  below  with  the  Respondent's
    submissions as to the assessment of suicide risk by Dr Thomas.

55. The Appellant's claim is supported by evidence from  his  brother,  who
    states he was contacted by family members in Sri Lanka at the  time  of
    events and his credibility on this point  has  not  been  substantively
    challenged.   Further,  the  Appellant's  account  is  consistent  with
    background  objective  evidence  as  to  actions  of  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities against those suspected of links with the LTTE  during  the
    civil war.  Finally, the Respondent's submissions do not  substantively
    address  this  part  of  the  Appellant's   claim   (other   than   the
    inconsistency as to period of time between release from  detention  and
    departure to the United Kingdom dealt with above), focusing more on the
    latter parts of his claim in relation to  events  in  2013  and  future
    risk.

56. In relation to the  arrest  warrant  issued  on  29  August  2013,  the
    Respondent previously relied upon a document verification report  which
    concluded that the arrest warrant relied upon was not  genuine,  albeit
    for the reasons set out  in  VT  (Article  22  Procedures  Directive  -
    confidentiality) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT 00368 (IAC),  little  weight  is
    attached to this document and the Respondent has not placed any  recent
    reliance upon it.

57. The Appellant relies on the opinion of Mr  Guruparan  that  the  arrest
    warrant is consistent with such documents issued by the courts  in  Sri
    Lanka, albeit the authenticity of this particular arrest warrant  could
    not be verified for the reasons explained  in  the  opinion.   For  the
    avoidance of doubt, I find little  force  in  the  submissions  of  the
    Respondent in relation to this opinion  and  in  particular  about  the
    corruption or otherwise of the judiciary in Sri Lanka, which is not the
    key point in the opinion or in the context of this appeal.

58. However, the report in  any  event  provides  little  support  for  the
    Appellant's claim in circumstances where there is a complete absence of
    any explanation as to how the copy of the arrest warrant  was  obtained
    by family members two years after its issue.  The absence of  any  such
    explanation is pertinent given Mr Guruparan's opinion (supported by the
    report of Ms Jansz) that the lack of digital Court records  means  that
    further information, unknown to him, as to the last court  date,  would
    be required for the records to be found in the Court  Registry.   There
    is no explanation as to how the Appellant's family could obtain a  copy
    of the arrest warrant without this information, or if they had it,  why
    it was not given to Mr Guruparan to enable him to  obtain  a  certified
    copy from the court.  For these reasons I attach little weight  to  the
    opinion and find that it does not significantly advance or support  the
    Appellant's claim, given that although consistent in style, the  arrest
    warrant itself could not be verified and there is no explanation as  to
    how it was obtained.

59. In addition, it is entirely unexplained as to  why  an  arrest  warrant
    dated 29 August 2013 remains live and  would  be  relied  upon  by  the
    authorities looking for the Appellant in 2015, or now, in circumstances
    where the Appellant was in fact arrested and detained  on  2  September
    2013, only a few days after the arrest warrant was issued.  It would be
    reasonable to infer that the Appellant's arrest in September  2013  was
    pursuant to the arrest warrant issued only days before.   There  is  no
    reason as to why it would remain outstanding if used within days of its
    issue, even in circumstances where  the  Appellant  was  released  from
    detention on payment of a bribe.

60. There is also a complete absence of  any  explanation  as  to  why  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka would have any interest in  the  Appellant  in
    2013, having shown no interest in him since 2009 or since  the  end  of
    the civil war.  The Appellant was able  to  return  to  Sri  Lanka  for
    approximately four weeks in 2012 without any difficulties and  has  not
    claimed any involvement in sur place activities or any LTTE involvement
    at all.  There is no suggestion that his family, with whom he has  been
    in regular contact, had  any  visits  from  or  difficulties  with  the
    authorities before 2013.  There is no identification as to any event or
    issue which would  give  rise  to  the  authorities  having  a  renewed
    interest in the Appellant in late 2013 but not in the  period  2010  to
    early 2013.

61. In accordance with the findings in GJ, the  focus  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities has shifted since the end of  the  civil  war  in  2009  to
    identifying Tamil activists in the diaspora who  are  actively  working
    for Tamil separatism and to destabilise the unitary of the  Sri  Lankan
    state.  There is nothing about this Appellant or in  anything  that  he
    has claimed to suggest that he is or would be  suspected  of  being  an
    activist or that he is pursuing Tamil separatism.  To the contrary,  he
    expressly states that neither he nor his family  have  any  involvement
    with the LTTE; that being for good reason given his  father's  injuries
    from a bomb blast caused by the LTTE.  With regards  to  his  claim  of
    further detention in 2013, the Appellant only stated that he was  asked
    again about delivery of the parcel in 2009 and the people  involved  in
    this.  Such questioning is not consistent with the current focus of the
    Sri Lankan authorities and there is no background evidence  to  suggest
    that there has been any change in this focus since GJ.

62. I have considered specifically whether the Appellant's account on  this
    point has or could have been affected by his  status  as  a  vulnerable
    witness in accordance with the Presidential Guidance Note, for  example
    due to a difficulty in recalling details in the context of trauma,  but
    this is not a  point  on  which  any  late  disclosure  has  been  made
    (contrary to, for example, further disclosure to Dr  Thomas  of  sexual
    abuse during the period of detention in 2009), there is simply  nothing
    to suggest that anything has been left out of the account as to what he
    was questioned about, contrary to, for  example,  claimed  mistreatment
    not being set out or set out in full at the first  opportunity.   I  do
    not find any basis upon which it is likely that this point  lacking  in
    the Appellant's claim has anything to  do  with  his  vulnerability  or
    impairment, particularly in light of the country guidance.

63. In relation to the Appellant's claim of further arrest,  detention  and
    torture in September 2013, although corroboration is not required, this
    is not specifically supported by any wider evidence save for that  from
    the Appellant's brother.  The consistent reports of  Dr  Sinha  and  Dr
    Thomas as to the Appellant's poor mental health conclude that this  was
    caused by cumulative trauma in Sri Lanka; although it is impossible  to
    separate out specifically from these reports claimed trauma in 2013  as
    distinct from that in 2009 and from the Appellant's  father's  injuries
    from a bomb blast previously.  There is no specific detail at all as to
    events in 2013 or any worsening of mental health following  the  second
    claimed period of detention; with  trauma  and  chronic  mental  health
    problems having been established several years previously.

64. Although I have found above that there was no significant inconsistency
    in relation to the reasons given  as  to  why  the  Appellant  did  not
    disclose any further trauma in 2013 to his  GP,  the  medical  evidence
    available does not support the claims made by  the  Appellant  and  his
    brother of a relapse and deterioration in the Appellant's health  after
    his return from Sri Lanka in September 2013.  In fact, to the contrary,
    a letter from the Harrow Community Recovery  Team  dated  25  September
    2013 records that the Appellant is doing very well indeed,  he  is  not
    depressed and there have  been  no  further  episodes  of  mutism;  his
    studies are progressing well.  The conclusion is that on assessment  on
    24 September 2013, there were no cognitive or  biological  symptoms  of
    depression, nor psychotic symptoms and the Appellant was not  suicidal.



65. Whether or not the Appellant had disclosed claimed recent events to his
    GP, it would be reasonable to expect objective signs  of  deterioration
    in his mental health to be evidenced so soon after his claimed  arrest,
    detention and torture only a few weeks before and having only  returned
    from Sri Lanka a matter  of  days  before  the  assessment.   There  is
    nothing in the medical records to suggest any relapse, deterioration or
    severe episode of mental  health  problems  in  the  aftermath  of  the
    Appellant's return to the United Kingdom in September 2013.   The  next
    medical records available in November 2013 and March 2014 also show  no
    deterioration or relapse and on  the  latter  date,  the  Appellant  is
    recorded as being in remission.

66. It would be reasonable  to  expect  that  if  the  Appellant  had  been
    arrested, detained and tortured for a second period in September  2013;
    then  there  would  be  objective  medical  evidence  of  his   claimed
    deterioration in his mental health from that time.  Not only  is  there
    no  such  evidence,  to  the  contrary  there  are  repeated   positive
    assessments of the Appellant's health between late September  2013  and
    March 2014, together with references to employment and progression with
    studies.

67. The Appellant has  not  claimed  that  he  suffered  from  any  serious
    injuries during detention in 2013 and there is therefore no evidence of
    any physical injuries or scarring from this  time  in  support  of  the
    claim of further detention and mistreatment.

68. In the context of the above, I attach little weight to the  Appellant's
    brother's evidence of events in 2013 and their effect on the Appellant,
    which is inconsistent with, in particular, the medical evidence  as  to
    the Appellant's mental health in  the  six  months  after  the  claimed
    detention.

69. Although I have found the Appellant's claim in relation to his  arrest,
    detention and torture in 2009 to be credible; for the reasons  set  out
    above, I do not find his claim in relation to the same in  2013  to  be
    credible nor to meet the lower standard of proof applicable  in  asylum
    claims.  In so doing, I have taken into account paragraph 339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules to the effect that a  person  who  has  already  been
    subject to persecution or serious harm will be regarded  as  a  serious
    indication of the person's well-founded fear  or  persecution  or  real
    risk of suffering serious  harm,  unless  there  are  good  reasons  to
    consider that such persecution or serious harm will  not  be  repeated.
    The good reasons applicable in the present case  are  the  end  of  the
    civil war in Sri Lanka and the findings in GJ which are binding on  me,
    that there has been a shift in the focus of the Sri Lankan  authorities
    after the end of the civil war and a consequent significant  change  in
    the categories of this at risk on return.

70. For the reasons set out above, I do not find that the  Appellant  falls
    within any of the risk categories in  GJ,  in  particular  he  has  not
    established, even to the lower standard of proof, that he would  be  or
    would be perceived to have a significant role  in  relation  not  post-
    conflict Tamil separatism within  the  diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of
    hostilities within Sri Lanka.  There is no suggestion that any  of  the
    other risk categories would apply and I have not found that there is an
    outstanding arrest warrant in relation to the Appellant.

71. There is no plausible basis upon which the Appellant's  claim  to  have
    delivered a single parcel to someone in Colombo before the end  of  the
    civil war in 2009 and undertaken no activity since in relation  to  the
    LTTE or Tamil separatism would engage the authority's adverse attention
    again in 2013 and not in the intervening period.  As I do not find that
    the Appellant  has  established  that  he  was  arrested,  detained  or
    tortured in 2013, the Court  of  Appeal's  comments  in  ME  about  the
    pertinence of a post-conflict arrest do not assist the  Appellant.   In
    these circumstances, the Appellant has not established  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution on return to Sri Lanka and  his  appeal  under  the
    Refugee Convention must therefore be dismissed.  For the same  reasons,
    the Appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection nor
    is there any breach of his  rights  under  Articles  2  and  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights on the basis of  fear  of  the  Sri
    Lankan  authorities  (his  mental  health  claims  will  be  considered
    separately below).

72. In the application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  course  of  these
    proceedings  before  the  Upper  Tribunal;  the   Appellant   did   not
    specifically challenge the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to the separate consideration of his claim under Article 3  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights on health  grounds.   Paragraph
    31 of the grounds of appeal submitted that there was a mistake of fact,
    or alternatively an unreasoned conclusion by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that Dr Thomas' report  raised  only  a  "theoretical"  possibility  of
    suicide, although the consequence or otherwise of this  point  was  not
    fully developed in submissions.  This point is dealt with in paragraphs
    22 and 23 of the error of law decision  annexed,  with  the  conclusion
    overall that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  on  its  approach  to  the
    evidence of Dr Thomas and failed to give  it  sufficient  weight,  also
    failing to accurately summarise its contents.  Those  errors  have  not
    been specifically  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  to  challenge  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to Article 3 on medical
    grounds, but arguably infect the conclusions in paragraphs 47 to 49  on
    this point.  Pursuant further directions issued  to  the  parties,  the
    Appellant confirmed that he continued to rely on a discreet  Article  3
    claim on mental health grounds and written  submissions  were  made  by
    both parties on this point.  I therefore go on to remake that  part  of
    the decision as well.

73. It is well established that there is a very high threshold for a breach
    of Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  in  health
    cases, as set out in N v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2005] UKHL 31.

74. In relation specifically to the risk of suicide from  enforced  return,
    in J v Home  Secretary  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  629,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    identified the  following  five  stages  of  the  correct  test  to  be
    considered in such cases.

         "27. First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed.  This must attain a minimum level  of
             severity.  The court has said on a number  of  occasions  that
             the  assessment  of  its   severity   depends   on   all   the
             circumstances  of  the  case.   But  the  ill-treatment   must
             "necessarily be serious"  such  that  it  is  "an  affront  to
             fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to
             a country where he is at risk of serious  ill-treatment":  see
             Ullah paras [28-39].


         28.  Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights. Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:


                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).


                  See also para [108] of Vilvarajah  where  the  court  said
                  that the examination of the article 3 issue "must focus on
                  the  foreseeable  consequences  of  the  removal  of   the
                  applicants to Sri Lanka..."


         29.  Thirdly, in the context of  a  foreign  case,  the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state, but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.


         30.  Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).


         31.  Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach
             of article 3 in a suicide case, a question  of  importance  is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to  be  based  is
             objectively well-founded. If the  fear  is  not  well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
             the removal will be in breach of article 3.


         32.  Sixthly, a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has effective
             mechanisms to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights."


75. In Y (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 362, the Court of Appeal qualified the fifth factor  in  J  as
    follows in paragraph 16 of the judgement:

         "16. One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in J that  what
         may nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any genuine fear
         which the appellant may  establish,  albeit  without  an  objective
         foundation, is such as to create a risk of suicide if there  is  an
         enforced return."

76. As already set out above, the medical evidence in this case is that the
    Appellant has a  relatively  long  history  of  serious  mental  health
    problems and the most  recent  report  from  Dr  Thomas  confirmed  his
    presentation at that time, concluding that he would be at high risk  of
    suicide if forcibly removed  to  Sri  Lanka  and  would  be  unable  to
    effetively access treatment on return there.  Dr  Thomas'  opinion  was
    however based upon an assumption that the entirety of  the  Appellant's
    protection claim and history was credible,  specifically  that  he  was
    detained and tortured not only in 2009  but  also  in  2013.   For  the
    reasons already given above the Appellant has not established  that  he
    was arrested, detained or tortured in 2013 and it is therefore  unknown
    what effect, if any this would have on  Dr  Thomas's  view  as  to  the
    situation if forcibly returned now.  There is  arguably  a  potentially
    significant difference given that the Appellant returned to  Sri  Lanka
    in both 2012 and 2013, without any suggestion of  re-traumatisation  or
    fear on return on either occasion.

77. The further difficulty with Dr Thomas' conclusion  that  the  Appellant
    would not be able to access mental health treatment on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka, is that no consideration is given to the fact that the Appellant
    has supportive family in Sri Lanka, including his parents, siblings and
    his wife and no explanation whatsoever is given as to why  this  family
    network and support would be ineffective to  enable  the  Appellant  to
    seek any treatment required.

78. In these circumstances, although I attach great weight to the report of
    Dr Thomas, it has, for the reasons set out  above,  much  more  limited
    value in relation to suicide risk in the event of  forcible  return  to
    Sri Lanka.  However, I do take into account the background evidence, as
    set out in GJ and supported more recently by the Respondent's own  Fact
    Finding Mission,  that  mental  health  facilities  in  Sri  Lanka  are
    incredibly limited and I do not find that it necessarily  follows  that
    because the Appellant was able to access treatment  in  2010,  that  he
    would be able to do so on return now.

79. Although the Appellant's fear on return  to  Sri  Lanka  has  not  been
    established to be objectively well-founded, given  his  past9  accepted
    history, particularly relation to events in 2009,  I  accept  that  his
    fear on return is genuinely held.

80. Taking all of these matters in the round, although the Appellant  faces
    a high hurdle to establish a real risk of breach of Article 3 on return
    for mental health reasons and although there are  unanswered  questions
    and weaknesses in  the  evidence  available,  I  find  that  given  the
    Appellant's significant  history  of  serious  mental  health  problems
    caused cumulatively by trauma in Sri Lanka, including from his  arrest,
    detention and torture in 2009, taken together with the significant lack
    of mental health facilities in  Sri  Lanka,  that  he  just  meets  the
    threshold of a real risk such that his appeal is allowed on  Article  3
    grounds.

81. In the application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  course  of  these
    proceedings  before  the  Upper  Tribunal;  the   Appellant   has   not
    specifically challenged nor made any submissions  in  relation  to  the
    findings dismissing his  appeal  on  private  or  family  life  grounds
    (either under the Immigration Rules or outside of them on the basis  of
    Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights)  and  those
    findings therefore stand from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Mill.  The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in the decision annexed, the making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  a  material  error  of
law and as such it was necessary to set aside the decision.

The appeal is remade as follows:


    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on protection grounds.


    The Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds,  with
    reference to Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights only.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]             Date     20th June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01648/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2018                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     MA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Mill promulgated on 1  June  2018,  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse his protection and  human  rights  claim
    dated 4 February 2016 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born  on  2  April  1976,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom on 14 January 2010 with a visa  issued
    the previous month and with leave to remain to 11 May  2011  and  later
    extended.  On 13 June 2014, the Appellant applied for leave  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules which was refused on  18  August  2014
    and the appeal against that refusal was dismissed on 24 June 2015.  The
    Appellant claimed asylum on 16 September 2015 (although  that  date  is
    disputed by the Appellant), on the basis of fear  of  persecution  from
    the Sri Lankan authorities as a suspected supporter of the LTTE.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant was
    not accepted as having given a credible account  of  his  claim  having
    returned to Sri Lanka after he says he initially faced problems and the
    arrest warrant was not accepted as a genuine document.   There  was  no
    medical evidence in support  of  the  claimed  injuries  from  torture.
    Overall it was not accepted that the Appellant  would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka even taking his claim at its highest.   There  were
    no grounds for a grant of leave to remain on medical grounds, or family
    and  private  life  grounds.   In  particular,  medical  treatment  was
    available to the Appellant on return to Sri Lanka, he did  not  satisfy
    the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  an  adult  dependent
    relative on his brother in the United Kingdom and had no  other  family
    here, and did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  in  relation  to  private  life.   No   exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain were found.

 4. Judge Khan initially dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on
    16 June 2017, however that was set aside following the  finding  of  an
    error of law by the Upper Tribunal on 5 December 2017.  The appeal  was
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing which came
    before Judge Mill on 22 May  2018.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 1 June  2018  largely  on  adverse  credibility
    grounds.  The Appellant's account was found to  be  inconsistent  in  a
    number of respects and his claim inherently  implausible,  particularly
    as regards his return to Sri Lanka in 2012 and 2013 despite his claimed
    history of detention and torture in 2009.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal did not give any weight  to  an  expert  report
    from Kumaravadivel Guruparan  as  to  the  authenticity  of  an  arrest
    warrant relied upon by the Appellant and found that the arrest  warrant
    was not genuine and could not be relied upon.  Further, a  medico-legal
    report from Dr Ritesh Sinha was not considered as  lending  significant
    weight to the Appellant's claim, nor was a report from Frederica Jansz.

 6. The Appellant's mental health was not considered to be something  which
    added weight to  the  Appellant's  protection  claim  and  was  instead
    considered as part of a separate Article 3 claim, although it was found
    that the circumstances did not meet the high threshold in such a case.

 7. Overall, the Appellant was not found to fall into any  risk  categories
    identified in GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT
    319 (IAC) and not to be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.  His appeal was
    also dismissed on human rights grounds.



The appeal

 8. The Appellant appeals on five  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note number  2
    of 2010 (the "Presidential Guidance") in assessment of the  Appellant's
    credibility as a vulnerable adult.  In particular,  that  his  accepted
    mental health difficulties were  not  taken  into  account  during  the
    substantive consideration of his protection claim.  Secondly, the First-
    tier Tribunal  failed  to  make  any  findings  about  the  Appellant's
    brother's credibility, nor was the  evidence  from  him  summarised  or
    referred to at all in  the  decision.   Thirdly,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal applied the wrong standard of proof in relation to the reports
    from Dr Thomas and Dr Sinha, failing  to  give  this  evidence  anxious
    scrutiny nor consider it in the round.  In  particular,  reference  was
    made to evidence not being conclusive rather  than  being  assessed  in
    accordance with the lower standard of proof and no consideration  given
    of the totality of the psychological and physical evidence.   Fourthly,
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in   placing   no   weight   on   the
    authentication of the arrest warrant by an  independent  witness  whose
    expertise was not  canvassed  by  the  Tribunal  and  the  reasons  for
    rejecting it were  partly  based  on  a  mistake  of  fact  as  to  the
    availability of a required date for  verification  purposes.   Finally,
    there was a mistake of fact by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  that  the
    Appellant claimed asylum on 8  October  2014  and  not  in  2015  after
    finding out about the arrest warrant and other examples  are  given  of
    factual errors which did not accurately record the evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Murray on 13 August  2018  on
    all grounds.

10. At the oral hearing, Counsel for the Appellant made submissions in line
    with the written grounds of appeal, with reference to relevant parts of
    the evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  highlighting  the
    factual errors in the decision, lack of reasons  and  consideration  of
    the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  application  of  the
    wrong standard of proof.

11. On behalf of the Respondent, it was submitted  that  the  evidence  and
    decision must be looked at in the round and when doing so,  there  were
    no errors of law.  It was highlighted that the Presidential Guidance on
    vulnerable witnesses had  been  acknowledged  but  even  taking  mental
    health  matters  into  account,  there  were   discrepancies   in   the
    Appellant's evidence which could not be  put  down  to  any  issues  of
    vulnerability.  There were material discrepancies in the chronology and
    a lack of any report to medical practitioner of claimed injuries at the
    relevant  time.   The  findings  in  relation  to   plausibility   were
    unaffected by any issues of vulnerability.

12. It was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal gave  sufficient  reasons
    for the weight being attached to the report of Mr Gurupuran,  including
    that it was opinion based rather than evidence-based with no conclusion
    or opinion as  to  the  verification  of  the  actual  arrest  warrant.
    Concerns were raised about  the  independence  of  the  author  on  the
    corruption point and it was submitted that the ground of appeal in this
    regard amounted only to disagreement with the findings rather than  any
    error of law.  Similarly, in relation to the mental health  report,  it
    was submitted  that  sufficient  reasons  were  given  for  the  weight
    attached to it and it was  appropriately  considered  as  part  of  the
    evidence in the round applying the correct standard of proof.   It  was
    accepted that evidence would only rarely be diagnostic of something, so
    this  is  a  factor  which  should  be  considered.   The  Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  paragraph  47  of  the   decision
    accurately represents the contents of Dr Thomas'  report  and  adequate
    consideration was given to it.

Findings and reasons

13. In relation to the first ground of appeal, the First-tier Tribunal  was
    clearly alive to and accepted the Appellant's mental health and it  was
    expressly stated in paragraph  19  that  there  was  no  difficulty  in
    applying the  Presidential  Guidance  for  this  reason.   However,  in
    paragraph 42, consideration was given as  to  whether  the  Appellant's
    mental health was something which added weight to claims  of  detention
    and torture but it was not found that it did such that the evidence  in
    relation to mental health  was  considered  only  in  relation  to  his
    separate Article 3 claim.  The First-tier Tribunal  stated  that  there
    was no clear correlation between the state of  the  Appellant's  mental
    ill-health and his claim to torture which he  found  his  asylum  claim
    upon.

14. The Presidential Guidance includes guidance for the Tribunal  prior  to
    and at the substantive hearing, and also guidance on the assessment  of
    evidence given by a vulnerable witness.  It states that when  assessing
    evidence, account should be taken of potentially corroborative evidence
    and the need to be aware that the order and manner in which evidence is
    given may be affected by mental, psychological or emotional trauma  and
    comprehension may have been impaired.  A Tribunal should  consider  the
    extent to which the age, vulnerability or sensitivity  of  the  witness
    was an element in any clear discrepancies in the evidence  or  lack  of
    clarity.  A decision of  the  Tribunal  should  record  the  effect  it
    considered the identified vulnerability had in assessing  the  evidence
    before it and in asylum appeals, weight should be  given  to  objective
    indications of risk rather than lead to a state of mind.

15. The First-tier Tribunal's decision does  expressly  conclude  that  the
    Appellant's mental health has no clear correlation with his  claims  of
    torture and adds little weight to his protection claim, however it does
    not expressly set out any consideration of or conclusion as to  whether
    the Appellant's mental health  has  been  taken  into  account  in  the
    assessment of the evidence that he gave.  It is not a matter of whether
    the Appellant's mental health adds weight to the claim, but whether  it
    has affected the evidence he  has  given  and  if  so,  whether  it  is
    appropriate to draw adverse credibility findings in such circumstances.

16. In  particular,  the  decision  makes  no  reference  to  the  detailed
    psychological  assessment  from  Dr  Thomas  which  stated   that   the
    Appellant's ability to give a coherent account was affected  by  "much-
    heightened anxiety, cognitive impairment (especially very  poor  short-
    term memory), suicidal ideation and post-traumatic hyper-arousal".  The
    contents of Dr Thomas' report were only  considered  later  on  in  the
    decision and not with reference to the  assessment  of  credibility  in
    relation to the protection claim.

17. I find an error of law by the First-tier Tribunal in not  applying  the
    full  extent  of  the  Presidential  Guidance  in  the  assessment   of
    credibility and evidence in the round by reference to  the  Appellant's
    accepted poor mental health, supported by specific and detailed medical
    evidence.  This is a  material  error  given  the  adverse  credibility
    findings  were  largely  premised  on  the   inconsistencies   in   the
    Appellant's  claim,  the  delay  in  making   it   and   its   inherent
    implausibility.

18. This finding is linked to and overlaps to some extent with  the  second
    ground of appeal, the failure by the First-tier Tribunal to refer to or
    make any findings as to the Appellant's brother's evidence.   Paragraph
    20 of the decision records that there was an  additional  witness,  the
    Appellant's brother, but his evidence is not referred to at all in  the
    body of the decision or  the  reasons  for  the  findings  made.   This
    evidence is potentially corroborative  of  the  Appellant's  claim  and
    therefore potentially has an increased importance, in  accordance  with
    the guidance  in  assessing  the  evidence  of  a  vulnerable  witness.
    Although it is not necessary for each and every piece of evidence to be
    expressly considered in a decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  in  the
    circumstances of this particular case, it is an error  of  law  not  to
    refer to it at all in the context of adverse credibility findings  made
    against a vulnerable witness.

19. In relation to the third ground of appeal, it is necessary to have more
    detailed regard to the findings made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to the reports from Dr Thomas and Dr Sinha.  The  analysis  of
    the psychological assessment by Dr Thomas 47  of  the  decision,  which
    states as follows:

         "An independent psychological assessment is lodged on behalf of the
         Appellant which is recently dated 21 May  2018.   This  appears  at
         pages 49 - 90 of the Appellant's supplementary bundle.  The  author
         is  Dr  Rachel  Thomas,  Consultant   Clinical   Psychologist   and
         Consultant Adult Psychotherapist.  She states that the Appellant is
         suffering from moderate symptoms of major depressive disorder  with
         additional post-traumatic traits.  She states  that  she  considers
         the principal cause of the Appellant's psychiatric disorder  to  be
         the traumatic experiences of torture  he  has  experienced  in  his
         native Sri Lanka.  It is not a matter  for  the  psychologist  when
         offering expert opinion on his health  to  offer  opinions  on  the
         issues of credibility.  Whilst  the  report  is  Istanbul  Protocol
         compliant, it is noted that Dr Thomas suggests that  his  condition
         of  mental  health  is  highly  consistent  and  typical   of   the
         psychological profile of someone  who  was  being  tortured.   This
         leaves open the existence of other causes of causation.  It is  not
         conclusive.  Dr Thomas states that in the event  of  the  Appellant
         being removed from the United Kingdom now that she anticipates that
         his psychiatric  health  would  rapidly  deteriorate  to  a  severe
         psychiatric episode  with  increased  suicidality.   She  does  not
         analyse in detail any current suicidal thoughts  or  behaviours  on
         the part of the Appellant nor the level of risk, albeit  increased,
         that would come with the Appellant's removal."

20. The reasoning in this paragraph appears on the one  hand  to  recognise
    that it is not the place of an expert providing a  medical  opinion  to
    assess credibility,  but  on  the  other  hand  to  require  conclusive
    evidence of causation for such evidence to be taken into account in  an
    appellant's favour.  The reference to the evidence not being conclusive
    can only be read as implying a much higher standard of proof  than  the
    lower standard applicable in protection claims.

21. When the report is read as a whole, it is also clear that Dr Thomas has
    made an assessment not of the credibility of the Appellant's protection
    claim, but of the credibility of his psychiatric symptoms.  Reasons are
    given from paragraph 58 onwards in the report  as  to  why  these  were
    considered credible, including by reference to the consistency  of  his
    account, objective assessment and  presentation,  a  balanced  view  of
    symptoms and consistent with objective evidence.  To this  is  added  a
    section on the impact of past abuse and torture on  a  person's  mental
    health by reference to objective evidence on the area.  It  is  not  an
    attempt to assess credibility in the way in which a First-tier Tribunal
    is required to do, nor to offer conclusive evidence and the  weight  to
    be attached to it should not have been determined as if it was  or  was
    required.

22. I would add further that the summary in this paragraph,  combined  with
    the final  sentence  in  the  following  paragraph  that  "Dr  Thomas's
    assessment raises only a theoretical possibility of a suicide attempt."
    is also not a  fair  or  accurate  summary  of  the  report.   Detailed
    analysis and consideration of suicidality is contained in the report in
    paragraphs 42, 76 and 77 with wider reasoning given in the  surrounding
    paragraphs as to the impact of return on the Appellant.

23. The First-tier Tribunal's  approach  to  the  evidence  of  Dr  Thomas,
    particularly when considered alongside the evidence of Dr  Sinha,  errs
    in law for the reasons given.  First, it is not taken into  account  at
    all for the application of the Presidential  Guidance.   Secondly,  the
    wrong standard of proof is applied when the evidence should  have  been
    considered in the round to the lower standard.  Thirdly, less weight is
    attached the report for a lack of detail which is in fact contained  in
    the report.

24. As to the fourth ground of appeal, in relation to the  evidence  of  Mr
    Guruparan and verification of the arrest warrant, I also find an  error
    of law.  Little weight is attached  to  the  report  for  a  number  of
    reasons, including that the prima facie plausible explanation  for  not
    being able to obtain a copy of the arrest  warrant  did  not  withstand
    scrutiny given  the  Appellant  detailed  the  date  on  which  he  was
    summonsed to Court for a hearing.  However, it appears to be assumed by
    the First-tier Tribunal that that is the same as the last date on which
    the case was called or the next day on which the case is to  be  called
    which is not necessarily the case as it may  have  been  listed  for  a
    later date after the arrest warrant.

25. Further, the report is rejected as being inconsistent  with  background
    evidence  of  the  prevalence  of  fraudulent  documents,  however   Mr
    Guruparan refers to corruption in the judiciary being  very  low,  i.e.
    that it is unlikely a document could be fraudulently obtained from  the
    judicial system  which  is  a  slightly  different  point.   For  these
    reasons, I find that the reasons for little weight being given  to  the
    report are not sustainable.

26. As I have found errors of law on the first four grounds of  appeal,  it
    is not necessary to consider all of the claimed mistakes of fact in the
    decision  in  detail.   I  have   already   referred   above   to   the
    misrepresentation of Dr Thomas' report as to the risk  of  suicide  and
    legitimate concerns have also been raised as to the characterisation of
    the Appellant's claim of  torture  against  which  adverse  credibility
    findings were made.

27. The final factual issue is as to when  the  Appellant  claimed  asylum.
    The Respondent's records show this was in September 2015, close to  the
    date in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and the  Appellant  has  not
    provided any evidence to  support  his  claim  that  this  was  a  year
    earlier.  In any event, I am not persuaded that if there was a  mistake
    of fact in the date that it would be material given that  even  if  the
    claim was made in 2014, there was still a delay  of  at  least  a  year
    between the claimed torture in 2013 and the claim for asylum.

28. For the reasons set out above, the making of the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal did involve the making of material errors of law  and  as
    such it is necessary to set aside the decision.  Given the  history  of
    the appeal and detailed  evidence  already  available,  the  appeal  is
    retained in the Upper Tribunal for determination.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Directions

The Appellant and the Respondent  are  to  confirm  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
within 21 days of the date on which this decision is issued as to whether  a
further oral hearing is required to remake the decision on appeal or  if  it
can  be  determined  on  the  papers  with  the   parties   making   written
submissions.  If an oral hearing is required, the  parties  are  to  confirm
from whom oral evidence  is  to  be  called  and  any  special  arrangements
required  for  such  evidence.   On  the  expiry  of  this  period,  further
directions will be given as to listing of a  hearing  if  required,  or  for
written submissions for determination on the papers.


Signed   [pic]             Date     8th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


