
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01179/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2021 via Skype for Business    |On 3 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     LD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Anzani, Counsel, instructed by L & L Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to are contained in  the  appellant's  two
First-tier  Tribunal  bundles,  the  respondent's  bundle,  the  appellant's
asylum interview transcript, and the grounds  of  appeal,  the  contents  of
which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: they were content  the  proceedings
had been conducted fairly in their remote form.

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Verghis promulgated on 2 April 2020, in which she dismissed his  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 30 January  2020  to
    refuse his fresh claim for asylum.

 2. It was common ground before me that the judge's credibility  assessment
    involved the making of an error of law, and that the appeal  should  be
    allowed.  This decision sets out the respondent's  concession  to  that
    effect, and my reasons for accepting it.

Factual background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  in  October  1988.   He
    arrived in this country as a student in 2011, with a visa  valid  until
    January 2013.  He claimed asylum in  February  2014.   That  claim  was
    refused in March 2015, and an appeal against the refusal was dismissed.
     The decision under challenge in these proceedings was taken  following
    a fresh claim made by the appellant in September 2019.

 4. The appellant claimed to be sought in Sri Lanka on account of his  pro-
    Tamil political opinion, having  been  detained  and  tortured  by  the
    authorities  there.   Before   the   First-tier   Tribunal   in   these
    proceedings, the  appellant's  case  was  he  was  tortured,  including
    through  being  beaten  on  his  feet.   The  judge   had   significant
    credibility concerns.  Those concerns included  the  fact  he  had  not
    mentioned being tortured in that way in his asylum interview, conducted
    in February 2015.   She said, at paragraph 48:

         "The appellant did not mention in his initial or  asylum  interview
         that when he was held in detention, he was beaten on  his  feet  to
         the extent that he had difficulty walking for three months.   There
         tribunal finds there was no reason why this important point was not
         mentioned and an injury that impacted the appellant's mobility  for
         three  months  is  noteworthy...  The  tribunal  draws  an  adverse
         inference from the failure to mention this  earlier  and  concludes
         that the appellant was not giving a truthful account."

 5. In the appellant's asylum interview dated  25  February  2015,  he  was
    specifically not asked about the torture methods used against him.  See
    question 76:

         "I don't need to know how you were tortured.   I  won't  be  asking
         those questions."

Grounds of appeal

 6. There are two grounds  of  appeal.   The  first  concerns  the  judge's
    analysis of the medical evidence.  In light of the consensus concerning
    the second ground of appeal, this ground does not fall to be considered
    and I need say no more about it.

 7. The second ground of appeal contends that it was 'unreasonable' for the
    judge to reject a key plank of the appellant's narrative on  the  basis
    he  did  not  mention  something  during  his   asylum   interview   in
    circumstances when the interviewing officer  specifically  declined  to
    engage with that very topic.

Discussion

 8. Mr Tufan realistically concedes that the judge made  an  error  of  law
    going to the heart of her credibility assessment, with the effect  that
    the entire credibility assessment was tainted and must  be  set  aside.
    That was a concession that was validly made, and one which was open  to
    the Secretary of State.

 9. It was not reasonably open to the judge to hold against  the  appellant
    the fact that he did not mention  the  foot-based  torture  allegations
    during  his  asylum   interview,   given   the   interviewing   officer
    specifically said that questions on that issue would not be asked.

10. I accept both parties' submissions that the judge's overall credibility
    assessment was tainted such that it must be set aside in its  entirety,
    with no findings preserved.  In light of the extent of the fact finding
    required, I consider that it is  appropriate  for  this  matter  to  be
    reheard in the First-tier Tribunal, by a different judge.

11. The appeal is allowed.

12. I maintain the anonymity order already in force.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Verghis involved the making of an error of law and  is
set aside.

The matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
different judge, with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith            Date 22 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
