
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01396/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th November 2016                         |On 6th January 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     J T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by Ask Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Sri Lanka born on 26th May 1980.  He
    entered the UK illegally on 2nd August 2010 and applied for asylum  two
    days later on the basis that he was at risk  on  return  owing  to  his
    association with the  LTTE.   That  application  was  refused  for  the
    reasons given in the Respondent's letter of  27th  January  2016.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Page (the Judge) sitting at Newport on 23rd August  2016.   He
    decided to dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection,  and
    human rights grounds for the reasons given in his  Decision  dated  1st
    December 2016.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and
    on 25th October 2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At the hearing before me, it was agreed between the  parties  that  the
    grounds of application might be amended to include a  ground  that  the
    Judge had erred in law by mistakenly believing that an  issue  of  fact
    had not been raised by the Appellant in a witness statement dated  30th
    January 2015 which had been before the Judge at the hearing before him.
     It was conceded by Mr Walker that this ground constituted  a  material
    error of law so that the decision of the Judge should be set aside, and
    it was further agreed by the parties that the  decision  of  the  Judge
    should be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. I accordingly find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the Judge which I therefore set aside.  As my  decision  is
    with the consent of the parties, I do not have to give my  reasons  for
    that decision in accordance with the provisions of Rule 40(3)(a) of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  in  accordance  with
paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
