


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      PA/01214/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 13th December 2016                        |On: 15th December 2016       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                Cristina [N]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:      Mr Aziz, instructed by Bolton CAB
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Angola, born on the 5th July 1969.   She
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Wellesley-Cole) to dismiss her  appeal  against  a  decision  to
    refuse to grant leave to remain on protection grounds.


 2. The appeal is brought on  the  grounds  that  there  was  a  procedural
    unfairness in the hearing of the appeal. The point is  well  summarised
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford in his grant of permission dated  5th
    October 2016:

         "The  Appellant's  current  representative  has  stated  that   the
         previous representative wrongly advised that the appeal hearing was
         listed for the 31st August rather than the  30th  August  and  that
         instructions had been received only days before  the  bank  holiday
         weekend.  It  is  stated  in   a   witness   statement   from   the
         representative that the error  was  not  realised  until  part  way
         through the morning. I can see from the file that he  made  contact
         with the Tribunal by fax just after noon on the date of the hearing
         and made a request for an adjournment.


         The ROP does not give start and finish times for  the  hearing  but
         does state "no show" for the Appellant. Given that the  adjournment
         request was not received until after 12 noon,  it  is  likely  that
         Judge Wellesley-Cole was unaware of the adjournment request  as  it
         most likely came in after the hearing was  concluded.  The  hearing
         had proceeded on submissions only.


         Because the Appellant may have been  misinformed  by  her  previous
         solicitor as to the date of the hearing, it is  arguable  that  the
         request for an adjournment would likely have succeeded had it  been
         made in time and that such conspicuous unfairness to the  Appellant
         has resulted that it arguably amounts to a material error of  law".




 3. It would seem that there was an unfortunate confluence of events  prior
    to the matter coming before the First-tier Tribunal. In addition to the
    solicitor making the error as to the correct date, it appears from  the
    file that the notice of hearing dispatched to the Appellant herself was
    sent to her old address in Islington. She had by that time  been  moved
    (by NASS) to address in Bolton. Although the Tribunal had been informed
    the information had not been placed on the file before that notice  was
    delivered.  I agree with Judge Ford's assessment that as  a  result  of
    timing it is very unlikely that  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  had  been  made
    aware of any of this. Mr Bates concurred,  and  pointed  out  that  the
    determination expressly records that nothing had been  heard  from  the
    Appellant or her representatives.


 4. In those circumstances the Respondent had no objection to the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal being set aside for procedural irregularity,
    and the matter remitted afresh  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    hearing.






      Decisions


 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  infected  by  material
    error of law and it is set aside.


 6. The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.  I am advised
    that the Appellant will require a  Lingala  interpreter  and  that  she
    intends to give evidence. The appeal should be allocated 3 points.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            13th December
                                    2016
