
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01319/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 14th October 2016           |On 26th October 2016               |

                                   Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:
                                    A. L.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal

Representation:
For the Claimant: Miss Reid (Counsel)
For the Secretary of State:     Mr Walker  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Birk promulgated on the 31st August 2016, in  which
    she allowed the Claimant's asylum appeal.  Although First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Birk did not accept that the Claimant was a victim of trafficking
    or had been sold into prostitution  as  claimed,  she  found  that  the
    Claimant would be returned to Albania as either a woman who  was  still
    married but was returning with a child born out of  wedlock,  or  as  a
    single woman who had had an illegitimate child at  [27]  and  that  she
    would be at a risk of persecution due to being a member of a particular
    social group, namely a lone woman with an illegitimate child  and  that
    she did qualify for  protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention.   She
    therefore allowed the Claimant's asylum appeal.

 2. The Secretary of State has now sought to appeal against  that  decision
    for the reasons set out within the Grounds of Appeal.  This is a matter
    of record and is therefore not repeated in its entirety  here,  but  in
    summary, it is argued  that  the  Judge's  finding  at  [27]  that  the
    Claimant was either a woman who was still  married  but  now  returning
    with a child born out of wedlock or she was a single woman who had  had
    an illegitimate child had not been reasoned at all, and that given  the
    rejection of the Claimant's credibility in respect of  the  trafficking
    claim that the 'negative pull of the  lie'  should  at  least  raise  a
    possibility that the child was her husband's, given that she was  found
    not to be a victim of domestic violence.

 3. It was further argued within the Grounds of Appeal that at paragraph 28
    the Judge noted that the Claimant was from a  religious  Muslim  family
    and that that was not a reasoned  finding  and  that  again  given  the
    Claimant's lack of credibility, accepting her evidence  on  that  point
    ignored the fact that she had not given a  truthful  account.   It  was
    further argued at paragraph 5 of the Grounds of Appeal that the Judge's
    findings at paragraph 34 that she would be pursued  and  persecuted  by
    family members was wrong and that there  was  nothing  on  the  papers,
    including the Judge's summary of the claim at paragraph 5  to  indicate
    that that was something that the Claimant had claimed she feared.   The
    grounds  further  argue  at  paragraph  6  that  given   the   negative
    credibility findings that the Judge had neither identified  which  non-
    state actors would have an adverse interest in the  Claimant,  nor  had
    she given adequate reasons  as  to  why  they  would  have  an  adverse
    interest in her.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom, on
    the 22nd September 2016, when he found that:

         "Permission is granted because it is arguable that the FTTJ failed
         to give adequate reasons for accepting such matters as the child's
         illegitimacy and family's religiously motivated intolerance given
         the wholesale adverse credibility findings made about the
         Appellant's asylum claim at paragraphs 18, 20, 21, 23 and 25."

 5. Within the Rule 24 Reply, which again is a  matter  of  record  and  is
    therefore not repeated in full here, it is argued, inter alia,  by  the
    Claimant that the Secretary of State had not  challenged  the  evidence
    that the Claimant's son was conceived out of wedlock and that she would
    be returning with an illegitimate child, and it is  said  that  neither
    was it the Secretary of State's case that the father of the  child  was
    the Claimant's husband.  It is argued that the Secretary  of  State  is
    simply seeking to reargue the appeal in light of the findings  made  by
    the Judge and that  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  challenge  the
    Claimant's evidence that she was from a religious family.  It is argued
    that where facts are not disputed between the parties, a Judge  is  not
    required to  give  expansive  reasons  for  accepting  an  unchallenged
    version of events and that the Grounds of Appeal amount to no more than
    a mere disagreement with the findings made by the Judge.  The  Claimant
    further argues that the Judge has made findings on disputed facts which
    were consistent with her treating the Claimant as a woman returning  to
    Albania with an illegitimate  child  and  in  particular  the  Claimant
    relied upon paragraph 17 of  the  decision  in  that  regard  and  that
    although the Judge had made findings that the Claimant was not a victim
    of trafficking, it was said that the Judge had found that the  Claimant
    could have been deceived by 'A' and become pregnant, which  was  argued
    to be consistent with the Judge treating the Claimant as a lone female,
    whether or not  previously  married,  returning  with  an  illegitimate
    child.  The Claimant asked that the appeal be dismissed.

 6. It was on that basis that the  appeal  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 7. In his oral submissions, Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of  State
    argued that the Grounds of Appeal clearly set out the reasons challenge
    to  the  decision.   He  argued  that  the  Judge  made  clear  adverse
    credibility findings at paragraph 18 of the decision and  had  rejected
    the trafficking account, but he  argued  the  Judge  had  not  properly
    explained the findings made at  paragraph  27  regarding  the  Claimant
    being a woman who was either still married and returning with  a  child
    born out of wedlock or being a single woman who had had an illegitimate
    child, and in respect of the finding at paragraph 28 that coming from a
    religious Muslim family she was highly unlikely to be given support  by
    her family or other relatives.  Mr Walker conceded  that  in  light  of
    paragraph 20 of the Claimant's statement in which she did say that  she
    did fear persecution from her parents and her husband, that paragraph 5
    of the Grounds of Appeal fell  away,  but  he  argued  that  given  the
    negative credibility findings, the Judge's reasoning in respect of  the
    conclusion reached that the Claimant was entitled  to  asylum  had  not
    been adequately explained.  He argued that  if  there  was  a  material
    error, given that credibility was in issue, the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Birk should be set aside in its entirety and he did  not
    seek to persuade me that there should  be  any  preserved  findings  of
    fact.  He said that the hearing should be a de novo hearing, given that
    credibility was in issue.

 8. In her submissions on behalf of the Claimant, Miss Reid relied upon her
    Rule 24 Reply.  She further sought to argue that  the  Judge  had  made
    clear findings that the Claimant was a single woman returning  with  an
    illegitimate child and would therefore be at  risk  upon  return.   She
    argued that it was never the Secretary of State's case that  her  child
    was the child of her husband.  She argued that within the Secretary  of
    State's original refusal notice dated the 20th January  2016,  that  in
    the paragraphs dealing with internal relocation starting  at  paragraph
    54 of the decision, at paragraph 55 it was said that  "You  state  that
    you cannot go back to another area of Albania because  the  people  you
    fear can find you wherever you go (AIR  Q212)  it  is  noted  that  you
    remained in Tirana; which is where your parents and husband lived  from
    March 2014 until October 2014 (AIR question 57-59)  and  you  have  not
    stated that either your parents or  your  husband  tried  to  find  you
    there".     Although  she  conceded  that  this  was  not  a   specific
    concession that the Claimant had lived in Tirana between March 2014 and
    October 2014, she argued that the Claimant's own case was that she  had
    left her husband in March 2014 and moved to live with  a  friend  named
    Albana who lived in Tirana.   She  argued  that  it  was  part  of  the
    Claimant's Supplemental Skeleton Argument that she was  a  lone  female
    returning with an illegitimate child.  She argued that  the  Judge  had
    found at paragraph 17 of her decision that "As for those issues  raised
    in the NRM letter, I find that it is not implausible or incredible that
    the Appellant would be unaware of the adverse  intentions  of  'A'  and
    that this would necessarily be apparent just because he was a friend of
    her friend's boyfriend and  if  he  was  as  she  claimed  sufficiently
    devious to deceive her then he could deceive  others  as  to  his  true
    intentions.  I also do not find any substance in the assertion  by  the
    Respondent that the Appellant's clients used contraceptive  means  that
    she cannot get pregnant in the first month since it  is  accepted  that
    contraception does not 100% guarantee against pregnancies".  Miss  Reid
    argued that the Judge had therefore found  that  it  was  possible  and
    credible that the Claimant could have become pregnant  as  claimed  and
    that the Judge did not need to give substantial reasons  for  accepting
    facts which were not disputed.  She  argued  that  it  had  never  been
    suggested that the child was her husband's by the  Secretary  of  State
    and that the Judge was not required to make findings on that point.

 9. In respect of the findings regarding  the  lack  of  support  from  her
    family and other relatives given the fact that it  was  said  that  her
    family were a religious Muslim family at paragraph 28 of the  decision,
    Miss Reid argued that such a finding was justified on the basis of  the
    Country Guidance cases, but accepted that in fact each case would  turn
    on its own facts.

10. She further conceded that in respect of paragraph 34, the  "other  non-
    state actors" who were referred to, had  not  been  identified  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

11. Miss Reid did not accept that there were any  material  errors  in  the
    decision, but said that she had discussed the  appeal  with  Mr  Walker
    prior to the appeal commencing and that it had been agreed between them
    that if there were material errors found, the case should  be  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal as a hearing de novo, with no preserved
    findings of fact.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

12. At [25] of her decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk found that  "As
    her general credibility has been severely damaged, I find that she  has
    not established that she was married or in a relationship with domestic
    violence.  However, I have to consider her current position on  return.
    I find that being a lone woman with an illegitimate child can be PSG.".
     Judge Birk further found at [27] that "I find that  she  is  either  a
    woman who is still married but is now returning with a child  born  out
    of wedlock or she is  a  single  woman  who  had  had  an  illegitimate
    child.".

13. The Judge at paragraph 18 of her decision, set out significant  reasons
    as to why she rejected the  Claimant's  account  in  respect  of  being
    trafficked, and went on to give further reasons at paragraphs  20,  21,
    23 and 25.  She found specifically she  had  not  provided  a  credible
    truthful account to escape from prostitution or of her journey  to  the
    UK and that this went sufficiently to the heart of her claim  of  being
    trafficked such that she did not accept the  Claimant  had  established
    that she was induced to leave Albania  and  had  then  been  sold  into
    prostitution and  that  she  did  not  accept  that  the  Claimant  had
    established that she was a victim of trafficking.

14. Although the  Judge  at  paragraph  23  stated  that  "As  her  general
    credibility  has  been  severely  damaged  I  find  that  she  has  not
    established that she was married or in  a  relationship  with  domestic
    violence", this I consider to be somewhat inconsistent with the Judge's
    finding at paragraph 27 that "I find that she is either a woman who  is
    still married but is now returning with a child born out wedlock or she
    is a single woman who had had an illegitimate child".  The  finding  at
    paragraph 25 that she had not  established  she  was  married,  appears
    inconsistent with the finding that she was  either  still  married  but
    returning with a child out of wedlock or a single woman who had had  an
    illegitimate child at paragraph 27.  In any event, in my judgement, the
    reasoning of the Judge for her findings at paragraph 27  that  she  was
    either a woman who was still married but now returning with a child out
    of wedlock or still a single woman who had had an  illegitimate  child,
    has not been either adequately or sufficiently  explained.   The  Judge
    has simply made a bald finding in that regard, but has  not  given  any
    clear or adequate reasons for finding that either she was still married
    but returning with a child out of wedlock or  that  she  was  a  single
    woman who had had an illegitimate child.  The fact that the  Claimant's
    account of being trafficked had been rejected, did not in  itself  mean
    that her child was born out of wedlock or that she was single  with  an
    illegitimate  child.   Although  the  Claimant  sought  to  rely   upon
    paragraph 17 of the decision where the Judge stated  that  it  was  not
    implausible or incredible that the Claimant would  be  unaware  of  the
    adverse intentions of 'A' and that this  would  not  have  simply  been
    apparent just because he was a friend of her friend's boyfriend  as  if
    he was as she claims sufficiently devious to deceive her then he  could
    deceive others as to his true intentions, was not a  finding  that  she
    had been deceived by 'A', and further, the findings from the Judge that
    she did not accept that there was any substance in the assertion by the
    Secretary of State that  the  Claimant's  clients  used  contraceptives
    meant that she could not get pregnant within the first month  since  it
    was accepted that  contraception  was  not  a  100%  guarantee  against
    pregnancy, again was not an acceptance by the Judge that she had become
    pregnant having been trafficked and worked as a prostitute.

15. Although the Judge, as she quite properly had to do, had considered the
    factors both in favour and against the  Claimant's  credibility,  quite
    clearly come down, after considering  all  the  evidence,  against  the
    Claimant  as  being  someone  who  had  been  trafficked.   She   found
    specifically that she had not established that she had been induced  to
    leave Albania and sold into prostitution  and  had  found  specifically
    that she was not a victim  of  trafficking.   However,  the  Judge  has
    failed  to  explain  adequately,  her  reasoning  as  to  why  in  that
    circumstance, this would mean that the Claimant's child was born out of
    wedlock either to someone who was still married or that  she  would  be
    single woman who had had an illegitimate child.  The Judge's  reasoning
    in paragraph 77 is just not apparent.  It  does  not  necessarily  flow
    that the rejection of the trafficking claim in itself  means  that  she
    was not in fact married or had had a child out of wedlock.  I find that
    the Judge's failing in regards to  explaining  her  reasoning  in  this
    regard, is a material error of law.

16. Further, I find that in respect of the Judge's findings at paragraph 28
    that "I find that in coming from a religious Muslim family that she  is
    highly unlikely to be given support by them or other  relatives"  again
    has not been adequately explained.  It does not  appear  to  have  been
    accepted by the Secretary of State that the Claimant had  come  from  a
    religious family, and in the absence of an acceptance of that fact, the
    Judge should have given adequate and sufficient reasons for her finding
    that the Claimant had come  from  a  religious  Muslim  family  and  in
    particular in respect of her findings  that  the  Claimant  was  highly
    unlikely to be given support by them or her other relatives.  There  is
    no reason put forward by the Judge as to why that was going to  be  the
    case.  Although Miss Reid seeks to rely upon the  Country  Guidance  in
    that regard, she rightly concedes that each case will turn on  its  own
    facts, and that even if in a religious Muslim  family,  that  may  mean
    that someone would be unlikely to be given support, as suggested by the
    Claimant, the Judge has not said that she has based her reasoning  upon
    the Country Guidance and  has  given  no  reasons  for  coming  to  the
    conclusion that she did that the Claimant both  was  from  a  religious
    Muslim family and that she was highly unlikely to be given  support  by
    them or by her other relatives.  The Judge's reasoning in  that  regard
    is wholly unclear as to the basis for the findings,  and  the  lack  of
    adequate and sufficient reasons  in  this  regard  also  amounts  to  a
    material error of law.

17. Further, I find that at paragraph 34, although the Judge found that  "I
    find that this indicates that there are real and  serious  difficulties
    that the Appellant will face upon return.  I find that  this  indicates
    that this is a real likelihood that she will be pursued and  persecuted
    by her family members  and  other  non-state  actors  without  adequate
    protection from the state upon her return", I do find  that  the  Judge
    has not explained there who the "other non-state actors" might  be  who
    would be pursuing  and  persecuting  her.   This  again  has  not  been
    adequately and sufficiently explained.

18. I therefore do find that the Learned Judge has on this occasion,  sadly
    erred in not adequately explaining her reasoning by  finding  that  the
    Claimant either is a woman who is still married but now returning  with
    a child born out of wedlock or that she is a single woman who  had  had
    an illegitimate child at paragraph 27, and for her  findings  that  the
    Claimant came from a religious Muslim family and  that  she  is  highly
    unlikely to be given support them or other relatives  at  paragraph  28
    and that in addition to being pursued  and  persecuted  by  her  family
    members, there would be other non-state actors who would be wishing  to
    persecute or pursue her at paragraph 34.  The Judge's lack of  adequate
    and sufficient reasoning in this regard, means that the  decision  does
    contain material errors of law, and in  such  circumstances  I  do  set
    aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk.   As  was  agreed
    between the parties, given that credibility is in issue, I do find that
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk should be set  aside  in
    its entirety, with no preserved findings of fact and  that  the  matter
    should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  as  a
    hearing de novo, before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Birk.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk does contain material  errors
of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing  as  a
hearing de novo, before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Birk.

The Claimant is granted anonymity in this case.  The  Claimant  was  granted
anonymity in the First-tier Tribunal, and given the  nature  of  the  issues
raised, it is appropriate for the Claimant to be still granted anonymity  in
the Upper  Tribunal.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  Court  otherwise
directs, the Claimant is thereby granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.  This direction applies both to the Claimant and  to  the  Secretary
of State.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  contempt  of
Court proceedings.



Signed

R. F. McGinty

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty Dated 14th October 2016
