
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01744/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th July 2019                     |On 12th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                                     and
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     HF
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. I Palmer, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Although no application is made before us,  the  appeal  concerns  a
       claim for asylum and international protection and in our  judgement,
       it is appropriate for an anonymity order to be made under Rule 14 of
       the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  HF  is  granted
       anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.  No   report   of   these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.    This
       direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
       being brought for contempt of court.


    2. It is common ground between the parties that  the  appellant  is  an
       Iraqi national, of Kurdish ethnicity, and that he is from Khanaquin.
        Mr Palmer informed us that Khanaquin is within the Diyala region, a
       contested area outside the IKR. The appellant first left Iraq in  or
       about August 2006 and having travelled through a number of  European
       countries, he first arrived in the United Kingdom in  May  2008.  On
       23rd July 2008 the appellant claimed asylum.   Checks  completed  by
       the respondent revealed that the appellant  had  previously  claimed
       asylum in Germany and in March 2009, he was removed to Germany.  The
       appellant claims that he returned to Iraq, from Germany, in December
       2009.  He claims that he left Iraq again on 15th April 2016, and  on
       the 9th June 2016, he again claimed asylum in the UK. His claim  was
       refused by the respondent for the reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
       dated 6th February 2019. The appellant's appeal against that refusal
       was heard by FtT Judge Lucas, and dismissed for the reasons set  out
       in a decision promulgated on 16 April 2019. It is that decision that
       is the subject of the appeal before us.


 The decision of FtT Judge Lucas


    3. The appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraphs [3] and
       [4] of the decision.  A summary of the claim made by  the  appellant
       regarding events in Iraq following his return to  Iraq  in  December
       2009, is set out at paragraph [6] of  the  decision.  The  appellant
       claims:


             "... He met someone called [GA] in June 2015 and that she gave
             him her mobile number. The  relationship  progressed  and  she
             continued to visit him in his shop. He then proposed to her in
             April 2016 (or December 2015). Her father objected because the
             appellant is Sunni and the family were Shia. He stated that he
             was threatened after the first proposal.  He  made  a  further
             proposal  in  February  2016  but  this  was  again  rejected.
             However, he maintained contact with [GA] and met  her  on  3rd
             April 2016 but they were spotted by a cousin who informed  her
             father. On the 10th April 2016, the father and cousin came  to
             the appellant's barber shop to beat him up and they  took  his
             phone. The appellant stated that he is in  fear  of  his  life
             because there were intimate photographs of the couple  kissing
             on his phone."


    4. At paragraphs [13] to [24] of the decision, the FtT Judge  sets  out
       the evidence before the Tribunal. The Judge noted the claim  by  the
       appellant that he cannot relocate within the KRG because it  is  not
       far from his home, and he would be found. The Judge also  noted  the
       claim that the appellant does not have an Iraqi passport or  a  CSID
       document, and noted that the appellant attended the Iraqi Embassy on
       19th March 2019 with Mr Saeed, but was told he would not be eligible
       for a passport without Iraqi identity documents. The  Judge  refers,
       at [17], to the online application to  the  Iraqi  Embassy  and  the
       short witness statement from Mr Saeed that was before the Tribunal.


    5. The findings and conclusions of the Judge are set out at  paragraphs
       [29] to [49] of the decision.  The Judge found the  "..Appellant  is
       far from a reliable or plausible witness.".   The  Judge  noted,  at
       [32] and [43], that there is no evidence of the appellant's presence
       in Iraq between  2009  and  2016,  his  entry  or  exit.  The  Judge
       considered that having previously left Iraq and having made a  claim
       for asylum, including a claim in Germany, it would have been "an odd
       thing for him to do", to return to Iraq following his  removal  from
       the UK to Germany. The Judge  noted,  at  [32],  that  there  is  no
       explanation why the appellant did not simply remain in  Germany,  or
       indeed claim asylum in any other country on his way back to Iraq.


    6. In any event, the FtT Judge rejected the appellant's account of  the
       events that he claimed occurred, when he  returned.   At  paragraphs
       [39] and [40] the Judge states:


             "39. The appellant made an asylum claim in 2006 on  the  basis
             that he was wanted by a gang in Iraq.  That claim has now been
             abandoned and he has now concocted another claim based on  his
             proposal to the daughter of a strict Muslim family.


             40.  This claim is quite clearly a  concoction.  There  is  no
             evidence to show that he was ever actually within Iraq at  the
             time in question. There is no evidence that  he  worked  in  a
             barber shop."


    7. The Judge rejected the appellant's account that he is  undocumented,
       as being without foundation and simply opportunistic.  At paragraphs
       [35] and [36] of the decision, the FtT Judge states:


             "35. ... the appellant is not a credible witness and  has  now
             launched an asylum claim, in  part,  to  try  to  fit  himself
             within the recent authority of  AAH.  The  Tribunal  does  not
             accept that he neither has identity documents nor  could  have
             obtained them. If he is correct, he was able  to  re-enter  in
             Iraq from Germany in 2007 (sic) without difficulty.


             36.  He states that he worked in Iraq  and  has  maternal  and
             paternal family there. He undoubtably also had family friends,
             schoolfriends and a variety of  locals  who  used  his  barber
             shop. Yet, he has no contact with any of them. He has produced
             no evidence from any independent source to show of any attempt
             that he has made to contact  any  of  the  above  individuals.
             There was nothing from the Red Cross or even his  own  efforts
             to make contact with the numerous individuals who knew him, or
             had contact with him in Iraq.


    8. At paragraph [38], the FtT Judge concluded as follows:


             "It is  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  is  or  would  be
             undocumented. This aspect of his claim has quite clearly  been
             manufactured in order to lend - or attempt to lend -  credence
             to claim that is otherwise lacking in plausibility."


    9. The FtT Judge concluded, at [49], that it is not accepted  that  the
       appellant is either without identity documents or could  not  access
       them if he wishes to.


 The appeal before the Upper Tribunal


   10.   The appellant advances three grounds of  appeal.  First,  the  FtT
       Judge has embarked on a substantially  different  case  theory  than
       that put by the respondent. Second, the FtT  Judge  failed  to  take
       matters into  account  and  made  adverse  credibility  findings  on
       matters that were never challenge.  Third, the  FtT  Judge  has  not
       properly applied the country guidance set out in AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -
       internal relocation) (CG) [2018] UKUT 212.


   11. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge  Hollingworth  on  17th
       May 2019.  The matter  comes  before  us  to  determine  whether  the
       decision of the FtT Judge contains a material error of  law,  and  if
       so, the remake the decision.


   12. At the hearing before us, Mr Palmer informed the Tribunal  that  the
       appellant had that morning provided him  with  two  documents,  both
       written in German, that provide strong prima facie evidence that the
       appellant did in fact return to Iraq following his removal from  the
       UK to Germany. One of the documents was said  to  emanate  from  the
       International Organisation for Migration ("IOM"),  and  the  second,
       was  said  to  be  from  the  German  authorities  responsible   for
       immigration matters.  The documents are said to pre-date the hearing
       before the FtT,  and  Mr  Palmer  informed  the  Tribunal  that  the
       appellant  claims  that  the  documents  had  been  brought  to  the
       attention of the caseworker dealing with the matter on  his  behalf,
       but for reasons that remain unexplained, they were not  relied  upon
       and brought to the attention of the FtT Judge at the hearing of  the
       appeal.


   13. We declined to admit the documents.  The appellant  was  represented
       at the hearing of his appeal before the FtT.  The Grounds of  Appeal
       to the Upper Tribunal were settled by Counsel, who we note, appeared
       before the FtT.  There is no reference to any such documents,  which
       would have been crucial to the core of the appellant's claim, having
       been available.  Furthermore, directions were issued  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal on 17th June 2019, and surprisingly if it is  correct  that
       the  appellant  brought  the  documents  to  the  attention  of  his
       representatives,  no  Rule  15(2A)   application   has   been   made
       identifying the nature of any further evidence to  be  adduced,  and
       explaining why it was not submitted to the FtT.


   14. Mr. Palmer adopted the grounds of appeal.  Rightly in our judgement,
       Mr. Palmer acknowledges that  the  first  ground  of  appeal  cannot
       succeed, if  we  accept  that  the  respondent  had  challenged  the
       appellant's claim regarding his return to Iraq following his removal
       from the UK  in  2009.   We  have  carefully  read  the  respondents
       decision of 6th February 2019.  Having set out the account of events
       relied upon by the appellant, at paragraph [45] of the decision, the
       respondent accepts the appellant is an Iraqi  national,  of  Kurdish
       ethnicity and that he is from Khanaquin.  The  respondent  does  not
       accept any other aspect of the  claim  and  paragraph  [46]  of  the
       decision,  expressly  states  that  the   respondent   rejects   the
       appellant's account of the problems he  faced  in  Iraq,  due  to  a
       relationship.  Although  we  accept  that  the  respondent  did  not
       expressly reject the appellant's claim that he had returned to  Iraq
       following  his  removal  to  Germany  in  terms,  neither  did   the
       respondent accept that he had.  In the absence of express acceptance
       of that claim by the respondent, it must have been apparent  to  the
       appellant and his representatives from the limited  concession  made
       by the respondent at paragraph [45] of the decision, that it was for
       the appellant to establish that he had returned to Iraq, and is  now
       at risk upon return because of events that had  occurred,  after  he
       had returned.


   15. The grounds of appeal acknowledge that  the  focus  of  the  hearing
       before the FtT Judge was upon the appellant's claim as to  what  had
       happened to him in Iraq between his return there, and his subsequent
       departure in 2016.  The Judge has not created his own  case  theory,
       but has considered the credibility of the claim being  made  by  the
       appellant, who was aware that his claim had  been  rejected  by  the
       respondent. The adverse credibility findings made by the Judge  were
       open to the Judge, and cannot be said to be perverse, irrational  or
       unreasonable, or  findings  that  were  wholly  unsupported  by  the
       evidence.  The Judge had the benefit of hearing from the  appellant,
       and of having his evidence tested in cross examination.  It was  for
       the appellant to establish that there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
       likelihood that he faces a risk upon return,  and  it  was  for  the
       Judge to make his findings on  whether,  and  to  what  extent,  the
       appellant's account is credible. The  appellant's  first  ground  of
       appeal  amounts,  in  our  judgement,  to  nothing   more   than   a
       disagreement with findings that were properly open to the Judge.


   16. As to the second ground of appeal, Mr. Palmer submits that  the  FtT
       Judge  gives  insufficient  reasons  for  reaching   those   adverse
       credibility  findings.   We  are  satisfied  that  having  carefully
       considered the appellant's evidence and the  evidence  of  Mr  Saeed
       relied upon by the appellant, it was open to the Judge to reach  the
       conclusion  that  the  account  advanced  by  the  appellant  is   a
       fabrication to support an asylum claim.  The Judge has set out, with
       reasons, how and why he arrived at the decision that  the  appellant
       is not at risk upon return to Iraq.   In  our  judgment,  a  careful
       reading of the decision of the FtT Judge establishes  that  the  FtT
       Judge reached his overall findings by reference to a combination  of
       factors including  a  lack  of  detail  or  sufficient  explanation,
       inconsistencies in the evidence, and matters that  appeared  to  the
       Judge, to be implausible. The decision of the  Judge  is  not  based
       simply upon implausibility's in the account that  was  proffered  by
       the appellant.  The Judge did not consider irrelevant  factors,  and
       the weight that he attached to the evidence was a matter for him.


   17. We also reject the claim that the FtT Judge failed to properly  apply
       the country guidance.  The appellant is from Khanaquin  and  it  does
       not appear to be in issue that Khanaquin  is  in  a  contested  area.
       Although the appellant may not be able to return to Khanaquin,  there
       remains the issue of internal relocation to the IKR.  The  FtT  Judge
       did not accept the appellant's claim that he does not  have  identity
       documents, and also rejected his claim that he could not obtain them.
       The FtT Judge clearly had regard  to  the  application  made  by  the
       appellant to the Iraqi Embassy and the supporting statement  from  Mr
       Saeed.  They are referred to at paragraphs [17] of the  decision  and
       [37] of the decision.  We reject the claim that the Judge's  finding,
       at [37], that the  appellant's  lack  of  documentation  is  "without
       foundation", is illogical.


   18. The appellant claims that his father has disowned  him  for  bringing
       shame onto the family because of his relationship with [GA]. We  note
       from counsel's note of the evidence given by  the  appellant  at  the
       hearing of his appeal, that he claimed that he  has  been  unable  to
       speak to his mother because the line is no longer active, and that he
       has not spoken to his father  since  2016,  because  his  father  has
       disowned him.   It is to be noted that the FtT Judge rejected at  the
       appellant's account of the events, arising from his relationship with
       [GA], and found his claim to be a "concoction".


   19. In  rejecting  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  is,  or  would  be,
       undocumented, it was in our judgement open to the FtT Judge  to  note
       that the appellant has produced  no  evidence  from  any  independent
       source to show any attempts made to contact any  of  his  family  and
       friends, or the Red Cross.  In fact, as Mr  Palmer  accepts,  in  his
       screening interview, the appellant  acknowledged,  (Q.6.3),  that  he
       will be able to obtain his nationality certificate.


   20. We also note that in  the  substantive  interview  completed  on  6th
       February 2018, the  appellant  stated  (Q.26)  that  he  has  a  good
       relationship with his family, and, (Q29 -33)  that  he  had  been  in
       touch with his mother  about  a  month  before  the  interview.   The
       appellant repeated during that interview, (Q.35) that he has an Iraqi
       ID card in Iraq that he could ask for.  In view  of  the  appellant's
       own evidence in his interviews as to the availability  of  his  CSID,
       although the Judge did not expressly refer to the  answers  given  in
       interview, that failure was not material.


   21. The appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish origin, and  the  issue
       for the Tribunal Judge was whether the  appellant  has  originals  or
       copies of his Civil Status ID ("CSID"), or will  be  able  to  obtain
       one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.


   22. It was in our judgement  open  to  the  FtT  to  conclude  that  the
       appellant has access to his CSID and has fabricated this part of his
       claim, in an attempt to present an obstacle to his return  to  Iraq.
       Even on the lower standard of proof, the  appellant  has  failed  to
       establish that he does not have the CSID or that  he  would  not  be
       able to obtain his original identity documents from family.  He  was
       confident that that could be achieved, on the two occasions when  he
       was interviewed  by  the  respondent.   At  paragraph  [34]  of  the
       decision,  the  Judge  found  that  in  a  broader  context,  it  is
       implausible that the appellant who has spent time  in  a  number  of
       different European countries and who has a number of aliases,  would
       not have the wherewithal or ability  to  obtain  an  Iraqi  identity
       card.


   23.   The Tribunal confirmed in  AAH  that  for  an  Iraqi  national  of
       Kurdish origin in possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport,  the
       journey from Baghdad  to  the  IKR,  whether  by  air  or  land,  is
       affordable and practical, and can be made without a real risk of the
       individual suffering persecution, or serious harm.  It  was  in  our
       judgement, open to the FtT Judge to conclude that the appellant does
       have  access  to  his  identity  documents  and   could   therefore,
       internally relocate, without being at risk on return.


   24. In our judgment, the grounds advanced by  the  appellant  amount  to
       mere disagreements with the reasoning of the FtT Judge, and a  claim
       that the Judge failed to consider each facet of the evidence, to the
       extent desired by the appellant. The obligation on a FtT Judge is to
       give reasons in sufficient detail to show the  principles  on  which
       the Tribunal has acted,  and  the  reasons  that  have  led  to  the
       decision.  Such reasons need not be elaborate, and do  not  need  to
       address  every  argument  or  every  factor  which  weighed  in  the
       decision.  It  is  sufficient  that  the  critical  reasons  to  the
       decision,  are  recorded.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  FtT  Judge
       considered the evidence, and reached conclusions that were  open  to
       the Judge.


 NOTICE OF DECISION


   25. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of FtT  Judge  Lucas  shall
       stand.


Signed                                  Date          8th July 2019


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD


We have dismissed the appeal, but in  any  event,  as  no  fee  is  paid  or
payable, there can be no fee award


Signed                                  Date          8th July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
