
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA013312017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 10 May 2017                      |On: 23 May 2017                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                    [M G]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast born  on  [  ]  1963.  He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 24  January  2017
    to refuse to grant the appellant asylum and humanitarian protection  in
    the United Kingdom. The appellant  appealed  against  the  respondent's
    decisions Anne's appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  MA
    Khan following a hearing at Hatton Cross.  The appellant's  application
    for leave to appeal was granted by first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler,
    stating that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal's Judge erred
    by not giving adequate reasons for his adverse credibility findings and
    making clear findings and failing to take material facts  into  account
    and possibly making a mistake of fact, at paragraph 12  and  failed  to
    take into account the documentary evidence mentioned at paragraph 10.

    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision

 2. The Judge in his determination stated the following which I  summarise.
    The core of the appellant's case is based on his fear of persecution in
    the Ivory Coast. He claims that he was the president of the  union  and
    also a member of the IPF  political  party.  He  also  claims  to  have
    financially supported the student's  organisation.  The  appellant  was
    into the United Kingdom on 15  February  2016  to  purchase  items  and
    returned to the Ivory Coast. Within five days because his son fell ill.
    On his return. He claims he was arrested by the  authorities,  detained
    and tortured. He was released on 21 February 2016 to attend  his  son's
    funeral on 22 February 2016. He claims he did not  return  home  for  a
    month because he was under pressure from  the  military  as  they  were
    calling him on his mobile threatening to kill  him.  He  was  arrested,
    beaten and tortured and  then  taken  to  a  medical  clinic  where  he
    escaped. He left the country forged French passport.

 3. There are a number of credibility issues  against  the  appellant  with
    regards to the student's organisation  FESCI  which  are  inconsistent.
    This is as to when to members of the  FESCI  came  to  his  house.  The
    appellant's evidence about his first arrest and release  and  also  his
    second arrest and escape are not credible.

 4. At the hearing the appellant's oral evidence was  extremely  vague  and
    evasive. He  failed  to  answer  the  questions  put  to  him  even  in
    examination in chief, let alone in cross-examination. His  evidence  in
    regards to the aims and objectives of the IPF are  totally  lacking  in
    detail. His evidence that members of the party manage the party and are
    the brain of the party lacks credibility. He failed to explain how  the
    members organise themselves elect officer bearers and how the party  is
    managed. The appellant hardly knows anything about the running  of  the
    IPF, despite him claiming to be a member and vice secretary general  of
    the Koumanssi area in 2001 and the mobilisation secretary  since  2007.
    The appellant's evidence  about  the  membership  of  the  IPF  is  not
    credible or consistent and lacks total credibility.

 5. The appellant's arrest on 20 February 2016 and release on  21  February
    2016 is not credible.

 6. It is also not credible that the appellant claims to be a member of the
    IPF would help the FESCI,  an  organisation  that  is  set  up  by  the
    government of Ivory Coast, even though  the  appellant  may  have  some
    personal  contacts  in  the  FESCI.   The   appellant's   evidence   is
    inconsistent with background materials.

 7. The appellant claims that he was arrested for the second time in 12 May
    2016 and tortured by the military during his detention for two  months.
    He claims that he managed to escape through the back entrance where the
    toilet was not credible.

 8. The appellant claims that he came to the  United  Kingdom  in  February
    2016, but returned to the Ivory Coast within five days  of  this  entry
    because he claims his son fell ill and died on 18 February 2016. On his
    oral evidence. He said that he arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  15
    February 2016. In his written statement, he  states  that  he  returned
    after five days after he entered the United  Kingdom  which  means,  he
    returned on 20 February 2016, which would mean that his son had already
    died before he left the United Kingdom. In his screening interview  the
    appellant made no mention of his son's illness. The  appellant  is  not
    inconsistent.

 9. The appellant claims that  he  first  met  the  witness,  Mr  Bagou  in
    November 2016 and after two interviews. He was  appointed  mobilisation
    secretary of the IPF in the United Kingdom. His evidence,  however,  is
    that he first met the appellant in  May  2016  and  this  is  when  the
    appellant would have still been in the Ivory Coast. When it was put  to
    him that in May 2016. The appellant was still in the  Ivory  Coast;  he
    became vague and evasive and said he was not sure.

10. The appellant had a very vague explanation of the aims  and  objectives
    of the IPF. Mr Bago in his evidence stated that any member of  the  IPF
    would be able to give detail account of the aims and objectives of  the
    party.  Mr  Bago's  evidence  with  regards  to  membership  cards  was
    extremely vague and evasive.

11. The appellant travelled through France on a false passport and did  not
    claim asylum in that country. His credibility is seriously  damaged  by
    his failure to do so.

12. There is no risk of return to the  appellant  because  his  version  of
    events is not accepted. His family are still in  the  Ivory  Coast  and
    have not been questioned about the appellant's whereabouts and, if  the
    authorities were looking for the appellant they would  have  approached
    his family, which they did not. The  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

    The grounds of appeal

13. The appellant in his grounds of appeal stated  the  following  which  I
    summarise. The Judge has made many typographical and grammatical errors
    which renders  the  reasons  incomprehensible.  The  Judge  put  vague,
    evasive and confusing throughout the decision but it is not clear  what
    exactly was vague, confusing in  the  evidence.  The  Judge  failed  to
    consider the key documents and evidence which support  the  appellant's
    claim. The Judge has failed to explain why these documents and evidence
    are not relevant or carry little weight. Therefore,  it  is  not  clear
    whether they have even been considered.

14. The Judge made a material error of fact by finding that the  government
    supports the FESCI which is not supported by Background  evidence.  The
    Judge found the entire account incredible  but  yet  his  work  as  the
    leader of the trade union is not disputed.







    Rule 24 response

15. The respondent in  her  Rule  24  response  stated  the  following,  in
    summary. The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal and submits that
    the  Judge  directed  himself   appropriately.   In   a   comprehensive
    determination,  the  Judge  considered  all  the  evidence   presented,
    including oral evidence of the appellant and his witness,  Mr  Bago  of
    the IPF  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Judge  found  the  appellant's
    knowledge of the IPF to be lacking, particularly as  the  aims  of  the
    organisation. The appellant and Mr by Val gave discrepant evidence.  He
    also considers Article 8 of the 2004  Act  and  found  the  appellant's
    credibility to be damaged. The Judge's findings were open to him on the
    evidence and there is no material error of law in the decision.

    Discussion and decision as to whether there is an error of law

16. I have considered the first-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  with  care.
    Permission was granted on the basis that the Judge did not  give  clear
    reasons for his decision and that it is not  clear  from  the  decision
    whether he took into account all the evidence,  including  the  copious
    documentary evidence. At  the  hearing,  Ms  Child  that  there  is  no
    reference  documentary  evidence  provided,  of  which  there   was   a
    considerable amount, at the hearing.

17. Having considered the decision, I am of the view that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is not a safe one. It is incumbent on the Judge
    to take into account all the evidence in the appeal, not only the  oral
    evidence. it is also not  a  contest  between  the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State, but an evaluation of the evidence as to whether the
    appellant can be believed and that his account is credible.  Therefore,
    the fact finding must be based on all the evidence in the appeal.

18. It  is  also  incumbent  on  the  Judge  to  set  out  the  appellant's
    explanation to any issue raised before reaching a finding on the issue.
    The Judge has failed to take into account the  appellant's  explanation
    before reaching his conclusion.

19. The Judge made a material error of fact by finding that the Ivory Coast
    government supports the FESCI which was  not  supported  by  background
    evidence.

20. Failure to take documentary evidence into account is in  itself  reason
    enough to find that there is a material error of law in the decision.

21. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision and I remit this  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for proper findings fact to be made based on
    all the evidence in the appeal.

    Appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal


Signed by   Date this 18th day of May 2017

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana
