
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01764/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 July 2016                        |On 15 August 2016                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Shaw, Counsel instructed by Corbin & Hassan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of China.   On  30
    September 2015 the appellant (hereafter the SSHD) made  a  decision  to
    remove him.  The claimant's subsequent appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) Judge Greasley who on 25 May 2016 allowed his appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

2.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal are essentially threefold.  First  it  was
    alleged that the judge had failed  to  consider  the  Article  8  claim
    through  the  prism  of  the  Rules  and  had  not  anywhere  shown  an
    understanding  that  the  relevant   test   was   one   of   compelling
    circumstances.  Second, it was submitted that the judge failed to apply
    correctly the consideration set  out  in  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 concerning  the  attachment  of  little
    weight to relationships developed whilst a person's immigration  status
    is precarious.  Third, the SSHD argued that the FtT judge had failed to
    engage with case law principles on the best interests of the child.

3.   I am indebted to Ms Ahmed and Mrs Shaw for their submissions.

4.   I am satisfied that the judge materially  erred  in  law.   First,  the
    judge wholly failed to show that he had applied  established  case  law
    principles.  Despite noting  at  [54]  that  the  appellant  could  not
    succeed under the eligibility criteria set out within Appendix FM,  the
    judge nowhere identified the relevance of this failure to the issue  of
    the weight to be attached to the  public  interest.   Neither  did  the
    judge anywhere show an understanding that what  the  appellant  had  to
    show was the existence of compelling or exceptional circumstances.

5.   Second, the judge's treatment of the matter of the  immigration  status
    of the claimant, his wife and daughter betrays legal  error.   For  one
    thing the first sentence [60]: "although the above provisions  indicate
    that little weight should be given to the private life  interests  when
    immigration status is precarious, this does not  mean  that  no  weight
    should be given" appears to state that because little weight is not the
    same as no weight this serves as a justification for  him going  on  to
    give great weight to the claimant's private life.

6.   However, for another thing the judge  appears  to  have  attached  very
    significant weight to the fact that the claimant's  wife  and  children
    have been granted DL until March 2017 and  "I  have  not  received  any
    evidence, and nor has any formal indication  been  given,  which  might
    suggest that such DL would not continue  beyond  March  2017".   It  is
    difficult to see how DL is a status which for the  purposes  of  s.117B
    must be considered as precarious: see AM (s.117b)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT
    0260 (IAC).

7.    Mrs Shaw sought  valiantly  to  persuade  me  that  it  was   entirely
    rational assumption for the judge to attach signficant weight to the DL
    because from September 2016 the couple's oldest child would  have  been
    in the UK seven years and so the claimant  would  have  a  fresh  legal
    basis of stay under the Immigration Rules and  s.117B(6).   Ms  Ahmed's
    response  was  to  point  out  that  both  under  s.117B(6)   and   the
    corresponding Immigration Rule, there is a requirement that in addition
    to there being a "qualifying child" "it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.  It was not established, submitted Ms
    Ahmed, that  the  claimant  would  be  able  to  succeed  under  either
    provision.  For Mrs Shaw this was not a strong point because the  judge
    had accepted that the children could not be returned to  China  because
    it was recorded at [28] that:
         "The appellant stated he illegally departed  China  in  2000  which
         meant that he would be imprisoned if  returned.   He  was  also  in
         breach of the family planning policy  in  China  as  he  had  three
         children and he would not  be  able  to  add  them  to  the  family
         household register which would prevent them from attending school."

    However at [42]-[43] the  judge  rejected  the  claimant's  asylum  and
    Article 3 claims based on China's family planning policy.

8.   This brings me to the third reason  I  have  for  concluding  that  the
    judge materially erred in law.  It is clear from established  case  law
    principles that assessment of the best interests of the child  requires
    a balancing exercise taking into account not just the situation of  the
    children in the UK but the likely circumstances the child would face if
    returned with the parent or parents.  The FtT judge failed to  deal  at
    all with the latter scenario.  I  do  not  consider  that  the  factors
    identified by the judge at [57] establish a  proper  balancing  of  the
    relevant factors.  For example there is no reference to the  children's
    cultural  or  linguistic  ties  with  China  or  the  likely  schooling
    situation they would face on return.

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law.  I was asked by Mrs Shaw to consider (if I found a material  error
    of law) remitting the case to the FtT.  Ms  Ahmed  submitted  the  case
    could be retained in the Upper Tribunal.  On reflection, I have decided
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal as it seems to me that the
    failure of the judges to connect  together  in  any  rational  way  the
    negative findings on the asylum and  Article  3  and  the  findings  on
    Article 8 (and the best interests of the child)  effectively  mean  the
    case will need to be heard afresh on all grounds.  It also seems to  me
    that notwithstanding the SSHD's decision to grant DL to the  claimant's
    wife and children, there remain serious  questions  about  whether  the
    claimant and his wife have both given a candid account of their  family
    circumstances before they came to the  UK.   In  any  event,  it  seems
    necessary that the First-tier Tribunal look  afresh  at  the  evidence,
    with particular focus on whether the claimant  and  his  wife  and  two
    children, P and K, would be able to reintegrate in China  without  very
    significant obstacles.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal judge materially erred in law and  his  decision  is
set aside.

The case is remitted to be heard by the FtT not before Judge Greasley.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 8 August 2016
               [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
