
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01267/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2019                           |On 21 November 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                   MS A A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by Arshed & Co
Solicitors,
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this decision is a subject of an anonymity order (see  below),
    and the name of the appellant and the full name  of  her  son  are  not
    given, it is necessary because of the issues  arising  the  appeal,  to
    name one person, being the appellant's alleged former  partner.

2.   This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal D S Borsada  dated  14  June  2019  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  22
    January 2019 refusing  the  Appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
    claim.

3.   The Appellant is a national of  Pakistan  and  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 11January 2012 on a Tier  4  (General)  Student  visa.   Her
    leave to enter as a student was curtailed on 18 August 2012  so  as  to
    expire on 17 October 2012, for reasons which are not material  to  this
    appeal. It is apparent that the Appellant  did  not  leave  the  United
    Kingdom upon her leave to remain expiring.  Her account  is  that  upon
    arriving in the United Kingdom she was introduced to a man of Pakistani
    origin named Raja Faysal Rahman ('RFR') through a friend.  RFR and  the
    Appellant were said to have become friends and ultimately  commenced  a
    relationship with one another.

4.   The Appellant remained in the United Kingdom within  this  relationship
    as an overstayer.  In March 2015 the Appellant discovered that she  had
    become pregnant.  It is said that upon her informing her family members
    in Pakistan of this pregnancy outside of  marriage  her  mother  became
    angry and the reaction of the male  members  of  her  family  was  more
    extreme.  It  was  said  that  the  Appellant's  brother  had  directly
    threatened her life on the telephone and it  was  also  said  that  the
    Appellant's sister had informed the Appellant that the male members  of
    the family intended to kill the Appellant upon her return to  Pakistan.
    It was also said that the Appellant's uncle, being  a  police  officer,
    had influence to avoid any investigation into such an honour killing.

5.   The Appellant gave birth in due course to her son, whose last  name  is
    Rahman, in November 2015.  It is to be noted that the birth certificate
    for that child names the Appellant as the child's mother and names  RFR
    as his father.  The birth certificate states at  section  11  that  the
    informant to the registrar was  the  mother.   It  was  said  that  the
    relationship between the Appellant and RFR deteriorated.  The Appellant
    had hoped that they would marry but RFR did not wish to do so and  felt
    pressured by the Appellant to marry, causing  a  deterioration  in  the
    relationship.  After the relationship broke down it is  said  that  the
    Appellant was threatened with homelessness and was  ultimately  obliged
    to make a claim for protection.

6.   In considering that claim for protection the  Respondent  rejected  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
    decision letter of 22January 2019.   The  Respondent  argued  that  the
    delay between March 2015 and the Appellant claiming asylum in July 2017
    diminished the credibility of her claim to be at risk of  serious  harm
    in Pakistan.  Further, the Respondent  noted  that  the  Appellant  had
    suggested that she had not met RFR  until  after  she  arrived  in  the
    United  Kingdom,  whereas  within  a  previous  application  for  entry
    clearance, prior to her arrival in the UK on  11  January  2012,  there
    were  records  of  email  correspondence  from  one  'Faisal   Rehman',
    requesting that the  visa  application  be  withdrawn.  The  Respondent
    formed the view that this Faisal Rehman and RFR were one and the  same,
    and was the father of  the  Appellant's  child.   That  being  so,  the
    Respondent suggested that the Appellant had known Faisal  Rehman  prior
    to her departure from Pakistan,  diminishing  the  credibility  of  her
    entire account.


7.   The Respondent also noted that both the  Appellant's  and  RFR's  names
    were  recorded  on  the  Appellant's  son's  birth  certificate.    The
    Respondent  asserted,  citing  the  web  address   www.gov.uk/register-
    birth/who-can-register-a-birth as a source, that the  level  of  detail
    contained on the birth certificate could only have been supplied  by  a
    married couple, or if a statutory declaration  of  parentage  had  been
    supplied to the registrar.  It was  asserted  that  no  such  statutory
    declaration had been submitted to the Respondent along with  the  son's
    birth certificate and thus the respondent formed the view that  on  the
    balance of probabilities, the parents of the  child  must  be  married,
    which was contrary to the  Appellant's  account,  and  which  therefore
    undermined her credibility.


8.    The  Respondent  also  argued  that  RFR's  reluctance  to  marry  the
    Appellant was inconsistent with the cultural  traditions  of  Pakistan.
    Further, the Appellant's assertion that her uncle was in the police and
    had influence, and that he had an inclination to harm the Appellant was
    said to be speculative and not supported by evidence.   The  Respondent
    also argued that  there  was  effective  protection  available  to  the
    Appellant by the reasons of the existence of specialised women's police
    stations in Pakistan, and referring to other  country  information  set
    out at [48] to [60] of  the  decision.  Further,  the  Respondent  also
    asserted at [66] to [75] that internal relocation would be available.

9.   The Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decision,  that  appeal
    coming before the judge at the Birmingham  Hearing  Centre  on  31  May
    2019.  The Appellant was represented by Mr Brown who appears before  me
    today.  The judge in summary, agreed with all of the points  raised  by
    the Respondent and dismissed the appeal.  Those findings are set out at
    paragraphs 9 to 13 of the judge's decision.

10.  The Appellant appealed against that decision in grounds dated  26  June
    2019, arguing that the judge erred in law, in summary, as follows:

       i) (a)     The judge had erred in law  on  a  central  and,  it  was
          asserted, determinative issue,  as  to  whether  the  Appellant's
          claim to be an unmarried mother  was  credible.   The  judge  had
          erred in law in appearing to find  that  only  a  married  couple
          could supply the level of detail required  as  contained  in  the
          birth certificate in the present case. The  grounds  quoted  from
          the appellant's evidence in her witness statement:


                       "Mr Rahman and  I  went  to  the  local  registry  to
                  register our son's birth and at the registry  we  provided
                  driving licences as proof of  identification.   I  confirm
                  that  we  were  not  required  to   provide   a   marriage
                  certificate at the registry for registering the  birth  of
                  our son"


              (b)  The grounds assert:


                        "This  information  is  consistent  with  what  most
                  couples who go to register a birth of  child  (sic).   Put
                  simply you do not have to be married to provide the  level
                  of detail that is recorded.  It is perverse to infer  that
                  such details show on balance that the  birth  parents  are
                  married.  This is an impermissible  presumption/assumption
                  to make."


             (c) The grounds then set out at paragraph 7 what  purports  to
             be  a  further  extract  from  the  same  www.gov.uk   website
             regarding registrations of births.  One quoted passage  within
             the Appellant's grounds of appeal provides as follows:


                  "Unmarried Parents


                       The details of both parents can be  included  on  the
                  birth certificate if one of the following happens:


                  .   they sign the birth register together...".


             (d) The grounds aver that: "The evidence above simply does not
             show  that  the  level  of  detail  recorded  on   the   birth
             certificate can only be supplied by a married couple".

      ii) The grounds also argue that the judge had  failed  to  take  into
          account adequately or at all the Appellant's  evidence  that  for
          the reason for the delay in her claiming asylum, which  was  that
          after the original threat the Appellant had remained living  with
          her partner she was not then at risk and there had been no reason
          for her to claim asylum.  She had only  become  vulnerable  after
          her partner had  left  her,  and  the  judge  had  erred  in  his
          approach.

     iii) The Appellant  also  argued  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
          proceeding  on  the  assumption  that  the  name  Faisal   Rehman
          mentioned in the entry clearance application form  was  the  same
          person as RFR the father of the Appellant's child.   The  grounds
          assert that this had simply not been established on the  evidence
          and it was asserted  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been  cross-
          examined at the hearing about these two names  and  whether  they
          were the same person.

      iv) The grounds conclude "the Appellant contends that for  the  above
          reasons the judge's reasons for rejecting the primary claim  that
          the Appellant had a child out of wedlock is unsafe  and  arguably
          such errors infect the subsidiary findings which the judge  makes
          from paragraph 11 of the decision and reasons.

11.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Grant-Hutchison on 16 July 2019 on the basis that  these  grounds  were
    arguable.

     Submissions

12.  On behalf of the Appellant Mr Brown relies on the  grounds  of  appeal,
    and argues that the judge proceeded unfairly by seeking  to  rely  upon
    the  coincidence  of  similar  names  contained  within   documentation
    relating to the Appellant's application for entry clearance before  she
    came to the United Kingdom and the name of  her  partner  who  she  met
    after arriving in the United Kingdom (Ground (iii)).

13.  In relation to the Appellant's first ground of appeal, Mr Brown  argued
    that it was perverse for the judge to treat the Appellant's  and  RFR's
    names appearing on the birth certificate as meaning that they must have
    been married or that the Appellant had provided a statutory declaration
    of parentage. Mr Brown accepted that although the Appellant had set out
    her account of what she said happened at the registry office,  she  did
    not set out in  her  witness  evidence  any  evidence  about  what  she
    understood the correct procedure to be, and  that  no  evidence,  other
    than that contained in the respondent's refusal letter,  and  what  the
    Appellant said had happened, was before the judge as to the process for
    registering a birth.

14.  Rather, Mr Brown sought to rely upon the extract  from  the  government
    website set out in the grounds of appeal. However,  Mr  Brown  accepted
    that this material was not before the judge.

15.  I queried whether the purported reliance on such  new  evidence  should
    be the subject of an application under  Rule  15(2A)  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (no  such  application  had  been
    made) and even if such evidence were now admitted by the Upper Tribunal
    when considering the present appeal, how  the   purported  reliance  on
    such evidence, on appeal, necessarily demonstrated an error of  law  on
    the part of the judge, proceeding on the basis  of  evidence  available
    before him.

16.  Rather, as I pointed out to both parties, the appellant's point  within
    the grounds of appeal is more properly  made  not  by  reference  to  a
    summary of the registration procedure contained in a  website,  but  by
    reference to the law, that being the Births and Deaths Registration Act
    1953, as amended, relevant extracts of which I provided to the parties.
    The Act provides at Section 10 as follows:

         "10.     Registration of father where parents  not  married  or  of
             second female  parent  where  parents  not  married  or  civil
             partners


             (1)  Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing  provisions  of
                  this Act, and subject to Section 10ZA of this Act, in  the
                  case of a child whose father and mother were  not  married
                  to each other at the time of his birth, no person shall as
                  father of  the  child  be  required  to  give  information
                  concerning the birth of the child, and the registrar shall
                  not enter in the register the name of any  person  as  the
                  father of the child except -


                  (a)  at the joint request of the  mother  and  the  person
                      stating himself to be the father  of  the  child  (in
                      which  case  that  person  shall  sign  the  register
                      together with the mother); or ...".

17.  I gave permission for the appellant to vary her grounds  of  appeal  on
    this ground from a challenge on grounds of perversity, to  a  challenge
    on grounds of misdirection  in  law.  I  heard  submissions  from  both
    parties as to the application of those provisions. Mr Brown relied upon
    the provision within s.10(1)(a) of the Act which  he  stated  confirmed
    that a joint request of the mother and  father  for  the  name  of  the
    father to be recorded as the father of a child is  permitted,  assuming
    the father is present at the  time  of  that  request,  which  was  the
    appellant's account. Thus, Mr Brown argued that the judge had proceeded
    under a misapprehension as to the law. Mr Brown  argued,   echoing  the
    penultimate paragraph in the grounds of  appeal,  that  the  where  the
    judge's reasons for rejecting the primary claim that the appellant  had
    had a child out of wedlock were unsafe, arguably such  errors  infected
    the subsidiary findings which the judge makes paragraph 11  onwards  in
    the decision.

18.  Mrs Aboni argued that there was no misdirection in law in  the  judge's
    decision, and the judge made a decision which was open to  him  on  the
    evidence available. She argued that there was no procedural  unfairness
    relating to the judge's findings on the coincidence of the names.

19.  Further, Mrs Aboni argued in relation to the  birth  certificate  issue
    that a person seeking to have his name recorded as father  of  a  child
    under s.10(1)(a) of the Act, was, under  that  provision,  required  to
    sign the register with the mother. Mrs Aboni argued that there  was  no
    signature of the father on the birth certificate. I  pointed  out  that
    neither was there any signature of the mother on the birth certificate,
    whereas s.10(1)(a) appeared require the father  to  sign  the  register
    'together with the mother'. I  expressed  the  view  that  signing  the
    register did not necessarily mean that the signatures of the mother  or
    father would appear on the birth certificate itself. Mrs Aboni  further
    argued, in the alternative, that if the procedure had been followed  as
    set out by the appellant, then the father's name would also  have  been
    recorded onto  the  birth  certificate  in  section  12  as  the  named
    informant, alongside the mother. However, she was unable to draw to  my
    attention any legal provision which established that that was the case.



     Discussion

20.  I find with respect to Mr Brown that it cannot  properly  be  suggested
    that it was procedurally unfair for the judge to have relied at [10] in
    his decision on the coincidence of  the  name  of  RFR  and  of  Faisal
    Rehman. The point was  clearly  raised  in  the  Respondent's  decision
    letter at [33].  The Appellant for her  part  merely  asserted  in  her
    witness statement that she met RFR in the United Kingdom for the  first
    time in January 2012.  However, she does not directly  address  in  her
    witness statement the point raised by the Respondent that  there  is  a
    very similar name given in correspondence to an Entry Clearance Officer
    prior to the Appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom, or explain  who
    that person was.  The Appellant has chosen not to  address  that  point
    and cannot be said to have not been given the opportunity to  say  what
    she wanted in relation to that matter.

21.  I find that any challenge as to the judge's  findings  that  these  are
    one and the same person is not made out  on  the  basis  of  the  judge
    having proceeded unfairly,  or  having  failed  to  take  into  account
    relevant evidence.  I find that the only challenge that could  be  made
    in this regard would be one of perversity.  I find that  it  is  not  a
    perverse conclusion for the judge to have arrived at  to  consider  the
    person named in the correspondence to the Entry Clearance  Officer  and
    the person recorded as the father of the Appellant's son to be the same
    person.  This ground fails.  Going further, although not  necessary  to
    support my finding, I note that the  email  address  given  for  Faisal
    Rehman in the notes associated with the entry clearance application  is
    'rfaisalr@(etc)'. This may be compared  with  the  name  of  RFR,  Raja
    Faysal Rahman, a person that the appellant claims to have met  for  the
    first time only in the UK. The appellant's ground is hopeless.

22.  In relation to the Appellant's second ground, I refuse  to  admit  into
    evidence the extracts in the Appellant's grounds of appeal said  to  be
    from  the  website  www.gov.uk/register-birth/who-can-register-a-birth.
    The inclusion of this material in the  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal
    represents in my opinion an attempt to  introduce  evidence  on  appeal
    that had not been before the judge.  There is no application under Rule
    15(2A) to adduce such further evidence and even if there was, no reason
    is given as to why the extended extract from the gov.uk website was not
    put before the judge.  I find that the  attempt  by  the  Appellant  to
    introduce evidence into the grounds of appeal is to be rejected.

23.  However, I find by reference to the relevant primary legislation,  that
    the judge did, inadvertently, proceed under a misapprehension as to the
    law regarding the registration of births. The judge  was  not  assisted
    properly by either party.

24.  I find, considering the provisions set out  within  s.10(1)(a)  of  the
    Act, the wording of which  is  entirely  clear  in  my  view,  that  an
    unmarried father is permitted to have his name recorded in the register
    as the father of a child, at  the  joint  request  of  the  mother  and
    father. In those circumstances, there is nothing, I  find,  within  the
    relevant provisions, which requires a father attending at the  time  of
    registration of the  birth,  to  provide  a  statutory  declaration  of
    parentage. The judge  was  misled  by  the  argument  advanced  by  the
    Respondent in the refusal letter at [34] as to the relevant law. I also
    reject  Mrs Aboni's arguments that the father's signature would need to
    be shown on the birth certificate, and in the alternative, that such  a
    father would be named as joint informant, on the  basis  that  she  was
    unable to provide any legislative provision which stated that either of
    those propositions is correct.

25.  I find, therefore,  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  treating  the
    appearance of RFR's name on the birth certificate as indicative that he
    and the appellant were married.

26.  Addressing briefly the Appellant's remaining grounds of  appeal,  I  do
    not find it made out that the judge failed to  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's evidence as to the reason for the  delay  in  her  claiming
    asylum between March 2015 and August  2017.   The  judge  set  out  the
    Appellant's evidence in that regard in the body of  the  decision.   It
    cannot be said that the judge  failed  to  take  the  explanation  into
    account.   The  only  other  argument  advanced  is  that  the  judge's
    conclusion in rejecting that explanation was perverse.   I reject  any
    such proposition.

27.  The remaining issue then is to  determine  whether  the  error  of  law
    which I have identified at [24] above was material to  the  outcome  of
    the appeal.  The error was that the judge appears to have proceeded  on
    a  misunderstanding  as  to  the   legal   provisions   governing   the
    registration of births of children in the United Kingdom, such that  he
    was wrong to have doubted the Appellant's suggestion that the father of
    the child was able to register the birth of the child  along  with  the
    mother even though they were not married.

28.  However, I find that that error was not material to the outcome of  the
    appeal.  To recap briefly again the judge's  reasons  for  finding  the
    Appellant's account incredible, these were that:

    (i)  there was a delay in claiming asylum [9];


    (ii) the name and e-mail contained  within  an  application  for  entry
         clearance for the  Appellant  before  her  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom gave the same  name  as  the  father  of  her  child  [10];




    (iii)    the Appellant's account of threats being made against her  was
         unwarranted speculation [11];


       v) the Appellant's suggestion that her  uncle  held  a  position  of
          power  and  influence  in  the  police  was  vague   and   lacked
          credibility [11];


      vi) it was not credible that the  father  of  the  Appellant's  child
          would not have wanted to marry her [11];

     vii) although at [13] the judge seems to suggest that the  appellant's
          poor credibility  was relevant to the question of whether or  not
          her family had the power and influence  in  their  home  area  to
          prevent  the  police  or  the  authorities  from  protecting  the
          Appellant, there was in any event an overarching  finding  within
          the body of the decision in the second  part  of  paragraph  [13]
          that the Appellant was not at  risk  outside  of  her  home  area
          because of the availability of  internal  relocation,  a  finding
          which has not been challenged in any way in the grounds;

    viii) at [14] the judge's endorsement of all of the  points  raised  in
          the refusal letter should also be treated as  an  endorsement  of
          the points raised at paragraphs [48]  to  [60]  of  the  refusal,
          which address in detail the question of effective protection that
          would be available to the Appellant on return.

29.  I find, due to the preponderance of other reasons given  by  the  judge
    for dismissing the appellant's appeal, that notwithstanding the judge's
    error as set out at [24] above, it was not material to the  outcome  of
    the Appellant's appeal.

    Decision


    The judge's decision did not include the making of any  material  error
    of law.


    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                     Date 20.11.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                     Date 20.11.19
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

