
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01022/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21 June 2017                              |On 06 July 2017                |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                           MR NAVATHEESAN YOGANATH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  20  June  1986.   The
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 12  June  2009  on  his  own
    passport with a Tier 4 (General) Student visa which was valid until  31
    January 2013.  His student leave was extended until 30 August 2014.  On
    3 April 2014 the respondent wrote to the appellant informing  him  that
    his leave had been  curtailed  because  the  sponsor  had  advised  the
    respondent that the appellant had ceased to study at the college.  On 3
    June 2014 the appellant made an application for a residence card  which
    was refused by the respondent on 24 July 2014.  A further request for a
    residence card was made on 22  August  2014  which  was  refused  on  4
    November 2014.  The appellant appealed against this  decision  but  his
    appeal was dismissed on 16 June 2015 and permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision  was  refused
    on 14 December 2015 and a renewed application  refused  on  15  January
    2016.  Six months after the Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal
    the appellant made an appointment on 19 July 2016 to claim asylum.  The
    respondent refused the appellant's claim for asylum on 18 January 2017.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  3  April  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges Woodcraft and Craft dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.
    The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant  was  not  a  credible
    witness and did not accept his account dismissing  his  asylum  appeal.
    The Tribunal also found that the appellant did not have a  valid  claim
    for humanitarian protection and also dismissed the appeal on Article  8
    grounds.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  The grounds of appeal  assert  that  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal was not a fair hearing.  It is submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal did not consider properly the authority of
    the case of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418 which makes clear that the test  to
    be applied is that of fairness.  It is asserted that the judge  ignored
    the fact that both the appellant and his representative made  it  clear
    that they simply did not have the appellant's file.  It was  impossible
    in the circumstances to instruct Counsel or anyone else in the  absence
    of the file.

 4. On 8 May 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge McClure granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. Ms Jegarajah submitted that in this case  the  appellant  was  claiming
    asylum and it was clear  from  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  that
    credibility was in issue.  She submitted that in these circumstances it
    was necessary for legal  submissions  to  be  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  She referred to paragraph 25 of the case of MM (unfairness;
    E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC).  She submitted that  it  is  made
    clear that there is no requirement to show materiality.   The  question
    was ultimately whether or not the hearing was conducted fairly and that
    included the perception of fairness.  She submitted that Mr  Lingajothy
    was hospitalised for three days and had the file with  him.   In  those
    circumstances it  was  virtually  impossible  to  arrange  for  another
    representative to attend within the two day period between the accident
    and the date of the hearing.

 6. Mr Tufan submitted that although it was not the appellant's fault  that
    he had no representation,  on  the  facts  of  this  case  even  if  Mr
    Lingajothy had been present there could have been no other outcome.  He
    submitted that the appellant had  tried  everything  to  get  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and had been unsuccessful.   He  submitted
    that even at the highest, if the appellant's case was to  be  believed,
    he was someone who was involved with the LTTE.  This would not put  him
    at risk now on return.  He submitted that he had  not  engaged  in  any
    activities in the UK to be perceived as somebody who  had  destabilised
    the unitary state.

 7. In reply Ms Jegarajah submitted that materiality is not in issue on  an
    application for permission to appeal because the appellant was denied a
    fair hearing.  The merits are not relevant to the issue.

Discussion

 8. The First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  details  of  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's solicitors, Linga & Co, that  was  faxed  to  the  Tribunal
    requesting an adjournment.  At paragraph 15 the Tribunal set out:

         "15. On 1 March 2017 the Appellant's solicitors Linga & Co  sent  a
             fax dated 28 February 2017 noting that the Appellant's  asylum
             appeal was to be heard the following day on 2  March  2017  at
             Hatton Cross.  The Appellant had instructed Mr V P Lingajothy,
             the firm's principal, to represent him at  the  hearing.   The
             letter continued:

                       'Unfortunately, Mr Lingajothy met  with  an  accident
                  late last night and he is currently admitted at the  Royal
                  Gwent  Hospital,  Cardiff  Road,  Newport  NP20  2UB.   Mr
                  Lingajothy was travelling to Wales last  night  to  attend
                  the hearing in Bradford today.  He took [the  Appellant's]
                  entire file of papers with him as he believed he would  be
                  returning to London late tonight.   Unfortunately  we  are
                  finding it very difficult to find a barrister who would be
                  able to attend the  hearing  tomorrow  to  represent  [the
                  Appellant] at the last minute.  The  fact  that  we  don't
                  have a physical file of  papers  in  the  office  here  in
                  London  is  making  this  process  even   more   daunting.
                  Furthermore [the Appellant] has instructed us to submit an
                  adjournment request to the Tribunal so that Mr  Lingajothy
                  will be able to attend at a later hearing date.  He opines
                  that Mr Lingajothy  knows  his  case  the  best  and  will
                  therefore be able to do justice to his appeal."

         16.  This application was considered by the Duty Judge but  refused
             on the grounds that it was unclear why Mr  Lingajothy  was  in
             Wales for a hearing in Bradford.  Furthermore,  counsel  could
             be instructed and the hearing should go ahead.  This  decision
             prompted a further letter from the Appellant's solicitors also
             dated 28th of February 2017 but evidently written on  1  March
             which said:

                  'We wish to clarify that Mr Lingajothy runs a nursing home
                  and was on the M4 on the Severn Bridge connecting Wales to
                  England when the said  accident  occurred.   He  was  then
                  taken to the Royal Gwent Hospital in Wales following  this
                  incident.  Mr Lingajothy was going to go to  Bradford  and
                  stay the night there to attend the hearing today, which is
                  now been adjourned due to  the  accident.   The  reference
                  number for this appeal is PA/11161/2016 ...  As  we  don't
                  have [the Appellant's] physical file  in  the  office,  we
                  cannot provide any counsel with copies.  Mr Lingajothy  is
                  in hospital and he does not know anyone or has  anyone  to
                  find a way to send us the file in Wales.  Furthermore, our
                  client does not wish any other counsel to  represent  him.
                  He states that due to his past experience in Sri Lanka, he
                  finds it difficult to trust people and  confide  in  them.
                  However, as he is known Mr Lingajothy for  several  years,
                  he trusts him  and  feels  confident  with  Mr  Lingajothy
                  representing  him.   [The  Appellant]   states   that   Mr
                  Lingajothy known about him, his life, past experiences and
                  the problems he suffered in Sri Lanka to a  great  extent.
                  He therefore strongly believes only Mr Lingajothy will  be
                  able to properly litigate his case'.

         The hearing before us

         17.  On 2nd of March 2017 the matter was called on before  us  when
             the Appellant attended but there  was  no  representation  for
             him.  The Appellant stated that he believed his representative
             was in hospital following an accident.  He had been told  this
             by the staff at the solicitor's office yesterday morning  (1st
             of March).  They had rung him  and  he  had  gone  into  their
             office.  He was paying his solicitors privately.  He  did  not
             know how much, his aunt had arranged that.  They had not  sent
             anyone else to represent him because Mr Lingajothy was the one
             who knew his personal history.  He  had  seen  a  psychiatrist
             about 2 to 3 weeks ago but could  not  remember  the  doctor's
             name.  He was not content for  his  case  to  proceed  in  the
             absence of a representative as it was depressing him more.

         18.  The Presenting Officer indicated that the application  for  an
             adjournment was opposed.  There was  no  evidence  beyond  the
             solicitor's letters that  the  representative  was  unable  to
             come.  The Appellant was over  the  age  of  20,  he  had  not
             suffered any sort of trauma, he was not a vulnerable  witness.



         19.  We considered the application for an adjournment in the  light
             of the authority of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418 that the only test
             of whether to adjourn  is  one  of  fairness.   The  Appellant
             indicated he had now changed his mind and would like  somebody
             else to come to court with him instead of Mr  Lingajothy.   He
             said he had been shown a photograph of  the  accident  by  the
             staff in the office although no such photograph had been  sent
             to the Tribunal and the Appellant did not have a copy with him
             (even though he claimed he had been given a copy).  He said he
             had been to the solicitor's office about a week ago but he had
             not been shown any statement to sign.

         20.  Would refusing an adjournment deprive  the  Appellant  of  the
             opportunity of having a fair hearing?  Although there was said
             to be supporting evidence available to show that Mr Lingajothy
             had indeed been involved in a car accident, no  such  evidence
             was shown to us.  It was difficult to understand why a firm of
             solicitors  could  not  obtain  a   letter   or   some   other
             confirmation from a hospital regarding the treatment given  to
             their own principal.  From the tone of their  letters  it  did
             not appear that they had even tried  but  no  explanation  for
             this inactivity was  given.   By  itself  this  might  not  be
             conclusive, but what we were further concerned about  was  the
             lack of preparation in  this  case.   The  Appellant's  bundle
             which we have itemised above consisted  largely  of  documents
             taken from the respondent's bundle.   No  statement  had  been
             prepared and no application for an adjournment was made on the
             basis that medical  evidence  was  awaited.   The  Appellant's
             representatives had at least 2  clear  days  between  27th  of
             February when the traffic accident apparently occurred and 2nd
             of  March  when  the  hearing  came  before  us   to   arrange
             alternative representation for the Appellant.  The excuse that
             the  Appellant  only  wanted  Mr  Lingajothy  was   found   on
             examination  of  the  Appellant  not  to  be  the  case.   The
             Appellant's case  had  not  been  properly  prepared  and  the
             Appellant's representatives had not had the  courtesy  to  the
             Tribunal to arrange for  alternative  representation  for  the
             Appellant.

         21.  The Appellant claimed to have put his solicitors in funds  but
             he was vague about this and it  was  difficult  to  avoid  the
             conclusion that if the case were to be adjourned it  would  be
             in no better condition at the end of the period of adjournment
             than it was on the day  of  the  hearing  particularly  as  so
             little had been done on the Appellant's  case.   We  therefore
             indicated to the  Appellant  that  we  were  not  prepared  to
             adjourn the case as we did not consider that the  requirements
             of fairness meant that the case must inevitably be put off  to
             another  date.   We  were  aware  that   the   Appellant   was
             unrepresented and therefore we asked the Appellant a number of
             questions to assist him with the preparation and  presentation
             of his case."


 9. It is clear from the First-tier Tribunal's decision that credibility of
    the appellant was in issue. One of the features of the  case  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal noted was an apparent  lack  of  preparation.  This
    suggests that the appellant's case was not likely to  be  presented  at
    its highest from the documents  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    First-tier Tribunal were quite correctly concerned about  the  lack  of
    evidence submitted to confirm that Mr Lingajothy had been admitted  and
    treated in hospital. Indeed  no  such  evidence  was  provided  at  the
    hearing before me. However, in considering that it was unreasonable for
    an alternative representative to have not been  instructed  it  appears
    that the First-tier Tribunal have  not  taken  into  consideration  the
    assertion that the solicitors did not  have  the  appellant's  file  of
    papers.

10. When considering a request for an adjournment the Tribunal must  always
    yield to a party's right to a fair hearing.  As was set out in the case
    of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) at paragraph
    8:

         "In determining applications for adjournments, judges will also  be
         guided by focusing on the overarching criterion established in  the
         overriding objective which is that of fairness."


11. It was through no fault of the appellant that he was  unrepresented  at
    the hearing On the facts of this case, given that credibility was  core
    to the appellant's claim, that this is an asylum claim and it  did  not
    appear to have been well-prepared, that there was no realistic prospect
    of  being  able  to  instruct  an  alternative  representative  as  the
    appellant's solicitors did not have a file, the interests  of  fairness
    and the right to a fair hearing were not fully considered by the First-
    tier Tribunal.

12. I find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision not to grant  an  adjournment.  I  set  aside  that
    decision pursuant to section 12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA'). I remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the  TCEA  to  be
    heard at Hatton Cross on the next available date before any judge other
    than Judges Woodcraft and Craft.

13. I indicated to Ms Jegarajah that it was surprising that  Mr  Lingajothy
    had  not  submitted  evidence  from  the  hospital  of  his  three  day
    hospitalisation with his witness statement.  This  is  particularly  so
    given the fact that the First-tier Tribunal had  expressed  concern  at
    the lack of evidence from the hospital.  Ms  Jegarajah  indicated  that
    she was confident that she would be able to obtain  that  evidence  and
    have it faxed to the Tribunal today.

14. The medical evidence had not been produced to me by  4:30pm.   Although
    it is not for me to bind the hands of the First-tier  Tribunal  I  have
    indicated that the appellant's  representatives  ought  to  submit  the
    medical evidence of Mr Lingajothy's hospitalisation.

15. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
The decision is set aside. The case is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
at Hatton Cross for a re-hearing on  the  next  available  date  before  any
judge other than Judges Woodcraft and Craft.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 4 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw











