
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01045/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2020                  |On 05 January 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bartlam, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.

Anonymity

 2. Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because
    the case involves protection issues. I find that it is  appropriate  to
    continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The background:

 3. On 16 June 2009, the appellant was arrested  by  the  police  after  he
    claimed that he had entered the UK clandestinely by lorry.  He  claimed
    to be a minor but was assessed by the local authority as being an adult
    and therefore over 18.

 4. On 17 June 2009, he claimed asylum and on  the  same  day  a  screening
    interview was conducted. He claimed to have  left  Pakistan  in  August
    2008 travelling to Iran, Greece, Italy, and France before  arriving  in
    the UK. According to the EURODAC fingerprint base,  the  appellant  had
    been fingerprinted in Greece on 13 October 2008 as an illegal  entrant.
    Requests were made to the  Greek  authorities  inviting  them  to  take
    responsibility for his asylum claim under the terms of  the  Dublin  II
    regulation however his removal to Greece was cancelled as he  submitted
    a human rights application.

 5. On 15 October  2009  he  was  granted  temporary  release  with  weekly
    reporting conditions. Whilst it was stated the asylum  claim  would  be
    considered in the United Kingdom and not Greece, the asylum  claim  was
    not proceeded with  and  was  withdrawn  on  7  February  2013  as  the
    appellant had absconded.

 6. Nothing more was heard from the appellant  until  2  August  2015  when
    information was received from the  police  stating  that  he  had  been
    arrested for failing to stop, having no insurance, no  driving  licence
    and common assault.

 7. On 29 September 2015 he was encountered outside the police station  and
    he was arrested for being an  absconder  and  on  2  October  2015  was
    informed that he was a person liable to be detained.

 8. On 1 February 2016, the magistrates court is convicted and sentenced to
    7 days imprisonment for two counts of driving offences and  failing  to
    surrender to custody.

 9. On 7 February 2016 he notified the Home Office that he wanted to submit
    a fresh asylum claim and on 16 February 2016  screening  interview  was
    conducted.

10. On 4 April 2016 he was released again on reporting conditions.

11. On 8 August 2016 he signed a voluntary departure disclaimer and  signed
    a  facilitator  returns  form  indicating  he  wished  to   return   to
    Afghanistan.

12. On 9 August 2016 in the Crown Court he was convicted and  sentenced  to
    76 months imprisonment for wounding with intent to do  grievous  bodily
    harm and having a bladed article which was a sharply pointed knife in a
    public place.

13. On 24 January 2017 he signed a form indicating he wished to be included
    in the early removal scheme, that he wanted to leave the UK and  return
    to Afghanistan Kabul airport. He confirmed he did not intend to  appeal
    any decision for his removal, and he confirmed that he understood  that
    if he returned to the UK  before  his  sentence  expired  he  would  be
    returned to prison to serve the remainder of his sentence.

14. By March 2017 on induction at the prison he told officials he  did  not
    know if he wanted to return to Afghanistan however on  2  May  2017  he
    asked for a form to sign in order to return to Afghanistan.

15. On 11 July 2017, the appellant was sent  a  decision  pursuant  to  the
    immigration act 1971 and the UK Borders Act 2017.

16. Whilst the appellant replied to this letter on  26  July  2017,  on  23
    August  2017  he  completed  a  form  stating  it  wish  to  apply  for
    facilitated return scheme and to leave the UK to  travel  to  Kabul  in
    Afghanistan.

17. On 27 November 2017 he informed them that he did not wish to return and
    was advised to put that in writing as to what his intentions were.

18. On 6 December 2017 he informed the prison that he was still unsure  but
    on 19 January 2018 told the prison officials he definitely wanted to be
    deported and wished to be returned straight away.

19. On 14th February 2018 he was  sent  to  disclaimer  but  then  told  an
    immigration officer who did not wish to be deported.

20. It is recorded that the appellant spoke to his brother who told him  it
    was not safe.

21. A further screening interview was conducted on 16th February  2018  and
    on 22 March 2018 and asylum interview.

22. On 20 and 21 June 2018 he again informed the prison officials  that  he
    wanted to be deported to Afghanistan. On 8 July 2018  he  informed  the
    prison that he did not wish to be deported and that  he  explained  the
    reasons for changing his mind about whether he wished to return was due
    to mental health problems.

23. On 27 July 2018, the appellant informed prison officials that he wanted
    to claim asylum as he feared his wife's relatives.

24. On 2 November 2018 he was sent to section 72 letter asking him to rebut
    the presumption that the crime he committed was a particularly  serious
    one and that he was a danger to the community. A reply was received  on
    9 November 2018.

25. On 23 January 2019, the  respondent  issued  a  decision  to  refuse  a
    protection human rights claim in the context of his deportation.

26. The respondent sought the appellant's deportation as a  result  of  his
    conviction on 9 August 2016 where he was sentenced to 6 years and  four
    months imprisonment for wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm
    and having a bladed article (a knife) in a public place.

27. The sentencing remarks of the trial judge are set out at paragraph [67]
    of the decision letter.

28. The decision letter at paragraphs 48 -  72  set  out  the  respondent's
    reasons for reaching the conclusion that section 72 of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied.

29. Consideration was given to his protection claim in the context  of  the
    country materials and the country  guidance  decision  of  AK  (Article
    15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 0163.  It was considered that  whilst
    the  security  situation  in  Afghanistan   remained   volatile,   with
    especially high levels of violence recorded in Helmand (which is  where
    the appellant stated  he  had  lived  before  coming  to  the  UK)  the
    appellant could return to Kabul were the levels of violence  are  lower
    than in Helmand.

30. At paragraphs 83 - 92 the respondent set  out  the  credibility  issues
    identified within his claim.

31. The light of the country guidance decision and the objective  material,
    the respondent considered that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to internally relocate to Kabul.

32. The decision at paragraphs 108 - 113 set out the reasons for  excluding
    the  appellant  from  humanitarian  protection  on  the  basis  of  his
    conviction  and  imprisonment  under  paragraph  339D  (iii)   of   the
    immigration rules.

33. At paragraphs 114 - 124 the respondent addressed  Article  3  based  on
    medical grounds.

34. It was noted that in the asylum interview undertaken on 22  March  2018
    he claimed to suffer from mental health issues although no evidence had
    been provided to support the claim.

35.  The  respondent  considered  the  objective   material   relating   to
    psychiatric treatment Afghanistan dated 6 April 2017 and that treatment
    was available. The respondent set out the legal  authorities  including
    that of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31

36. In a determination promulgated on the  30   October  2019,  FtTJ  Tully
    allowed his claim and concluded that his illness had  not  reached  any
    critical strange, whilst he had been in the UK since June 2009  it  was
    not sufficient to demonstrate the UK ,was bound by any duty of care and
    that article 3 did not give a right to remain in the UK to continue  to
    receive medical treatment. It was noted that there  was  no  indication
    that a treatment currently received was unavailable in Afghanistan.

37. At paragraphs 125 - 129 the respondent considered article 8 noting that
    the bases his claims  that  he  lived  in  the  UK  for  10  years  and
    established a strong  private  life.  However,  no  evidence  had  been
    provided in support of his article 8 claim. It was concluded that there
    were no very compelling circumstances in his case and that there was  a
    significant public interest in deporting him.

38. It is recorded in the documents that the  appellant  completed  his  38
    months in prison sentence in May 2019.

39. The appellant appealed the decision,  and  it  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Tully on 15 October 2019.

40. In a decision promulgated on 30 October the  FtTJ  concluded  that  the
    conviction was "not  of  a  particularly  serious  nature"  within  the
    meaning of section  72(2)  (6)  because  she  did  not  find  that  the
    appellant was a danger to the public. The judge attached weight to  the
    fact that the appellant was unmedicated and suffering  from  a  serious
    mental health issue. The judge made reference to the  sentencing  judge
    who found that the dispute related to the appellant and his victim  and
    that he was not at risk of causing significant injury to members of the
    public. Given that he had no previous convictions  for  violence  since
    2016 the judge found that the appellant had rebutted the presumption.

41. In respect of his asylum claim the judge rejected his account  that  he
    would be targeted by members of his wife's family who live  in  Helmand
    and are associated with the Taliban.

42. The judge considered his evidence relating to his family relatives; the
    appellant claimed that he had been in contact with his parents since he
    came to the UK, but he had now lost touch.  He  said  his  brother  was
    killed fighting for the Taliban. The judge did not accept that  he  had
    discharged the burden of proof that he lost contact with his family.

43. As to other generalised risks, the judge reached  the  conclusion  that
    the appellant had a "serious mental health condition" and that he would
    be vulnerable on return to Afghanistan more than an  ordinary  returnee
    as a result of that condition. In the light of the mental health issues
    in his absence from Afghanistan from extended period, the judge did not
    accept he could reasonably return to his home area given the  level  of
    violence. As to internal relocation to Kabul, the judge found  that  he
    would not be with family support, he had mental health  problems  which
    would be a barrier to him accessing any support that might be available
    to him. The appellant had no education, no qualifications and had  left
    Afghanistan when he was 18 and had no work history. The judge concluded
    that it would be unduly harsh to relocate to Kabul. The FtTJ  therefore
    allowed the appeal.

44.  The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that  decision  and
    permission  was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Woodcraft on the 21st November 2019. The appeal came before  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the 13 January 2020.

45. In a decision promulgated on the 28th January 2020, the Upper  Tribunal
    (Deputy Judge Black) reached  the  conclusion  that  the  decision  did
    demonstrate the making on an error on a point of law and set aside  the
    decision (see decision annexed to this decision marked "Annex A").

46. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Black reached the  overall  view  that  the
    decision of the  FtTJ  lacked  sufficient  analysis  and  reasoning  in
    support of the conclusions under section 72,  asylum-generalised  risk,
    Article 3 (medical grounds) and relocation, and Article 8.

47. The Deputy UTJ therefore set aside the decision and for the decision to
    be remade by the Upper Tribunal.

48. The Deputy UTJ made a direction that the FtTJ's findings as related  to
    his "core claim" (and as set out at  paragraph  38)  should  remain  as
    preserved findings. This related to the specific claim put  forward  by
    the appellant in respect of being targeted by his wife's family.

49. The appeal was therefore to listed in the Upper Tribunal as  a  resumed
    hearing.

50.  In the light of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
    directions, inter  alia,  indicating  that  the  appeal  could  not  be
    determined  without  a  face-  to-  face  hearing,  both  parties  have
    indicated that they were content for the hearing  to  proceed  by  this
    method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing.

51. Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor issued directions on  the  29  April
    2020 and set out the issues as follows:

          1) The preserved finding of fact  at  paragraph  38  of  the  FtT
             decision.

          2) Whether he is able to rebut either  limb  in  respect  of  the
             section 72 certificate

          3) Whether the appellant is a refugee,

          4) Whether he is entitled to humanitarian protection

          5) Whether his removal would violate Article 3,

          6) Whether his removal would violate Article 8.

52. In an email reply dated 4 May 2020, the appellant's  solicitors  agreed
    those were the issues. No reply was received from the respondent.

The re-making decision before the Upper Tribunal:

53. At the resumed hearing both parties were represented by advocates;  the
    Appellant was represented by Ms Bartlam of Counsel who had  represented
    the appellant previously and  the  Respondent  by  Mr  Diwnycz,  Senior
    Presenting  Officer.  Ms  Bartlam  provided  a  comprehensive  skeleton
    argument in response to my directions.

The evidence:

54. The Appellant's solicitors  had  provided  a  copy  of  the  bundle  of
    documents which included in it the following documents:-

         . Witness statement of the Appellant,

         . Letter from Mr W dated 14/11/20,

         . Psychiatric report, Dr W dated 19/3/20,

         . psychological report Dr C,

         . OASY's report,

         . letter from probation officer dated 30 November 2020,

         . human rights watch  report:  Afghanistan  silent  mental  health
           circumstances dated 7/10/19

         . Fast Company article dated 6 May 2019

         . NRP, Afghanistan loan psychiatric hospital article dated 14/2/18

         . Decision of the UT in DH (particular social group

         . CG decision in AS (Afghanistan)

         . Addendum report of Dr C (dated 1 October 2019).

55. The Respondent relied upon the material in the Respondent's bundle:

         . including the screening interview dated 17 June 2019,

         . disclaimer dated 8 August 2016, early removal scheme disclaimer,



         . a response to  information  requested  Afghanistan:  psychiatric
           treatment dated 6 April 2017,

         . appellant's handwritten response dated 26 July 2017,

         . signed disclaimer and FRS dated  23  August  2017,  Home  Office
           letter dated 14 November 2018,

         . asylum interview dated 22 March 2018,

         . CPIN security humanitarian situation dated April 2018,

         . section 72 letter dated 2 November 2018,

         .  appellant's section 72 response dated 9 November 2018,

         . signed a deportation order dated 23 January 2019,

         . decision to refuse a protection  human  rights  claim  dated  23
           January 2019 refusal letter,

         . copy sentencing remarks of 9 August 2016,

56. In addition,  Mr  Diwnycz  filed  a  letter  setting  out  some  issues
    concerning the psychiatric report.

57. No up  -to-  date  objective  evidence  was  filed  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.

58. At a previous hearing before  the  FtT  it  is  recorded  that  counsel
    reported difficulties  with  the  appellant  understanding  matters  of
    evidence and/or the interpreter. This resulted  in  the  hearing  being
    adjourned and as a result Dr C (who had seen the appellant in May 2019)
    was asked to provide an addendum report to  deal  with  the  issues  of
    capacity. That is set out  in  a  separate  document  and  not  in  the
    appellant's Original bundle. As a result  of  that  document,  and  the
    diagnosis that Dr C had reached, it is agreed that he has  capacity  to
    instruct legal representatives. In summary Dr  C  stated  that  in  his
    opinion the appellant met the criteria  for  diagnosis  of  schizotypal
    personality disorder which is a rare condition that  resulted  in  some
    unusual effects on an individual. His condition is made worse  by  high
    impulsivity which may be termed ADD or be an aspect of his personality.
    Other aspects impaired communication; hearing loss, language,  auditory
    communication, possible drug use and not waiting to listen properly. He
    probably blurts out  lies,  over  which  he  has  little  control.  The
    difficulties could be mitigated by allowing him more time to  weigh  up
    the consequences, which ultimately has the capacity to do. He concludes
    that  he  can  present  to  someone  without  any  hint   of   capacity
    difficulties  and  there  is  nothing  in  his   medical   records   or
    psychological evaluations that suggests otherwise.

59. I have therefore had regard to that report when undertaking the hearing
    and also in the assessment of his evidence.

60. I have also reminded myself of the case of the case of AM (Afghanistan)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  1123  in
    which Sir  Ernest  Ryder,  Senior  President,  referred  to  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010: Child, Vulnerable  Adult  and
    Sensitive  Appellant  ("the  guidance  note")  and  also  the  Practice
    Direction, First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
    Sensitive Witnesses. He went on  to  state  that  "the  directions  and
    guidance contained in them are to be followed  and  Failure  to  follow
    them will most likely be a material error of law".

61. Paragraph 2 of the Guidance Note states that, when considering  whether
    an individual is vulnerable, any mental health  problems,  his  or  her
    social and cultural background and any domestic circumstances are to be
    taken into account. In the Appellant's case, there is  expert  evidence
    from a psychiatrist and from Dr C (a psychologist) who  make  reference
    to his mental health problems and his  diagnosis.  The  report  of  the
    psychologist confirms that he  is  fit  to  give  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal.

62. On the basis of this evidence,  and as both advocates  accept,  I  find
    that the Appellant is a vulnerable witness and whilst the Tribunal  did
    not receive any communication from the  advocates  as  to  any  special
    measures that may be necessary  I was satisfied from  speaking  to  the
    advocates at the hearing  that  steps were taken to ensure he was  able
    to give evidence  in accordance with  the Guidance and in the light  of
    the report.

63. The Home Office Presenting Officer had discussed with Counsel prior  to
    the hearing the type of questions that would be asked and the manner of
    them.  The questions asked both in  evidence  in  chief  and  in  cross
    examination were given in a calm and measured manner  and  if  anything
    was unclear, questions were rephrased. I set out that if any breaks  in
    the proceedings were required that could be accommodated at  any  time.
    In any event the oral evidence given was of a very short duration and I
    was satisfied that the Appellant was able to participate fully  in  the
    hearing and no concerns were raised during the hearing in this respect.

The Appellant's factual claim:

64. The basis of the Appellants claim is set out in the  witness  statement
    which he has signed and adopted in his oral evidence  when  Ms  Bartlam
    took him through that evidence.

65. The appellant states  that  he  was  born  in  xxx,  Helmand  province,
    Afghanistan in 1990. He states that  he  does  not  know  why  in  some
    documentation his date of birth is recorded as 1980. He states that  he
    was 18 years of age when he left Afghanistan.

66. He lived with his parents, as well as his brother who was younger  than
    him.

67. As a result of the situation in Afghanistan he never attended school or
    any type of formal education and had religious education at the  mosque
    only. In his asylum interview in 2018 he stated that he was not married
    and that he had no children, but this was not true. He  stated  he  was
    confused and felt very unwell when  he  provided  the  information.  He
    confirms that he had a wife and daughter ("I only have a daughter I  do
    not have a son") in Afghanistan and that he divorced his wife in 2014.

68. As to the events which led to him leaving Afghanistan, he  states  that
    his memories of Afghanistan were of war and that life was very hard and
    dangerous. He remembers of his life there that it was mainly to do with
    trying to hide from the Taleban so he would not be forced to join them.
    He states the Taleban would visit the area in order to take  people  to
    join them. They would come and knock on the door every 1  to  2  months
    and there would be 5 to 6 at a time.

69. He previously stated that he was kidnapped and tortured by the Taleban.
    The appellant states in his witness statement  that  he  had  explained
    that this was not true and that he had said  this  as  he  was  feeling
    confused and unwell. The appellant says, "I felt scared about what  was
    happening to me and panicked."

70. However, the appellant claims that it was true that the Taleban  wanted
    to recruit him and all of the young men his area and that he  persuaded
    his father to help him leave Afghanistan rather than be forced to fight
    and be killed.

71. The appellant states he left Afghanistan in 2008 when he was  18  years
    of age. His father wanted him to join the  Taleban  but  respected  the
    fact that this was not what the appellant wished so therefore  he  left
    him leave Afghanistan.

72. He claims before he left  Afghanistan  his  parents  arranged  that  he
    should marry a woman that he never met before he was  to  another  town
    and he later found out that her father and brothers were  a  member  of
    the Taleban. They had a daughter who was born just before  he  left  to
    come to the UK. He claims that the initial plan was that he would  come
    alone and then make arrangements for them to join him. However, when he
    reached the UK things changed because of his mental health and in  2014
    he divorced her over the phone under Islamic procedures. As soon as the
    family found out they were furious, and they threatened to kill him. He
    believes his ex-wife's family would want to kill him if he returned  to
    Afghanistan.

73. As to his travel to the United Kingdom, he states he travelled  through
    Iran, Greece, Italy, and France and arrived in the UK on 16 June  2009.
    He reported for a long time but did not know what else he needed to do.
    He was confused and was scared of being returned to Greece.

74. The appellant claims that he was until recently still in  contact  with
    friends in Afghanistan and they told him at the end of  2017  that  his
    brother was forced to join the Taleban and that he had been killed.

75. He states that he was previously in contact with his parents  but  lost
    contact with them and had no idea where  they  are  today.  He  has  no
    contact with anyone Afghanistan and there was no one who  can  help  or
    support him.

76. In respect of his mental health, he states that he has issues where  he
    gets confused and cloudy which is why he made the decisions saying that
    he wanted to go back to Afghanistan. He confirms that he does not  wish
    to return there as it is dangerous.

The submissions of the parties:

77. Ms Bartlam on behalf of the appellant relied upon her written  skeleton
    argument.

78. In addition she made the following oral submissions. In respect of  the
    section 72 certificate, she submitted that she relied upon the decision
    in EN (Serbia) set out at paragraph 9 of her skeleton argument.

79. She acknowledged that the appellant had committed a serious offence  in
    2016. However she submitted the appellant at the time  of  the  offence
    was not diagnosed and was not taking any medication in 2016 at the time
    of the offence and was  not  diagnosed  until  February  2019  when  in
    custody and it was not until Dr C saw him in May  2019  that  any  firm
    diagnosis was made. That in fact was  not  conclusive  until  September
    2019.

80. She submitted that was relevant because he  has  since  been  diagnosed
    with having a mental health condition and is now prescribed medication.

81. She submitted that since his  release  in  April  2019,  there  was  no
    indication of any misbehaviour of any kind and the  information  before
    the tribunal demonstrated that he had shown compliance with his licence
    and also with his mental health worker and the probation officer.

82. She submitted that in the report of Dr C referring to  his  impulsivity
    is on the basis of when the appellant is not on  medication,  but  this
    was not the reason for committing the offence. Thus when  he  is  being
    treated he is less likely to commit other offences.

83. As regards the OASys' report, risk of reoffending is said  to  be  low.
    She submitted the appellant had shown remorse for his actions even when
    facing deportation and there is no evidence  of  any  further  risk  of
    future offending. Thus she submitted he did not present a danger to the
    community and thus had rebutted the presumptions.

84. Ms Bartlam then turned to the Refugee Convention. In  her  submissions,
    she relied upon the decision of DH  (particular  social  group:  mental
    health) Afghanistan [2020] UKUT 00223, and that on  the  basis  of  the
    medical documentation the appellant was a member  of  a  PSG  and  thus
    qualified for protection under the  Convention  provided  there  was  a
    nexus between their condition and any prohibited treatment/persecution.

85. She submitted  that  whilst  the  appellant's  case  was  not  directly
    analogous with the decision in DH (as cited) some  comparisons  can  be
    drawn. In particular, both appellants were from  Afghanistan  and  that
    there is a paucity of mental health  provision  and  a  high  level  of
    stigmatisation  of  mental  health.  There  was  no  dispute  that  the
    appellant had a serious mental health condition.

86. In terms of the decision, she submitted that in  DH  there  were  risks
    associated with the risk of imprisonment  which  is  similar  here  and
    there is a link between his mental health and his offending.

87. She submitted that the question was whether there was a  real  risk  of
    persecution. It was accepted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  at  this
    hearing that the appellant did not have any contact with his family and
    did not know where they are. They previously were in Helmand  province.
    However the appellant would be returned to Kabul where it was  accepted
    that he did not have a support network. In his case there are a  number
    of risk factors including his lack of education, his limited employment
    history,  and  the  perceived  westernisation.  Given   that   he   has
    demonstrated to have been vulnerable to bullying in the UK and also  it
    is documented that he had been disowned by his cousin in the UK due  to
    his mental health, these are  all  factors  that  when  taken  together
    demonstrate  that  his  condition  is  causally  linked  to  prohibited
    treatment on the basis of the evidence the social stigma, article 3 ill-
    treatment  and  lack  of  adequate  mental  health  care  provision  in
    Afghanistan set out in the key passage  index.  She  further  submitted
    that this was worsened by having forsaken the Islamic religion.

88. There was also the issue of self harm and suicidal intent which was set
    out in the reports of Dr W and in the OASys's report.

89. It was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  there  was  an
    inadequacy of mental health care provision  in  Afghanistan  which  has
    been recently exacerbated by the deteriorating  security  situation  in
    the country and targeted attacks on  healthcare  provision  during  the
    pandemic as outlined in the recent UNAMA.

90. Ms Bartlam submitted that if the tribunal  found  that  he  was  not  a
    member of a PSG the purposes of the Convention, his  appeal  should  be
    allowed on the basis that he faced a real  risk  of  serious  harm  and
    return to Afghanistan by reason of the ill-treatment referred to above.

91. In the  alternative,  there  are  very  compelling  circumstances  that
    outweigh the public interest in his deportation (under part 5A  of  the
    NIAA 2002.

92. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the  respondent  did  not  provide  a  skeleton
    argument but provided a letter  in  which  he  stated  that  Dr  W  had
    provided reports in other tribunal hearings although he  accepted  that
    in none of those  cited  were  there  any  criticisms  made  of  Dr  W.
    Reference was made to his qualifications although it was not  explained
    why Dr W was not a psychiatrist.

93. In his oral submissions he stated that on behalf of the  respondent  he
    accepted that the appellant had no support network in  Afghanistan  and
    that he had no family that he could rely on and that he  did  not  know
    where his family were and that this was an important issue and that the
    decision in AS (Afghanistan) was a " stumbling block.

94. He further accepted that the decision letter  was  out  of  date  where
    reference has been made  to  the  appellant  having  no  mental  health
    problems when that was  now  accepted  in  the  light  of  the  medical
    evidence.

95. Dealing with the appellant's mental health, Mr Diwnycz  submitted  that
    he had been the presenting officer in the decision of DH (as cited) and
    relied upon on behalf of the appellant. He  submitted  that  the  exact
    circumstances in that  case  were  not  the  same  as  this  particular
    appellant and that the basis of DH that he had  an  undiagnosed  mental
    health issue which led to his difficulties.

96. When looking at the evidence here, whilst there may be questions  about
    his competence in the light of his  qualifications,  the  report  falls
    short. It does not make any  real  reference  to  the  reports  of  the
    psychologist.  He  submitted  that  the  psychologist's  reports   were
    "fulsome" and gave a  "lasting  diagnosis".  Mr  Diwnycz  accepted  the
    contents of the reports of Dr C but submitted that he  had  a  concrete
    diagnosis which distinguished his case from that of DH.

97. He submitted that the question was whether there was  medical  help  or
    assistance available to the appellant in  Afghanistan  and  whether  he
    could gain access to it and also if he would take that  assistance.  He
    submitted that in his oral evidence he was asked if he  had  taken  his
    medication last night, but he said that he had not because he  did  not
    want to oversleep for the hearing. He submitted that there was evidence
    available in the report of Dr  C  to  demonstrate  that  the  appellant
    continued to be a risk of harm and therefore a danger to the community.
    This was also supported by the contents of the OASY's report  and  that
    the appellant had not rebutted the presumptions.

98. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.

The legal framework:

99. The appellant is subject to automatic  deportation  by  reason  of  the
    provisions of sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007. Section 32
    defines 'foreign criminal' as a person who is not  a  British  citizen,
    who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and in  addition,
    that his offending meets either Condition 1 (sentenced to a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least 12 months) or Condition 2, that the offence is
    one of those specified as a serious criminal offence by  order  of  the
    Secretary of State under section 72(4)(a)  of  the  2002  Act  and  the
    person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

100. If either Condition is met, the person is a foreign criminal,  and  the
    statute creates a  statutory  presumption  (section  32(4))  that  such
    deportation order is conducive to the public  good.  The  Secretary  of
    State is required to make a deportation order in respect of  a  foreign
    criminal, unless one of the Exceptions in section 33 is applicable,  or
    the foreign criminal is outside the United Kingdom,  or  section  34(4)
    applies (making a fresh deportation decision under section 32(5)).

101. The statutory presumption that deportation is conducive to  the  public
    good ceases to apply (positively or  negatively)  if  an  Exception  is
    applicable.  The relevant exception in section 33  in  this  appeal  is
    Exception 1:

         "33. ...

             (2) Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
                  pursuance of the deportation order would breach -

                  (a)  A person's Convention rights; or

                  (b)  The United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
                      Convention. ...

             (7)  The application of an exception -

                  (a)  Does not prevent the making of a deportation order;

                  (b)  Results in it being assumed neither that deportation
                      of the person concerned is conducive to the public
                      good, nor that it is not conducive to the public
                      good."

161. Where the Secretary of State has certified her decision  under  section
    72 of the 2002 Act, section 72(1)  tells  the  Court  or  Tribunal  how
    Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention  is  to  be  applied.  Section
    72(10) of the 2002 Act requires the Tribunal to begin its consideration
    of the appeal with consideration of the section  72  certificate.   The
    appellant will have appealed under section 82, 83, 83A or  101  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended),  wholly  or
    partly on the ground that to remove him from,  or  to  require  him  to
    leave the United Kingdom, would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  Refugee
    Convention obligations (see section 72(9)(a)).

    A section 72 certificate has the effect of  raising  a  dual  statutory
    presumption: first, that the claimant has been  convicted  on  a  final
    judgment  of  a  'particularly  serious  crime'  and  second,  that  he
    'constitutes a danger to the community'.   In  the  case  of  a  person
    convicted in the United  Kingdom,  section  72(2)  provides  that  both
    presumptions come into effect where the individual is  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least 2 years.

102. Both presumptions may be rebutted by appropriate evidence, as  set  out
    in section 72(6) and EN (Serbia) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department & Anor [2009] EWCA Civ 630.

103. If both presumptions are not rebutted, then section  72(10)(b)  of  the
    Act requires the Tribunal to dismiss the appeal in so far as it  relies
    on the Refugee  Convention  ground.   No  presumptions  are  raised  in
    relation to human rights.

104. I have reminded myself that, when  considering  whether  the  Appellant
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for the purposes of the  Refugee
    Convention, the burden of proof lies with the Appellant but that I have
    taken into account the fact that he is a vulnerable witness, which  may
    have affected his ability to give evidence. The standard  of  proof  is
    that of a reasonable degree of likelihood or a serious possibility.

105. A person is entitled to refugee status under the Refugee Convention  if
    he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on  account   of   his
    nationality, religion, race, membership of a particular social group or
    political opinion.

         37. Regulation 6(1)(d) of the Qualification Directive states that:

         "A group shall be considered to form a particular social group
         where in particular

         a) members of that group share an innate characteristic, or a
         common background that cannot be changed, or share a characteristic
         or belief that is so fundamental to identity or conscience that a
         person should not be forced to renounce it, and

         b) that group has a distinct identity in the relevant country as it
         is perceived as being different by the surrounding society".

Internal Relocation

106. Of particular relevance to part of the guidance given in this  case  is
    paragraph 339O headed "Internal Relocation". This states:

         'i.  The Secretary of State will not make:

             (a)  a grant of asylum if in part of the country of origin a
             person will not have a well-founded fear of being persecuted
             and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part
             of the country; or

             (b)  a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of the
             country of return a person would not face a real risk of
             suffering serious harm, and the person can reasonably be
             expected to stay in that part of the country.

         ii.  In examining whether a part of the country of origin or
         country of return meets the requirements in i. the Secretary of
         State, when making his decision on whether to grant asylum or
         humanitarian protection, will have regard to the general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and to the
         personal circumstances of the person.

         iii. It applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return to
         the country of origin or country of return."

107. In considering the proper approach to the issue of internal  relocation
    I have also to apply the principles set out by the House  of  Lords  in
    Januzi [2006] UKHL 5  (which  adopts  the  criteria  now  contained  in
    paragraph 339O but also contains more detailed guidance) and AH (Sudan)
    [2007] UKHL 49.

108. In Januzi their Lordships held that the test for whether  it  would  be
    unreasonable for an asylum seeker to relocate to a  safe  haven  within
    his own country, was not whether the quality of life  there  failed  to
    meet the basic norms of  civil,  political,  and  socio-economic  human
    rights, but whether he would face conditions such as utter  destitution
    or exposure to cruel or inhuman treatment, threatening his  most  basic
    human rights.  There was no presumption that when persecution  emanated
    from agents of the state or where the state encouraged or  connived  in
    that persecution by others, there could be no  viable  internal  flight
    option.  The greater the power of the  state  over  all  parts  of  the
    asylum seeker's country the less viable such an  option  would  be  and
    vice versa.

109. In AH (Sudan) their Lordships  repeated  that  the  test  to  determine
    whether internal relocation was available was  as  set  out  in  Januzi
    namely whether it was reasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate or
    whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.   The  'unduly
    harsh' test did not require conditions in the place  of  relocation  to
    reach the Article 3 ECHR level.  The inquiry was to be directed to  the
    situation of the particular Appellant, whose age,  gender,  experience,
    health, skills, and family ties might all be very relevant.  Cases  had
    to  be  assessed  holistically  with  specific  reference  to  personal
    circumstances, including past persecution or fear thereof in family and
    social relationships.

Sufficiency of Protection

110. As the House of Lords decision in Horvath [2000] UKHL 37  demonstrates,
    to qualify as a 'non state agent of persecution' it is  not  enough  to
    show the person or group concerned has a  real  potential  to  cause  a
    claimant serious harm. There must also be a  protection  the  non-state
    actor simply remains an 'agent  of  serious  harm'  not  an  'agent  of
    persecution'. As Lord Hope stated:

         "The standard to be applied is therefore not that which  eliminates
         all risk and would thus amount to a guarantee of protection in  the
         home state.  Rather it is a practical standard which  takes  proper
         account of the duty which the state owes to all its nationals."

Analysis of the evidence:

111. I have set out above that it is common ground between the parties  that
    the Appellant is a vulnerable witness by reason of  his  mental  health
    condition. I have therefore taken account  of  and  applied  the  Joint
    Presidential Note. In this context I make reference to the case  of  JL
    (medical  reports-credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT  00145  (IAC),   in
    particular paragraph 6,  which  referred  to  the  situation  where  an
    Appellant was vulnerable and said that it was of particular  importance
    to take into account the possible relevance of the  Appellant  being  a
    vulnerable person to the credibility findings.

112. At paragraph 27  of  the  decision  in  JL  judges  are  reminded  that
    applying  this   guidance   entails   asking   whether   any   of   the
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account could be  explained  by  him
    being a vulnerable person.

113. The guidance at 10.3 at page  6,  which  gives  guidance  on  assessing
    evidence, and paragraph 14, which says  that  where  there  were  clear
    discrepancies in the oral evidence, consideration should  be  given  to
    the extent to which  the  age,  vulnerability  or  sensitivity  of  the
    witness was an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.

114. Paragraph 15  states  that  the  decision  should  record  whether  the
    Tribunal has concluded that the Appellant is  a  child,  vulnerable  or
    sensitive,  the  effect  the   Tribunal   considered   the   identified
    vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it and  whether  the
    Tribunal was satisfied whether the Appellant had established his or her
    case to the relevant standard of proof. It  is  noted  that  in  asylum
    appeals weight should be given to objective indications of risk  rather
    than necessarily to a state of mind.

115. At para [21] (agreeing with the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant in that case), the Senior President dealt with the importance
    of considering the circumstances of a child or vulnerable witness  when
    assessing their evidence in an asylum claim as follows:

         "21. It is submitted on behalf of the  Appellant  that  the  agreed
         basis  for  allowing  the  appeal  on  the  merits  reflects   core
         principles  of  asylum  law  and  practice  which  have  particular
         importance in claims from children  and  other  vulnerable  persons
         namely:

             a.   given the gravity of the consequences of  a  decision  on
             asylum and the accepted inherent difficulties in  establishing
             the facts of the claim as well as future  risks,  there  is  a
             lower standard of proof, expressed as 'a  reasonable  chance',
             'substantial grounds for thinking' or 'a serious possibility';

             b.   while an assessment of  personal  credibility  may  be  a
             critical aspect of some claims, particularly in the absence of
             independent supporting evidence, it is not an end in itself or
             a substitute for the application of the criteria  for  refugee
             status which must be holistically assessed;

             c.   the findings of medical experts must be treated  as  part
             of the holistic assessment: they are not to be treated  as  an
             'add-on' and rejected as a result of  an  adverse  credibility
             assessment or finding made prior to and without regard to  the
             medical evidence;

             d.   expert medical evidence  can  be  critical  in  providing
             explanation  for  difficulties  in  giving  a   coherent   and
             consistent account of past  events  and  for  identifying  any
             relevant safeguards required to meet vulnerabilities that  can
             lead  to  disadvantage  in  the  determination  process,   for
             example, in the ability to give oral testimony and under  what
             conditions (see  the  Guidance  Note  below  and  JL  (medical
             reports - credibility) (China) [2013]  UKUT  00145  (IAC),  at
             [26] to [27]);

             e.   an Appellant's account  of  his  or  her  fears  and  the
             assessment of an Appellant's credibility must also  be  judged
             in the  context  of  the  known  objective  circumstances  and
             practices of the state in question and a failure to do so  can
             constitute an error of law; and

             f.   in making asylum  decisions,  the  highest  standards  of
             procedural fairness are required."

116. It is correct that the Appellant has not given a consistent account  of
    the events in Afghanistan and this is accepted by Ms Bartlam on  behalf
    of the appellant where he has been described as a "poor historian". The
    medical evidence set out in the reports of Dr C set out that his mental
    health condition as now diagnosed is the explanation for that.

117. Therefore, it is necessary to consider  all  relevant  evidence  before
    reaching a holistic assessment of the credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account. However, the credibility of his account can also  be  assessed
    holistically by looking at its consistency and plausibility, as  above,
    and also by comparing it to what is known about Afghanistan.

118. There is no dispute that the appellant is  a  national  of  Afghanistan
    who entered the UK in 2009 and that he has never been granted any  form
    of leave save for a short period of temporary release in  October  2009
    when he first claimed asylum before absconding.

119. I have set out earlier a pr�cis of the claims that he is made  relating
    to fear of persecution in Afghanistan which included being at risk from
    his wife's family who live in  Helmand  and  are  associated  with  the
    Taliban. None of those issues have been canvassed during  this  hearing
    and I have heard no submissions on behalf of the appellant  seeking  to
    support any factual  background  based  on  any  past  history.  It  is
    accepted that the appellant has given various accounts relating to  his
    background which have been inconsistent in important  respects;  as  to
    whether he was married, divorced and whether he  has  one,  two  or  no
    children. The level of inconsistency throughout his claim has not  been
    disputed by the appellant during this hearing.

120. As set out in the medical evidence, to which I will return  to,  it  is
    accepted that he has a serious mental health condition that results  in
    him being dis-inhibited,  having  perceptual  disturbance/eccentricity,
    and blurting out lies without thinking about  the  consequences.  Dr  C
    (paragraph 28) was of the  view  that  his  inability  to  control  his
    impulses leading to suddenly blurt out falsehoods  which  is  the  most
    likely explanation for the discrepancies in reporting aspects regarding
    being married, having children, speaking Chinese, and being kidnapped.

121. As set out as a preserved finding from the  decision  of  IJ  Tully  is
    that the appellant had not discharged the burden of proof  that  he  is
    divorced or be a target or be at risk from his ex-wife's family.

122. As I have not been asked to make  any  other  findings  concerning  his
    account, and it has not been demonstrated that he was at risk from  the
    Taliban when he left Afghanistan.

123. However, it is accepted on behalf of the respondent at this hearing  in
    the light of the submissions made by Mr Diwnycz that the appellant upon
    return to Afghanistan will have no family support. It is accepted  that
    he has not been in contact with  his  family  and  thus  will  have  no
    support either on return to his home area or on the basis submitted  by
    the respondent on return to Kabul.

124. The appellant comes from a particularly volatile part  of  Afghanistan.
    The EASO COI Report Afghanistan Security Situation  (May  2018)  states
    that  "the  Talban  have  a  'high'  'active  and  physical   presence'
    (districts attacked at least twice a week' in Tagab [AB page  213].  In
    2017 UNAMA documented 101 civilian victims in Kapisa (34 deaths and  67
    injured), a 19% decrease compared to 2016.

125. The CPIN Afghanistan: Security and humanitarian situation (April  2018)
    acknowledges that "Since the promulgation of AK in May 2012 the overall
    number of civilian deaths and injuries  in  Afghanistan  documented  by
    UNAMA has increased. The number of civilian casualties in 2016  (11,418
    - 3,498 deaths and 7,920 injured) has increased by 32% compared to 2011
    (7,842) - the highest since recording began in 2009; and a 3%  increase
    in total civilian casualties compared to  2015  [§2.3.14].  The  worst
    affected areas were the southern  and  eastern  provinces  of  Helmand,
    Nangarhar, Kandaha, Kunar and Ghazni,  which  experiences  50%  of  all
    security related incidents. The Taliban increased their  activities  in
    northern and north-eastern Afghanistan and Farah in the west,  as  well
    as putting pressure on  the  Government's  control  of  the  provincial
    capitals of Farah (Farah province), Kunduz (Kunduz  province),  Lashkar
    Gah (Helmand province) and Tirin  Kot  (Uruzgan  province)  [§2.3.15].
    Reflecting the worsening security situation, the first  six  months  of
    2017 saw the highest numbers of civilian casualties recorded  in  Kabul
    province due to suicide and complex attacks  in  Kabul  city.  However,
    nearly 60% of civilian casualties in Kabul city were caused by a single
    suicide attack in May 2017, and the number of high-profile  attacks  in
    the city in 2016 decreased from  2015  [§2.3.16].  the  proportion  of
    civilian casualties in Afghanistan remains low with around 0.03% of the
    population injured or killed each year (taking the 2016  UNAMA  numbers
    against a population estimate of around 30 million). The proportion  of
    civilian casualties recorded in Kabul city in the first six  months  of
    2017 equates to 0.02% of the city's population [§2.3.17]."

126. I accept that  concession  when  seen  in  the  light  of  the  country
    materials that relate to his home area and on the basis  that  he  left
    Afghanistan over 10 years ago

127. The core of the Appellant's case  relates  to  the  appellant's  mental
    health condition.

128. There are two report from Dr C, chartered clinical  psychologist  dated
    May 13, 2019 and updated report dated 1 October 2019.

129. He sets out at paragraph 14 the same questions that Dr W was  asked  to
    consider. For the purposes of his report he had the Home Office bundle,
    a draft statement, and medical reports from the prison.

130. It seems to be common ground that there is  no  record  of  any  mental
    health illness or any psychiatric  treatment  prior  to  the  appellant
    being received into custody.

131. There was no history of deliberate  self-harm  until  19  October  2017
    when he self-harm with  a  razor  blade  causing  superficial  injuries
    following problems with inmates. In 2018 he was assaulted by a prisoner
    and had anxiety due to being  assaulted  by  a  prisoner.  In  2018  he
    reported anxiety due to being hassled by prisoners who wanted to  fight
    him and that he was bored, and he wanted to  harm  himself  because  of
    this. He lost his enhanced status due to an altercation.

132. Dr C reports that the medical records show  that  he  was  issued  with
    deportation orders on 24 September 2019 and two days later,  the  first
    time, he reportedly heard animal noises and hit his  head.  Three  days
    afterwards he reportedly heard voices saying they  will  kill  him.  He
    reported seeing visual images of dead people. He also reported that  he
    hits his head but no visible marks injury. Three days afterwards on  28
    January 2019 a suicide attempt of hangings recorded due  to  his  voice
    telling him self-harm. No physical swelling neck observed that there is
    light bruising. By next day he reported much better and claimed that  a
    recent attempt of hanging was "unplanned and impulsive". A  self-report
    scale of mental health yields a low score.

133. The prison records as summarised by Dr C sets out  that  he  was  first
    assessed by a psychiatrist on 7 February 2019 whose opinion was that he
    had stress with underlying vulnerabilities. He "may have some psychotic
    symptoms" but more information was required from wing staff. The doctor
    believed that he should trial the antidepressant  mirtazapine  although
    "he was not considered depressed". He was then given a single cell  and
    reported that he been able to sleep. This  is  the  final  day  of  the
    medical  records.  He  continued  to  hear  voices  and   an   atypical
    antipsychotic medication was being considered.

134. Dr C, at paragraph 59, stated that having reviewed the medical  records
    the question his mind was "did a deportation threat  trigger  anxieties
    which triggered  a  hallucinate  re-psychotic  symptoms  or  was  there
    another explanation such as malingering?"

135. Dr C saw the appellant two weeks after he  had  been  released  in  May
    2019. He referred to his behaviour at paragraphs 84 - 88, and found his
    presentation was consistent with his opinion that the appellant  likely
    has  "inattention  and  hyperactivity  deficient  disorder   which   is
    exacerbated by uncertain  status  and  a  concern  about  returning  to
    Afghanistan as well  as  social  difficulties  associated  with  recent
    release and visit prison and detention  and  having  few  resources  or
    available means to change his current  predicament."  As  a  result  no
    clinical assessment tools were undertaken. The  opinion  was  based  on
    interview and prior medical records.

136. The report refers to a previous diagnosis of "possible depression"  and
    that he was taking no  medication.  There  is  also  reference  to  the
    appellant having disclosed during his OASY's assessment that he  smoked
    a lot of cannabis at the time of the offence (in 2016).

137. Dr C's opinion as to the  appellant's  mental  health  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 98 - 108.  He states that he  is  aware  of  the  credibility
    issues raised by the Secretary of State and  that  he  is  required  to
    perform  a  "critical  objective  analysis".  We  also   consider   the
    possibility  that   the   appellant   was   malingering,   fining,   or
    exaggerating.

138. As to the reports of a history of voice hearing, Dr  C  said  that  was
    inconsistent with his medical records. Having considered the onset  and
    content of the  auditory  hallucinations  there  are  two  most  likely
    possibilities either he is faking/malingering of the  voices,  or  they
    are part of a  psychotic  illness,  possibly  in  the  prodromal  stage
    (before full-blown psychotic episode) or that they are  accompanying  a
    very severe depressive or trauma induced mental health condition.

139. Because of his apparent inability to  remain  still  and  poor  impulse
    control, Dr C consider whether he was suffering from bipolar disorder.

140. Based on the factors used to determine  consider  malingering,  on  the
    balance of probabilities, Dr C stated "the most likely that he  is  not
    being  truthful  about  hearing  voices   and   some   other   reported
    difficulties. It is  possible,  but  unlikely  that  he  either  has  a
    psychotic illness or is in the early stages of an episode of psychosis.
    I think it most likely that he is malingering" (at paragraph 102).

141. Based on his previous presentation of providing a false history,  Dr  C
    relied less than usual on self-reported symptoms  but  took  them  into
    account. He believed that he would have arrived at the same  conclusion
    even if there had not been other evidence of fabrication.

142. Other possibilities exist, for example drug use, but again  he  stated,
    "I think this is less likely than malingering".

143. At paragraph 105 he stated "in my opinion,  the  appellant  is  anxious
    about the possibility of deportation and emotionally  stressed  due  to
    his current very difficult social situation where he is not  yet  given
    any income, noisy permitted to work. However,  I  did  not  believe  he
    meets criteria for anxiety disorder,  depressive  order,  or  a  trauma
    order such as PTSD.

144.  At  paragraph  106  he  states  "however,  he  does  have  an  unusual
    presentation that has been consistently observed  several  years  in  a
    range of locations. He has been untruthful, and he has  admitted  that,
    including aspects that there is no apparent gain. For example,  whether
    he has one child to Afghanistan or that he speaks  Chinese.  I  believe
    his impulse control, including singing was part of an effort to  appear
    mentally unwell, although he told me he does have a mental illness." At
    107 he states "I  therefore  considered  whether  he  has  traits  that
    includes pathological lying, poor impulse control  that  indicates  the
    presence of a personality disorder. There are  features  that  indicate
    the possible presence of a personality disorder, such as an  antisocial
    behaviour disorder. I do not have sufficient  information  to  give  an
    opinion either way".

145. Dr C  considered  he  did  not  present  as  someone  with  a  learning
    disability. He was able to demonstrate an  intelligence  that  was  not
    consistent with an intellectual impairment. However, he  presents  some
    difficulties evaluating information.

146. The diagnosis of Dr C is set out at paragraphs 109 - 112.

147. He diagnosed attention  deficit  disorder  (ADD)  which  explained  his
    presentation. It is also associated  with  his  offending  history  and
    there is an overlap between the possible  personality  disorder  traits
    that he may have and a  childhood  history  of  attention  deficit  and
    hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). However, his diagnosis  was  unconfirmed
    because he could not get a history from the appellant but on balance he
    thought it "very probable that he meets the criteria for ADD." The rest
    of his opinions which were expressed were premised on the basis that he
    believed that he had ADD. He observed  that  there  is  an  overlap  of
    difficulties between ADD and antisocial personality  disorder  and  the
    children diagnosed with ADHD are more likely  to  subsequently  develop
    antisocial personality disorders in adult hood.

148. He recommended that there was a range of  possibilities  for  treatment
    including medication that needs to be based  on  factors  that  require
    further assessment.

149. As to vulnerability and risk,  Dr  C  stated  "assessing  the  risk  of
    suicide was made more difficult because in my view he was  malingering.
    On balance I do not believe that is attempts  in  prison  were  serious
    attempt to end his life. They were more likely  to  have  been  due  to
    boredom (as he stated) and a desire for better self.  His  harming  and
    suicidal behaviour is consistent with ADD. People with  ADD  are  at  a
    greater risk than the general population  to  commit  suicide.  16%  of
    people with a diagnosis  attempted  suicide.  When  combined  with  the
    presence of another disorder such as depression, which he is  prone  to
    the chances of suicidally associated with 4-12 x higher risk. He has  a
    number of risk factors that further increase the likelihood of  suicide
    and they apply even though he may not have attempted to have  seriously
    wanted to end his life on other attempts. They are set out at paragraph
    121 and reference is made to suicide attempts at para 122.

150. At paragraph 123, Dr C states that the appellant was not  expressing  a
    desire to end his life upon assessment, but he is  extremely  impulsive
    and has a history of deliberate self-harm. The  history  combined  with
    the risk factors play similar sadistically high risk  of  suicide.  The
    risk is much greater if he is deported since deporting carries the risk
    of provoking a mood or anxiety disorder.

151. In summary at paragraph 124 he stated  "because  of  the  risk  of  the
    onset of a coexisting mood disorder and is ADD, he statistically is  at
    a very high risk of suicide of deported.  Because  of  his  impulsivity
    which has previously been expressed by stabbing someone, it  is  likely
    that future attempts will come with little warning."

152. At paragraphs 125 - 129 Dr C addresses an assessment of whether a  risk
    is increased if a decision was taken to deport him an assessment of his
    ability to cope and overcome  difficulties  on  return  to  Afghanistan
    under the heading "vulnerability". He states that adults with ADD are a
    far  higher  risk  of  developing  mood  and  anxiety   disorders   and
    deportation is likely to provoke a mood disorder which will placement a
    much higher risk of completed suicide compared if he  remained  in  the
    UK. If deported is at a far higher risk than if you remained here where
    he has some support mechanisms.

153. Paragraph 127 records "[the appellant]  is  impulsive  and  makes  rash
    decisions without  thinking  through.  A  DHD  is  associated  with  an
    irritability and the kinds of alterations that there is a record of him
    being in during prison."

154. Dr C stated that he could not predict the precise vulnerabilities  that
    he has but that he would be at "mortal risk in Afghanistan compared  to
    the UK. If he gets into altercations and Afghanistan weapons  are  more
    common and revenge is more likely. Despite his  protestations  that  he
    will not join a military group is impulsivity increases the  likelihood
    that he will."

155. The summary reached is as follows:

         .  The  appellant  was  probably  malingering  some  symptoms  and
           difficulties. He is also known to fabricated aspects of history.
           He says things that come  into  his  mind  irrespective  of  the
           truth, without thinking of the consequences. He has poor impulse
           control over what he says and what he does (para 130).

         . T the appellant on 1 October 2009; the assessment was in English
           and without an interpreter although there were some difficulties
           in understanding they were easily solved and had  little  to  do
           with the language difficulty. He most likely explanation is that
           he suffers from attention  deficit  and  hyperactivity  disorder
           (ADHD) or attention deficit disorder (ADD) .to so thought it  is
           probable that he has ADD.

         . ADD/ADHD making vulnerable  to  developing  a  mood  or  anxiety
           disorder if deported.

         . When combined with other risk factors his condition  places  him
           in a statistically higher possibility of suicide.

         . He is also greater risk of joining  a  military  fighting  group
           getting involved in  potentially  life-threatening  altercations
           and a host of other risks due to very poor impulse control.

         . It is likely that  his  condition  has  played  a  role  in  his
           offending in the UK

         . his condition is never properly been assessed or  treated.  This
           should happen as soon as possible by contacting his GP.

156. There is an updated report from  Dr  C  dated  October  7,  2019.  This
    report was commissioned because when he appeared  before  the  tribunal
    there were concerns as to whether he had capacity to give evidence.  At
    paragraphs 6 - 11, Dr C makes reference to the events  at  the  hearing
    and with his own counsel.

157. Dr C reassessed him on 1 October 2019. The assessment  was  in  English
    and  without  an  interpreter  however  tradition  states   there   was
    difficulties in understanding they were easily solved  and  likely  had
    little  to  do  with  the  language  difficulty.  He  stated  that  the
    appellant's difficulties are "unusual and rarely seen" (paragraph 14).

158. His opinion on his mental health in the context of his previous  report
    and that his presentation could be explained by malingering,  drug  use
    and poor  impulse  control.  And  that  is  poor  impulse  control  was
    attributed to a possibility of a personality disorder and/or  attention
    deficit disorder which would explain his presentation across domains.

159. Dr C now gives a  different  opinion.  He  considered  that  "the  most
    likely explanation  of  his  difficulties  is  schizotypal  personality
    disorder. This is unusual and fairly rare disorder that is  categorised
    by  the  World  Health  Organisation  as  a  psychotic   disorder   and
    characterised by DSM 5 as a personality disorder."

160. At paragraph 22, he describes schizotypal  personality  disorder  as  a
    "pervasive pattern  of  social  and  interpersonal  deficits  including
    reduced  capacity  of  close  relationships,  cognitive  or  perceptual
    disturbances and eccentricities of behaviour."

161. He gives an example of unusual belief at paragraph 23.

162. There is a strong impulsivity  difficulty  component  his  presentation
    which is  associated  with  ADD  but  may  be  better  to  put  into  a
    personality  disorder  trait  (as  paragraph  107   previous   report).
    "Whatever term we name is impulsivity the effect is  the  same,  he  is
    impulsive and cannot control himself or sit still  for  any  length  of
    time". Dr C considers  that  his  condition  is  consistent  with  this
    statement that he is a mental health problem that  causes  him  not  to
    think straight and say whatever comes into his mind (see  paragraph  37
    previous report). Both of the assessments to support the assertion.

163. Dr C recognised that his difficulties may be complicated by  drug  use,
    malingering, and exaggeration and  though  he  may  be  malingering  or
    exaggerating some aspects, Dr C was of little doubt that he has  mental
    health difficulties that are serious, probably treatment resistant  and
    caused a range of difficulties across domains.

164. He also remains of the  opinion  that  his  inability  to  control  his
    impulses leads him to suddenly blurt out falsehoods which is  the  most
    likely explanation for the discrepancies in his  reporting  of  aspects
    regarding being married, having children, speaking Chinese,  and  being
    kidnapped.

165. The risks to  himself  remain  valid  and  that  the  difficulties  are
    greater than previously thought (see paragraph 29).

166. At paragraphs 30 - 31 Dr C deals with the  issue  of  capacity  and  at
    paragraphs 32 - 34 deals with communication  problems  irrespective  of
    capacity.

167. In summary Dr C stated that  in  his  opinion  the  appellant  met  the
    criteria for diagnosis of schizotypal personality disorder which  is  a
    rare condition that resulted in some unusual effects on an  individual.
    His condition is made worse by high impulsivity which may be termed ADD
    or be an aspect of his personality. Other aspects impair communication;
    hearing loss, language, auditory communication, possible drug  use  and
    not waiting to listen properly. He probably blurts out lies, over which
    he has little control. The difficulties could be mitigated by  allowing
    him more time to weigh up the consequences, which  ultimately  has  the
    capacity to do. He concludes that he can present to someone without any
    hint of capacity difficulties and  there  is  nothing  in  his  medical
    records or psychological evaluations that suggests otherwise.

The psychiatric report:

168.  A  psychiatric  assessment  was  undertaken  by   Dr   W,   consultant
    psychiatrist on 11 March 2020. Dr W is not a treating psychiatrist  and
    had been instructed to prepare the report for the proceedings on behalf
    of the appellant's solicitors.

169. Counsel confirmed in a letter after the  hearing  that  Dr  W  had  the
    reports from Dr C when reaching his diagnosis.

170. Dr W states that he has regard to what the applicant has told  him  and
    what is contained  in  the  medical  records  and  other  documents  as
    "assumed facts". The only fact  that  he  had  personal  knowledge  his
    findings on examination as set out in the section entitled "psychiatric
    examination". He states he interviewed and examined  the  applicant  in
    Urdu. I note that the interviews undertaken with the Home  Office  have
    been carried out in Pashtu.

171. The report sets out the chronology of events. It  is  inaccurate  where
    it states that the appellant has resided in  the  UK  since  June  1999
    (this should be 2009). It sets out that "there is a long-term threat to
    his life in Afghanistan because of the enmity with his in-laws. In 2013
    he divorced his wife over the phone. His in-laws consider  this  to  be
    incredibly insulting and have  threatened  to  take  revenge  for  this
    humiliation. He feels  extremely  vulnerable  and  unsafe  in  case  he
    returns to Afghanistan." As to his marital history, it is  stated  "the
    applicant  was  married  in  Afghanistan  some  time  before  he   left
    Afghanistan.... He later had a daughter... In 2013 he divorced his wife
    over the phone leading to threats of revenge."

172. As to drinking alcohol and substances,  he  told  the  psychiatrist  he
    occasionally smokes be denied using any  drugs  and  that  he  gave  up
    drinking alcohol in 2016.

173. He has no family history of mental illness.

174. As to past psychiatric treatment in  the  UK,  the  psychiatrist  notes
    that since his arrival "he has faced considerable  hardships...  He  is
    financially and emotionally vulnerable, leading to bouts of  depression
    and suicidal ideation is and plans.  During  his  stay  in  prison,  he
    started taking mirtazapine and olanzapine at night has  continued  that
    medication to the GP. He notes "there is no history  of  assessment  by
    any psychiatrist or admission to a mental health unit". He reported  an
    instance when he decided to end his life and showed a large  scar  over
    his right risk which he attributed to an attempt to end his  life.  The
    psychiatrist notes "he did not report any significant medical illness."



175. Dr W set out his current mental state. He observed that  the  appellant
    did not appear to be keen on answering questions did not understand the
    importance and relevance preparing a psychiatric report. He  maintained
    good eye contact but became emotionally overwhelmed when describing his
    problems.

176. As to his mood, both subjectively and objectively, he appeared to  have
    a low mood. "His past experiences Afghanistan ongoing problems  in  the
    UK  burden  him.  He  reports  having  active  suicidal   ideation   is
    acknowledges at times having thoughts that life is not worth living."

177. As to thoughts  it  is  recorded  that  "he  remains  preoccupied  with
    intrusive thoughts about the consequences of return to Afghanistan  and
    threats to his life  upon  return.  He  reported  that  these  worrying
    thoughts became overwhelming over the last few months.

178. Under "perceptions", the appellant reported that he  had  heard  voices
    in his head. They are multiple mixed gender voices, and they are trying
    to harass and intimidate him. He has no control over them,  and  it  is
    stressful for him.

179. Under the section "insight" it is stated that the  appellant  has  full
    insight into his mental health problems. He attributed this to  threats
    to his life in asylum case in the UK. He recognised his symptoms and is
    ready to consider treatment. He is also motivated to engage  with  this
    treatment plan.

180. The "predisposing factors for depression", include threat  to  life  in
    Afghanistan as he has deserted  from  becoming  a  Taleban  accomplice,
    threats of his in-laws, experiences of long-term immigration in the UK.
    Precipitating factors are his  continued  illegal  migrant  status  and
    reported recurring intensive dramatic thoughts in the prison  sentence.
    The "maintaining factors for depression" are  stated  to  be  financial
    constraints, fear of rejection of asylum application uncertainty  about
    the future.

181. The prognosis is stated as follows:

         "Based on my own  assessment  of  the  mental  state,  the  overall
         prognosis remains poor in the short term. There have been recurrent
         episodes of depression with an increased risk of  suicide.  He  has
         intrusive traumatic thoughts. With progressing age, the episodes of
         depression tend to  become  recurrence,  severe  and  resistant  to
         treatment. The prognosis is  further  made  worse  with  associated
         symptoms of traumatic stress. The ongoing stressors will take  time
         to resolve, but he is motivated to engage with treatment  and  work
         with health providers to find solutions with problems.

182. In the summary of conclusions, the following is stated::-

         "The appellant reports of persistent risks to himself and return to
         Afghanistan because he deserted from the Taleban.

         There is a history of depression and recurrent suicidal ideation is
         with plans.

         In my opinion  the  applicant  suffers  from  recurrent  depressive
         disorder along with features of PTSD.

         He needs  to  improve  his  mental  health  treatment  with  Pharma
         logical/psychological therapeutic approaches.

         His risk of self-harm is high and the risk of suicide while in  the
         UK will increase once he is informed of his deportation.

         If he is deported to Afghanistan, he  will  have  to  face  extreme
         stress and lack of support, thus increasing  his  vulnerability  to
         suicide.

         He  recommends  reviewing  his  current  dose  of  medication   and
         increasing it and that this would need to be  monitored.  He  would
         need to continue this treatment fully six months after he  recovers
         from his symptoms. His response to treatment may be limited due  to
         his current immigration matter.

         When  considering  the  psychosocial  precipitating   factors   and
         elements of PTSD, it is also  suggested  that  the  applicant  will
         benefit from receiving psychological therapy such as  CBT  for  the
         treatment of depression/ anxiety. This is a technique to help  them
         understand  thoughts  and  feelings  that   lead   to   potentially
         problematic behaviour. The local  NHS  mental  health  service  can
         provide this. The  treatment  period  can  vary.  The  psychiatrist
         recommends at least 8 to 12 weekly sessions. There is also  a  need
         to be signposted to local ethnic support group to  end  his  social
         isolation and enhance integration in the community. If the  current
         symptoms are left untreated, his condition may worsen to the extent
         that it becomes resistant to treatment and the  risk  can  escalate
         there is a risk of deterioration in  his  mental  health  fails  to
         comply with  the  medical  treatment  as  recommended  any  further
         exposure to a stressful situation  which  is  likely  to  face  and
         return Afghanistan may facilitate a severe aggravation his symptoms
         without appropriate treatment, his prognosis is poor."

183.  As  to  the  impact  on  his  mental  health  upon  deportation,   the
    psychiatrist again refers to the appellant having resided in the UK for
    the last 20 years since 1999, (again  this  is  a  factual  error).  He
    states medical treatment for options for mental health  are  scarce  in
    Afghanistan. "However, the main issue is that he  will  be  exposed  to
    life-threatening consequences of his desertion  from  the  Taleban  and
    revenge from his in-laws. Financially  sustaining  himself  will  be  a
    problem with all these  ongoing  psychosocial  issues,  monitoring  his
    mood, seeking psychiatric help and adhere to the treatment plans.

184. Dr W concludes "in my opinion,  return  to  Afghanistan  will  have  an
    extremely detrimental impact on his mental health with  worsening  risk
    to self."

185. As can be seen from the summary of the  medical  reports  there  is  no
    agreement between the experts involved as to  the  appellant's  correct
    diagnosis. Dr C considers that the appellant's  condition  is  "unusual
    and rarely seen" (I refer to paragraph 15 of  his  addendum)  and  that
    having had the opportunity to provide a further report and consider his
    condition he is of the opinion that the most likely explanation for his
    condition is that  he  is  suffering  from  a  schizotypal  personality
    disorder which is  an  unusual  and  fairly  rare  disorder;  which  is
    categorised by the WHO as a psychotic disorder and characterised by the
    APA as a personality disorder. He states the condition is made worse by
    high impulsivity which may be termed attention deficit disorder  as  an
    aspect of his personality.

186. Dr W by way of  contrast  diagnosed  him  suffering  from  a  recurrent
    depressive order along with features  of  PTSD  with  a  high  risk  of
    suicide.

187. Both are experts in their  differing  fields,  Dr  W  is  a  consultant
    psychiatrist and Dr C is a chartered psychologist.  Whilst  Mr  Diwnycz
    submitted that Dr W does not appear to have the correct  letters  after
    his name, no further submissions or evidence was provided in support of
    this submission. He has also  provided  a  number  of  reports  to  the
    tribunal as a psychiatrist consequently I have no difficulty  accepting
    his expertise as a psychiatrist. However in terms of diagnosis  I  have
    reached the conclusion that the reports of Dr C have the greater weight
    in the sense that he has been able to see the appellant  on  more  than
    one occasion and also has made reference to other material available to
    assist him in reaching his overall diagnosis. I have not found that  be
    the position with Dr W.

188. Dr W stated that he has had regard to the medical reports, and  counsel
    was expressly asked if Dr W had been sent the copies of Dr C's  reports
    and she sent a  letter  confirming  this  to  the  tribunal  after  the
    hearing. However there is no reference to any diagnosis reached by Dr C
    in the report of Dr W. This is important because in Dr  C's  report  he
    makes reference to the appellant's mental health condition and how this
    relates to the  appellant's  inability  to  provide  a  consistent  and
    plausible factual history. It can be noted from the report of Dr W that
    he  appears  to  accept  the  appellant's  account  as  to  events   in
    Afghanistan and in his conclusion stated, "the main issue is that he is
    exposed to life-threatening consequences  of  his  desertion  from  the
    Taleban and revenge from his in-laws."

189. It is also the case that Dr W refers to the  appellant  of  having  "no
    history of assessment by any psychiatrist". However as set out  in  the
    medical records as reflected in Dr C's report, the appellant  was  seen
    by a psychiatrist in February 2019 and  that  he  was  assessed  by  Dr
    Fazeli  whose  opinion  was  that  the  appellant  had  "stressed  with
    underlying vulnerabilities" and that "he may well have  some  psychotic
    symptoms." Importantly, the report of Dr C sets out some aspects of the
    appellant's  account  which  Dr  C  considered  provided  evidence   of
    malingering or exaggeration. There are also factual  mistakes  made  in
    the report of Dr W where he refers to the appellant having lived in the
    United Kingdom for over 20 years  since  1999,  both  in  the  county's
    history and also when stating his conclusions.

190. Therefore the  position  is  that  both  differ  as  to  their  precise
    diagnosis. Whilst that  is  the  case,  it  is  still  plain  that  the
    appellant  is  suffering  from  serious  mental  health  condition.   I
    therefore attach more weight to the reports of Dr C.  Mr  Diwnycz  does
    not dispute its contents, nor has he sought to challenge any aspect  of
    its contents during this hearing.

191. That said, I am satisfied the Doctor W  is  a  consultant  psychiatrist
    with the relevant expertise and whilst I have outlined certain areas of
    difficulty, I do attach weight  to  his  report  and  its  contents.  I
    observe his diagnosis as to the high risk of suicide is consistent with
    the report of Dr C in this respect. Both experts have given reasons for
    reaching their respective conclusions on this  issue  and  whilst  they
    differ in their diagnosis and given that they are different experts  in
    different fields, they are in agreement  about  that  issue.  I  accept
    their evidence on the issue of the risk of suicide  and  self-harm  and
    again this has not  been  challenged  by  the  respondent  during  this
    hearing.

Section 72:

192. In the light of the appellant's conviction  having  pleaded  guilty  to
    wounding with intent on being in possession of a bladed  article  which
    led to his sentence of imprisonment of 6 years  and  4  months,  it  is
    necessary to consider the issue of the Section 72 certificate.

193. Section 72 of the  2002  Act  provides  (so  far  as  is  relevant)  as
    follows:-

         Section 72 Serious criminal

         (1)  This section applies for the purpose of the construction and
             application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention
             (exclusion from protection).

         (2)  A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a final
             judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a
             danger to the community of the United Kingdom is he is -

         (a)  convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

         (b)  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years.

         ...

         (9)  Subsection (1) applies where -

            (a)   a person appeals under Section 82, 83 [F1, 83A] or 101 of
                 this Act or under section 2 of the Special Immigration
                 Appeals Commission Act 1997 (c. 68) wholly or partly on the
                 ground that to remove him from or to require him to leave
                 the United Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's
                 obligations under the Refugee Convention, and

            (b)   the Secretary of State issues a certificate that
                 presumptions under subsection (2), (3) or (4) apply to the
                 person (subject to rebuttal).

         (10) The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal -

             (a)  must being substantive deliberation on the appeal by
                  considering the certificate, and

             (b)  if in agreement that presumptions under subsection (2),
                  (3) or (4) apply (having given the appellant an
                  opportunity for rebuttal) must dismiss the appeal in so
                  far as it relies on the grounds specified in subsection
                  (9)(a).

194. Where the Secretary of State has certified his decision  under  section
    72 of the 2002 Act, section 72(1)  tells  the  Court  or  Tribunal  how
    Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention  is  to  be  applied.  Section
    72(10) of the 2002 Act requires the Tribunal to begin its consideration
    of the appeal with consideration of the  section  72  certificate.  The
    claimant will have appealed under section 82, 83, 83A  or  101  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended),  wholly  or
    partly on the ground that to remove him from,  or  to  require  him  to
    leave the United Kingdom, would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  Refugee
    Convention obligations (see section 72(9)(a)).

195. A section 72 certificate has the effect of  raising  a  dual  statutory
    presumption: first, that the claimant has been  convicted  on  a  final
    judgment  of  a  'particularly  serious  crime'  and  second,  that  he
    'constitutes a danger to the  community'.  In  the  case  of  a  person
    convicted in the United  Kingdom,  section  72(2)  provides  that  both
    presumptions come into effect where the individual is  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least 2 years.

196. Both presumptions may be rebutted by appropriate evidence, as  set  out
    in section 72(6) and EN (Serbia) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department & Anor [2009] EWCA Civ 630.

197. If both presumptions are not rebutted, then section  72(10)(b)  of  the
    Act requires the Tribunal to dismiss the appeal in so far as it  relies
    on the  Refugee  Convention  ground.  No  presumptions  are  raised  in
    relation to human rights.

198. I am guided in my  approach  to  the  section  72  certificate  by  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Mugwagwa (s.72 -  applying  statutory
    presumptions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT  338  (IAC).   Paragraph  1  of  the
    judicial headnote to that decision is as follows:

         "1.  The First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  is
         required to apply of its own motion the statutory  presumptions  in
         s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  to  the
         effect that Art 33(2) of the Refugee Convention  will  not  prevent
         refoulement of a refugee where the  factual  underpinning  for  the
         application of s.72 is present even if the Secretary of  State  has
         not relied upon Art 33(2) and s.72."

199. The Upper Tribunal in Mugwagwa explained the effect of the  section  72
    certificate as follows:

         "23.  Section  72(2)  creates  statutory  presumptions   that   the
         requirements of Art 33(2)  are  met  and,  as  a  consequence,  the
         prohibition against refoulement will not apply.  Section 72  is  in
         mandatory  terms:  "[a]  person  shall  be  presumed...".   In  our
         judgment, where s.72(2) or any of the  other  statutory  provisions
         creating presumptions in s.72 applies, the Tribunal is under a duty
         to apply s.72 to the individual in the appeal. Given the evidential
         base provided by these presumptions, subject to rebuttal, Art 33(2)
         will apply in such circumstances so that that a  refugee's  removal
         will not be a breach of the Refugee  Convention.   Of  course,  the
         individual will, whilst he fulfils the definition in Art 1  of  the
         Refugee  Convention,  still  have  the  status  of  a  refugee   in
         international law; and he cannot be removed  from  the  UK  to  his
         country of nationality as that would inevitably infringe Art  3  of
         the ECHR.  However, given the terms of the 2002 and 2007 Acts,  his
         appeal relying on 'asylum' or 'refugee' grounds cannot succeed.

200. In the decision of EN (Serbia) (as cited) the following was  stated  at
    [45]-[47] and at [66]:"

         "45. These remarks apply with equal force here. Moreover, I see  no
             need for any gloss on the express words of Article 33(2).  The
             words "particularly serious crime" are clear,  and  themselves
             restrict  drastically  the  offences  to  which  the   Article
             applies. So far as "danger to the community" is concerned, the
             danger must be real,  but  if  a  person  is  convicted  of  a
             particularly serious crime, and there is a real  risk  of  its
             repetition, he  is  likely  to  constitute  a  danger  to  the
             community.

          1. The Appellants submitted that Article 33(2) requires that  the
             danger to the community must  be  causally  connected  to  the
             particularly serious  crime  of  which  the  person  has  been
             convicted.  I  would  accept  that  normally  the  danger   is
             demonstrated by proof of the particularly serious offence  and
             the risk of its recurrence, or of the recurrence of a  similar
             offence. I would also accept that the wording of Article 33(2)
             reflects that expectation. But it does not expressly require a
             causal connection, and I do  not  think  that  one  is  to  be
             implied. By way of example, I do not see why a person who  has
             been convicted of a particularly serious offence  of  violence
             and who the State can establish is a significant  drug  dealer
             should not be liable to refouled under Article 33(2).  In  any
             event,  it  seems  to  me  that  a  disregard  for  the   law,
             demonstrated  by  the  conviction,  would  be  sufficient   to
             establish a causal connection between the conviction  and  the
             danger. If so, the suggested added  requirement  of  a  causal
             connection has little if any practical consequence.

          1. I would add that I have no  doubt  that  particularly  serious
             crimes are not restricted  to  offences  against  the  person.
             Frauds, thefts, and offences against  property,  for  example,
             are capable of being particularly serious crimes, as may  drug
             offences, particularly  those  involving  class  A  drugs.  In
             addition,  matters  such   as   frequent   repetition   or   a
             sophisticated system or  the  participation  of  a  number  of
             offenders may aggravate the seriousness of an offence.

         ...

         66. I see no reason why a rebuttable presumption, imposed for  the
             purposes of a decision as  to  whether  removal  would  be  in
             breach of Article 33(1), should be incompatible  with  Article
             33(2) of the Convention, at least in cases  in  which  it  may
             reasonably be inferred that  a  conviction  gives  rise  to  a
             reasonable likelihood that  a  person's  conviction  is  of  a
             particularly serious crime and that he constitutes a danger to
             the community. The Convention does not prescribe the procedure
             by which the conditions required by Article 33(2)  are  to  be
             established; and the creation of a rebuttable presumption is a
             matter of procedure rather than of substance.  I  accept  that
             the Convention places an onus on the State  of  refuge.  Under
             section 72, it is for the Secretary of State to establish that
             the person in  question  has  been  convicted  of  a  relevant
             offence. In practice, once the State has  established  that  a
             person has been convicted of what is  on  the  face  of  it  a
             particularly serious crime, it will be for him to show  either
             that it was not  in  fact  particularly  serious,  because  of
             mitigating factors associated with  its  commission,  or  that
             because there is no danger  of  its  repetition  he  does  not
             constitute a danger to the community."

201. The appellant was informed in writing on  2  November  2018  about  the
    intention  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  protection  under   refugee
    Convention on section 72 grounds. In accordance with section 72 (6) the
    2002 act he was invited to rebut the presumption that the crime that he
    was convicted of on 9 August 2016 was a particular  serious  crime  and
    that his continued presence in the  UK  constituted  a  danger  to  the
    community.

202. It is recorded in the decision letter that he replied stating  that  he
    wished to apologise for his inconsiderate unusual  behaviour  and  that
    ever since he was not able to express in words his feelings of disgust,
    shame, and pain that he suffered every day and for causing unimaginable
    physical and mental health of his victims, members of  the  family  the
    wider community. He accepted full responsibility for  the  offence  and
    that he would play no part in any criminal activity. It was  said  that
    there was no justification for his behaviour however he  was  suffering
    from depression, anxiety and PTSD which directly stemmed from traumatic
    events had witnessed in Afghanistan.

203. He further submitted that since he had been imprisoned, he had  matured
    and  had  better  insight  and  completed  courses  whilst  in  custody
    including Brcs, maths ESOL, training in catering (kitchen) and training
    in gardening. Over the past six months he demonstrated his new reformed
    character by being an enhanced prisoner. It was submitted that  he  had
    taken huge strides towards reform and to complete rehabilitation.

204. The respondent gave consideration to the case law  in  the  context  of
    the statutory framework. It was noted that conviction of a particularly
    serious crime in and of itself was not sufficient and that  the  person
    concerned, must, in view of the crime, also must present  a  danger  to
    the community. Having considered the representations and  acknowledging
    that he had clearly made an effort to reform, it  was  noted  that  the
    efforts had been made within a controlled environment  and  thus  would
    carry less weight than if he were  on  licence  and  demonstrated  good
    behaviour in an uncontrolled environment.

205. The decision letter sets out the sentencing remarks  at  paragraph  67.
    It was acknowledged that the sentencing judge found  that  he  appeared
    not to be a threat to the general public but concluded that the offence
    was still serious enough to merit a prison sentence of  six  years  and
    four months. Thus the respondent concluded that the appellant  had  not
    rebutted the  presumptions  and  that  his  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention should be dismissed.

206.  Ms  Bartlam  on  behalf  of  the   appellant   submits   that   whilst
    acknowledging the past offending, the tribunal was asked to  take  into
    account a number of factors in  reaching  a  conclusion.  Firstly,  the
    appellant pleaded guilty to the offence and that  the  remarks  of  the
    sentencing judge concerning the limitations  of  the  offence  were  of
    importance. The judge took into account that there were no offences  of
    violence previously recorded against him and that it was not a "serious
    injury in the context of the offence". The judge did not find  that  he
    was a dangerous offender.

207. It was also submitted  that  the  appellant's  mental  health  and  its
    possible role in his offending had not been taken into account  as  the
    appellant did not have a mental health diagnosis in  2016  or  February
    2019 and did not commence medication until  early  2019.  Reliance  was
    placed upon the insight shown in  his  offending  and  his  remorse  as
    exhibited in his letters (see RB 53 - 56 and 147 - 150), his absence of
    any subsequent offences of violence and that it was significant that he
    had been on licence since April 2019. The respondent had  not  provided
    any evidence of risk to the community.

208. I am satisfied that the appellant is a person to whom Section 72(2)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies as he has been
    convicted of an offence and sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
    least two years. That leads  to  presumptions  (a)  that  he  has  been
    convicted of a particularly serious crime and (b) that this constitutes
    a danger to the community of the United Kingdom.

209. As to the interpretation of Section 72,  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EN
    (Serbia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 630 said this at [46] to [47]:

         "46. The Appellants submitted that Article 33(2) requires that  the
         danger  to  the  community  must  be  causally  connected  to   the
         particularly serious crime of which the person has been  convicted.
         I would accept that normally the danger is demonstrated by proof of
         the particularly serious offence and the risk of its recurrence, or
         of the recurrence of a similar offence. I would  also  accept  that
         the wording of Article 33(2) reflects that expectation. But it does
         not expressly require a causal connection, and I do not think  that
         one is to be implied. By way of example, I do not see why a  person
         who has  been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  offence  of
         violence and who the State can  establish  is  a  significant  drug
         dealer should not be liable to refouled under Article 33(2). In any
         event, it seems to me that a disregard for the law, demonstrated by
         the  conviction,  would  be  sufficient  to  establish   a   causal
         connection between the  conviction  and  the  danger.  If  so,  the
         suggested added requirement of a causal connection  has  little  if
         any practical consequence.

         47.  I would add that I have no  doubt  that  particularly  serious
         crimes are not restricted to offences against the  person.  Frauds,
         thefts, and offences against property, for example, are capable  of
         being  particularly  serious  crimes,   as   may   drug   offences,
         particularly those involving class A drugs.  In  addition,  matters
         such as frequent  repetition  or  a  sophisticated  system  or  the
         participation  of  a  number  of  offenders   may   aggravate   the
         seriousness of an offence. It is also of  note  that  at  [62]  the
         Secretary of State accepted that the  relevant  provisions  of  the
         Qualification Directive are directly effective."

210. The court said this at [66] and at [80]:

         "66. I see no reason why a rebuttable presumption, imposed for  the
         purposes of a decision as to whether removal would be in breach  of
         Article 33(1), should be incompatible with  Article  33(2)  of  the
         Convention, at least  in  cases  in  which  it  may  reasonably  be
         inferred that a conviction gives rise to  a  reasonable  likelihood
         that a person's conviction is of a particularly serious  crime  and
         that he constitutes a danger to the community. The Convention  does
         not prescribe the procedure by which  the  conditions  required  by
         Article 33(2)  are  to  be  established;  and  the  creation  of  a
         rebuttable presumption is a matter  of  procedure  rather  than  of
         substance. I accept that the Convention places an onus on the State
         of refuge. Under section 72, it is for the Secretary  of  State  to
         establish that the person in  question  has  been  convicted  of  a
         relevant offence. In practice, once the State has established  that
         a person has been convicted  of  what  is  on  the  face  of  it  a
         particularly serious crime, it will be for him to show either  that
         it was not in fact  particularly  serious,  because  of  mitigating
         factors associated with its commission, or that because there is no
         danger of its repetition he does not constitute  a  danger  to  the
         community.

         ....

         80.  I conclude that section 72 can be and  is  to  be  interpreted
         conformably with Article 14(4) of the Directive, and  therefore  as
         creating  rebuttable  presumptions  in  relation  to  both  of  the
         relevant requirements of Article 33(2), i.e.  in  relation  to  the
         seriousness  of  the  crime  and  in  relation  to  danger  to  the
         community, and I would reject the Secretary of  State's  submission
         to the contrary. Parenthetically, it is interesting  to  note  that
         this result is consistent with the Explanatory Notes to  the  Bill,
         which stated at paragraph 198 in relation to section 72:

             'A person may rebut the presumption that they have committed a
             particularly serious crime and are a danger to the community.'

         We were told that this was an  error,  corrected  by  the  Minister
         during the course of the Parliamentary proceedings on the Bill"

211. Paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules provides as follows:

         '339D. A person is excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection
         for the purposes of paragraph 339C (iv) where the Secretary of
         State is satisfied that:

             (i) there are serious reasons for considering that they have
             committed a crime against peace, a war crime, a crime against
             humanity, or any other serious crime or instigated or
             otherwise participated in such crimes;

             (ii) there are serious reasons for considering that they have
             guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the
             United Nations or have committed, prepared, or instigated such
             acts or encouraged or induced others to commit, prepare or
             instigate such acts;

             (iii) there are serious reasons for considering that they
             constitute a danger to the community or to the security of the
             United Kingdom; or

             (iv) there are serious reasons for considering that they have
             committed a serious crime; or

             (v) prior to their admission to the United Kingdom the person
             committed a crime outside the scope of (i) and (iv) that would
             be punishable by imprisonment where it committed in the United
             Kingdom and the person left their country of origin solely in
             order to avoid sanctions resulting from the crime.'

212. As the appellant's case has been certified under section 72 ((9) of
    the 2002 Act, the first point is to consider whether the appellant has
    discharged the presumption that he constitutes a danger to the
    community and is excluded from Refugee or Humanitarian Protection.

213. Ms Bartlam on behalf of the appellant did not seek to  argue  that  the
    appellant had not been convicted of a particularly serious crime in the
    light of his conviction for wounding and the sentence he received.  Her
    submissions were that he had successfully rebutted the  presumption  of
    the danger to the community.  I  have  set  out  the  nature  of  those
    submissions above.

214. I remind myself that it is not for the  respondent  to  establish  that
    the appellant presents a risk to the community, it is for the appellant
    to rebut the statutory presumption that he represent such a danger.

215. I have considered with care the submissions on behalf of the  appellant
    and those set out in the decision letter and those  provided  in  their
    oral argument to which I have regard. I have also considered the issues
    raised in the light of the documentary evidence before the tribunal.

216. The circumstances of the offence the appellant  committed  are  recited
    in the sentencing remarks and also in the OASYs report. This was a very
    serious offence not only by reason of the length  of  sentence  imposed
    but also by reference to the commission of the offence.  The  appellant
    pleaded guilty, partway through  the  trial  to  offences  of  unlawful
    wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm by stabbing his  victim
    several times in the face, shoulder, and arm. According to the  report,
    the attack on the victim was a revenge attack and following an  earlier
    altercation. The  appellant  approached  the  victim  from  behind  and
    punched him in the face then pulling  a  knife  out  and  stabbing  him
    several times. The victim suffered injuries to his face body and  as  a
    result of the stab wounds he received, two of which required suturing.

217. The appellant's offence was clearly serious with  aggravating  features
    including the possession of a knife and acting in  revenge.  The  OASys
    report refers to the offence being  committed  at  the  time  when  the
    appellant  was  under  the  influence  of  either  alcohol   or   drugs
    (cannabis).

218. Ms Bartlam  submits  that  whilst  this  was  a  serious  offence,  the
    appellant had not committed any violence of this  type  previously  and
    relies upon the remarks made by the  sentencing  judge  to  demonstrate
    that he is not a danger to the community. The sentencing  judge  stated
    that he had to consider whether he was a significant  risk  of  causing
    serious injury to members of the public. The judge stated that  he  did
    not find the "dangerousness criteria" to apply and sentenced him  to  a
    determinate sentence of six years and four months.

219. However as a matter of sentencing law, it is not a requirement  for  an
    extended sentence to be passed were a younger person  is  found  to  be
    dangerous within the meaning of the  Criminal  Justice  Act  2003  (see
    section 226A(4). In R v Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ  1341  the  Court  of
    Appeal reaffirmed the principle that young people  are  likely  to  act
    impulsively and more likely to respond to any sentence imposed and more
    likely to affect change, especially when any sentence is likely  to  be
    long. A practice has evolved over time when sentencing young people for
    serious offences that a formal dangerousness assessment is  not  always
    commissioned if the sentencing judge has in  mind  a  long  determinate
    sentence. Therefore I would  not  consider  the  absence  of  a  formal
    finding of dangerousness to mean that the appellant would not have  met
    that test if such a test had been  commissioned.  Moreover,  I  do  not
    consider that the mere fact of a determinate sentence  means  that  the
    appellant could not have been found to be dangerous.

220. Furthermore the sentencing judge did not  have  the  evidence  that  is
    before this tribunal in the form of the OASys's report and the  reports
    of Dr C and Dr W.

221. The OASys' report has been compiled by  the  probation  service  and  I
    consider that this is a report which should be  afforded  weight.  That
    report sets out that the appellant poses a high risk  of  harm  to  the
    public and other persons,  which  is  greater  if  the  appellant  felt
    wronged or disrespected and likely to resort to violence if someone was
    violent to him. The risk is assessed as a high risk to members  of  the
    public and the risk is likely to be serious including serious  physical
    assault. The risk of reoffending is also set out  in  the  report.  The
    probability of non-violent offending is said to be 30% (first year) and
    44% in the second year leading to an assessment of  a  medium  risk  of
    reoffending  of  non-violent  offences.  The  probability  of   violent
    offending is 12% in the first year and 21% in the second  year  and  is
    identified as a low risk. However as set out in the risk to the public,
    whilst the risk of reoffending is statistically lower, the harm  caused
    would likely to be serious harm.

222. The OASys report identifies indicators  of  risk  in  relation  to  the
    appellant. The probation  service  assessed  the  appellant  as  having
    problems  dealing  with  conflict  with  others  without  resulting  to
    violence. This is supported by  the  commission  of  the  offence  that
    following a disagreement with the appellant he  approached  his  victim
    and assaulted him with a weapon in attempt to settle the grudge between
    them, which the probation officer found was confirmed by the victim.

223.  When  looking  at  the  evidence,  this  view  is  supported  by   the
    appellant's conduct whilst in custody. The appellant  is  described  as
    having issues of problem solving and consequential thinking as well  as
    temper control  and  anger  management.  There  is  reference  to  this
    behaviour in custody and that the report  states  "there  are  concerns
    about his behaviour in custody".

224. Both the OASys report and the report of Dr  C  refer  to  adjudications
    whilst in custody it is stated  that  he  has  four  adjudications  for
    assault other prisoners and  fighting  with  another  prisoner.  It  is
    recorded that he had previous adjudications in 2016 although no details
    are given. In January 2017 he assaulted a prisoner. On 31 July 2017, is
    recorded that there was a  fight  between  the  appellant  and  another
    prisoner over tobacco. It  does  not  appear  that  this  incident  was
    serious, and the description is of the  two  men  grappling  with  each
    other. The appellant is recorded as regretting his actions and that  he
    would approach the situation more sensibly next time. However following
    that incident on the 11 September 2017, it  is  recorded  that  he  was
    taken off level I gym fighting with the  same  prisoner.  He  sustained
    more injuries but both prisoners admitted that they had been  fighting.
    On 17 Jan 2018 there was an  assault  by  the  appellant  upon  another
    prisoner and on 12 October 2018 there was a  further  reference  to  an
    incident. Consequently  the  probation  service  considered  that  this
    evidence demonstrated the appellant had issues in "problem solving  and
    consequential  thinking"  as  well  as  "temper   control   and   anger
    management".

225. The OASys report at section 7 concluded that  there  were  identifiable
    indicators of risk of serious harm and that he has potential  to  cause
    serious harm to the public but unlikely to do  so  unless  there  is  a
    change in circumstances.

226. The report sets out the likely circumstances that would increase  risk.
    They are identified as follows; unemployment, lack of  engagement  with
    pro-social activities, lack of constructive use of his time,  unsettled
    immigration status, drug and alcohol misuse,  pro-criminal  peer  group
    associations, lack of suitable accommodation,  failure  to  develop  an
    inability to manage heightened emotions of anger, failure to deal  with
    conflict situations without resulting to violent behaviour, failure  to
    develop alternative thinking skills  and  to  improve  problem  solving
    skills, impulsiveness and desire  to  thrill  seeker  without  thinking
    through the consequences of  his  actions,  if  diagnosed  with  mental
    health issues, lack of engagement with mental health services.

227. A specific risk factor relates to drug and  alcohol  misuse.  A  letter
    from the mental health support worker took the view that substances had
    not appeared to be a risk in any of the paperwork that he had seen, and
    this had been confirmed by the probation officer. However this  is  not
    consistent with the material in the OASys report  or  that  in  Dr  C's
    report. It is stated that prior to custody the appellant was leading  a
    lifestyle with no direction, no stable accommodation or employment  and
    had misused  drugs  and  alcohol.  The  previous  offences  of  driving
    (although they are of  course  a  different  character  from  those  of
    violence) were described as "evidence of recklessness  and  risk-taking
    behaviour" as the pattern of driving offences  show  that  he  did  not
    learn from his mistakes. The report also sets out  that  the  appellant
    was under the influence of cannabis when he committed the  offences  in
    2016 and according to the CPS papers he  was  under  the  influence  of
    alcohol.

228. The OASys report refers the  appellant  stating  that  he  occasionally
    used cannabis but that in the view of  the  probation  officer  "it  is
    possible that he is minimising these drug issues"  and  the  assessment
    was made that drug use was linked to the risks of harm.

229. Thus the information in the OASys report is  not  consistent  with  the
    letter from the appellant's mental health support worker.

230. In assessing the question of whether the appellant is a danger  to  the
    community, there is a letter from his probation officer (at pages 116 -
    117 dated 13/11/2020). In that letter he states that the appellant  has
    been on licence since his release in April 2019 and is accommodated  in
    bail housing. He has attended  90  appointments  with  no  unauthorised
    absences. He is described as having language difficulties and  his  use
    of English, though improving was still basic. He is engaging  with  the
    community service mental health team and has been seen in September and
    November 2020 and has had one session with a  psychiatrist  to  provide
    advice on medication. It is  recorded  that  he  is  engaged  with  the
    probation  service  by  phone  contact  and  office   appointments   on
    alternative weeks. It is recorded also  that  "he  still  seems  rather
    isolated in the community".

231. I take into account in his favour  the  positive  engagement  with  the
    probation service as set out in the letter. I take  into  account  also
    that it is not a very  long  time  to  be  in  the  community  and  the
    proceedings in relation to deportation are still ongoing which for most
    would perhaps provide a strong incentive to behave.

232. I also take into account that the letter written on  13  November  2020
    still refers  to  the  current  assessment  of  the  appellant  as  "is
    currently assessed as a high  risk  of  harm  against  members  of  the
    public". It still states that "the risk is  greater  if  the  appellant
    felt wronged or disrespected or someone was violent  to  him  the  risk
    would also increase he failed to engage with probation or mental health
    services". The letter reaffirms the OGRS3 tool assessment as  a  medium
    probability of non-violent offending and a low  probability  of  proven
    violent type offending.

233. The letter gives no other insights as  to  how  the  identifiable  risk
    factors in the OASys report have been addressed. Importantly the letter
    does not state the risk of harm assessed as  high  to  members  of  the
    public has changed.

234. There is a report from a psychiatrist  to  which  I  have  referred  to
    earlier. Whilst the  appellant's  earlier  appeal  was  set  aside  and
    directions  issued  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Black   for   a
    psychiatric report and for the tribunal  to  consider  the  section  72
    certificate, the report does not address risk of harm to the public  or
    whether the appellant is a danger to the community. It is therefore  of
    no assistance in assisting the appellant to rebut the presumption.

235. There are also two reports of Dr C which  I  have  referred  to  above.
    Those reports do not directly address risk to members of the  community
    although  the  contents  of  those  reports  do  have  relevance   when
    considering that issue.

236. At paragraph 124 the doctor considers his condition  in  the  light  of
    attempts  to  self-harm.  The  appellant  is  described  as  "extremely
    impulsive". Dr C also considered that it was his impulsivity which  had
    previously been expressed in stabbing someone and that, "it  is  likely
    that future attempts will come with little warning". Whilst I read this
    in the context of the  risk  of  self-harm,  certain  features  of  the
    evidence of Dr C's report applying  to  this  appellant  refer  to  his
    instability and impulsivity and are still current  risk  factors.  That
    evidence is consistent with the risks identified in  the  OASys  report
    with the appellant unable to manage heightened emotions and failing  to
    deal with conflict situations and that his impulsiveness occurs without
    giving thought to the consequences of his actions.

237. Dr C also states at paragraph 121 that he is impulsive and  makes  rash
    decisions without thinking them  through.  The  condition  of  ADHD  is
    associated with  irritability  and  Dr  C  linked  this  alongside  the
    altercations in prison (see paragraph 121). In summary  Dr  C  consider
    that the appellant had poor impulse control over what he says and  what
    he does.

238. In his addendum report Dr C referred again to his "strong  impulsivity"
    and that this associated  with  ADD  may  be  better  attributed  to  a
    personality disorder trait. At [29) Dr C stated  "my  previous  opinion
    regarding Mr AK himself remains  valid.  However  now  I  have  greater
    clarity my opinion in his difficulties are greater  than  I  previously
    thought and  the  risk  to  him  and  others  greater  than  previously
    expressed." At [45] Dr C considered  that  the  appellant  had  a  rare
    condition that resulted in some unusual effects.

239. Whilst Ms Bartlam submits that the sentencing judge did  not  find  him
    to be a risk to the public, the judge did not have the advantage of the
    OASys report, nor did he have the medical reports of Dr  C  and  Dr  W.
    There was no diagnosis of any link between the  mental  health  of  the
    appellant and the offence. In my  judgement  that  lessens  the  weight
    attached to the view that was taken upon sentencing.

240. The evidence in the OASys report as to the high risk  of  harm  to  the
    public has not changed according to the letter dated 11  November  2020
    which still refers to that as a current assessment and the letter  does
    not make any reference to his risk having changed.

241. As I have stated I take  into  account  give  positive  weight  to  his
    engagement with the probation service and that  of  the  mental  health
    support team but as said previously he is still subject to licence  and
    deportation proceedings.

242. When looking at the risk factors identified in  the  OASys  report,  it
    does not appear that those risk factors have been resolved or that  any
    significant changes have taken place.

243. In respect of the issue of drugs and alcohol, that remains an  area  of
    concern. Both appear to be part of his offending as  evidenced  by  the
    CPS papers and the appellant's own evidence.  Furthermore,  the  letter
    from the mental health service refers to  the  appellant  having  taken
    alcohol (and hashish in the past and cannabis) that he used this in the
    past to "change his mind and deal  with  headaches".  The  report  also
    notes that "he feels that he may return to these if  the  pain  in  his
    head is not controlled." Thus the evidence in that letter suggests that
    the appellant may resort to taking drugs to self-medicate and thus  the
    associated risk appears to remain.

244. Dr C makes reference to this at paragraph 40 in his report that he  had
    a history of prior drug use, but it was not possible  to  know  he  was
    using drugs unless drug tests have been taken.  There  is  no  evidence
    that such tests have been undertaken. The OASys' report refers  to  the
    appellant attending WTD  Brent  or  other  substance  misuse  services.
    Similarly there is no evidence of attendance in this respect.

245. There is no evidence of  attending  any  courses  to  deal  with  anger
    management, managing emotions or thinking skill courses to  lessen  the
    risks identified in the OASys report.

246. The description of being  socially  isolated  and  having  a  "lack  of
    prosocial activities" still remains the position as  evidenced  in  the
    letter from the probation officer who reported the  same  isolation  in
    the community. I accept that COVID-19 19  is  likely  to  have  had  an
    effect upon this, but his presentation has not changed in any real way.
    Dr W had also found this to be the position and referred to  him  being
    "isolated" and that he required treatment for six  months  for  CBT  to
    understand feelings  and  thoughts  that  could  lead  to  "potentially
    problematic behaviour".

247. Drawing together those points, the evidence in the OASys  report  which
    expresses the view that the appellant is a high risk  of  harm  to  the
    public should be given weight. It is supported by the evidence of Dr  C
    which I have referred to and there is little supporting  evidence  that
    the appellant has addressed in any significant  way  the  risk  factors
    identified in that report. I have weighed in  the  balance  that  there
    have been positive steps identified in relation to his engagement  with
    the probation service and that he has complied with the  terms  of  his
    licence and engaged with the mental health services in some respects. I
    am satisfied that the appellant's offending was a particularly  serious
    crime. This was an attack upon a victim  by  way  of  revenge  and  was
    aggravated by the use of a knife. I conclude that the presumption  that
    this  was  a  particularly  serious  crime  has  not   been   rebutted.
    Furthermore, when considering the evidence in its  totality,  I  prefer
    the submissions made on behalf of the respondent that  when  considered
    cumulatively, in light of the OASys's report and the  detailed  reports
    of Dr C that the appellant has not rebutted the presumption that he  no
    longer presents a danger  to  the  public  and  that  is  offending  is
    unlikely to recur.

248. In the light of that finding, I uphold the section 72 certificate.  The
    appellant  therefore  cannot  rely  upon  the  Refugee  Convention   or
    Humanitarian Protection.

249. In the  alternative  Ms  Bartlam  submits  that  the  appellant  should
    succeed under article 3 of the ECHR.





Article 3:

250. Ms Bartlam on behalf of the appellant relies upon the medical  evidence
    advanced on behalf of the appellant in the reports of both experts.

251. It is submitted that the evidence points  to  the  appellant  being  at
    risk of suicide should he be returned forcibly to Afghanistan.

252. There is no dispute as to the applicable legal principles.

253. The Court of Appeal decisions in J and Y (Sri Lanka) govern a  discrete
    area of assessment under  Article  3  relating  to  suicide  risk.  The
    decisions in J and N were heard at around the same time in May 2005. By
    that time, the Court of Appeal in J handed down its  decision,  it  had
    the benefit of the House of Lords decision in N. The  Court  of  Appeal
    conducted a detailed review of the European and domestic case law.

254. The six points it drew  from  these  authorities  for  the  purpose  of
    assessing Article 3 in the context of suicide risk were:

         "26. First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed. This must attain a minimum  level  of
             severity. The court has said on a number of occasions that the
             assessment of its severity depends on all the circumstances of
             the case. But the ill-treatment must "necessarily be  serious"
             such that  it  is  "an  affront  to  fundamental  humanitarian
             principles to remove an individual to a country where he is at
             risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].

         27.  Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights. Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:

                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).

             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka..."

         28.  Thirdly, in the context of  a  foreign  case,  the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.



         29.  Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).

         30.  Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach
             of article 3 in a suicide case, a question  of  importance  is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to  be  based  is
             objectively well-founded. If the  fear  is  not  well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
             the removal will be in breach of article 3.

         31.  Sixthly, a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights."

255. The first three points set out the basic requirements to show a  breach
    of Article 3. The third point made clear  that  there  is  an  enhanced
    threshold in cases that come within the  N  paradigm.  The  last  three
    points went beyond the decision in N to consider the context  in  cases
    involving the assessment of suicide risk.

256. The Court of Appeal in the Y (Sri Lanka) modified the  fifth  point  as
    follows:

         "15. ... The corollary of the final sentence of §30 of J  is  that
             in the absence of an objective foundation for  the  fear  some
             independent basis for it must be established if weight  is  to
             be given to it. Such an independent basis may  lie  in  trauma
             inflicted in the past on the appellant in (or,  as  here,  by)
             the receiving state: someone who has been tortured  and  raped
             by his or her captors may be terrified  of  returning  to  the
             place where it happened, especially if  the  same  authorities
             are in charge, notwithstanding  that  the  objective  risk  of
             recurrence has gone.

         16.  One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in J that  what
             may nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any genuine
             fear which the appellant  may  establish,  albeit  without  an
             objective foundation, is such as to create a risk  of  suicide
             if there is an enforced return."

257. The assessment of suicide risk is a discrete aspect  of  the  extension
    to Article 3 considered in D and N. In MM (Malawi) v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 2482 Counsel for the Secretary of State  accepted  that  it  was  a
    distinct area of assessment under Article 3 [63]. The Court  of  Appeal
    in J made clear that there was a high threshold in 'foreign cases', and
    acknowledging the decisions in D and N, made clear that  the  threshold
    was even higher in cases where " the alleged inhuman treatment  is  not
    the direct or indirect responsibility of the public authorities of  the
    receiving state".

258.  The  nature  of  the  potential  harm  in  a  suicide  risk  case   is
    sufficiently serious to engage the operation of Article  3  within  the
    meaning of the N paradigm. If a person can show that there  is  a  real
    risk that they will commit suicide on return to  the  receiving  state,
    the feared harm clearly meets the minimum level  of  severity  required
    i.e. intense mental suffering leading to their imminent death.

259. The fifth and sixth  points  highlighted  in  J,  modified  in  Y  (Sri
    Lanka),  simply  focus  the  assessment  on  issues  specific  to   the
    circumstances relating to suicide risk. First, an initial assessment of
    whether there is a real risk  that  the  person  is  likely  to  commit
    suicide if returned to the receiving  state.  This  would  normally  be
    assessed with reference to expert psychiatric evidence. Second, whether
    effective measures can be put in place before, during and after removal
    to reduce the risk of suicide below a real risk. This would normally be
    assessed with reference to evidence relating to  the  circumstances  in
    the receiving state."

260. In AXB (Art 3 health: obligations; suicide) Jamaica  [2019]  UKUT  397.
    Much of the decision is not relevant to the issue to be  determined  in
    this case. In so far  as  the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  N
    paradigm is the threshold that must be met  in  a  case  involving  the
    assessment of suicide risk, it says nothing more  than,  and  does  not
    alter, the approach taken by the Court of Appeal in J.  In  that  case,
    the Court of Appeal incorporated the high threshold into the  six-point
    approach to the assessment of  suicide  risk.  As  made  clear  in  the
    previous decision in this case, it is self-evident that the  nature  of
    suicide is such that it reaches the N threshold because a person who is
    at real risk of killing themselves  is  likely  to  experience  intense
    mental suffering leading to  the  risk  of  death.  The  focus  of  the
    assessment in a case involving potential suicide risk  is  not  usually
    the threshold but whether the evidence shows that there is a real  risk
    of suicide happening before, during or after removal of the  person  to
    their country of origin.

261. The Supreme Court also handed down the  judgment  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v
    SSHD ,  Dr C [2019] UKSC 17. It  contains  an  analysis  of  the  ECtHR
    decision in Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867. In particular,  the
    Supreme Court clarified what was meant by the modest extension of the N
    test at [183] of the ECtHR decision with reference to:

         "... situations involving the removal of a seriously ill person  in
         which substantial grounds have been shown for believing that he  or
         she, although not at imminent risk of  dying,  would  face  a  real
         risk, on account of the absence of  appropriate  treatment  in  the
         receiving country or the lack of access to such treatment, of being
         exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or  her
         state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a  significant
         reduction in life expectancy."

262. The Supreme Court did  not  make  specific  findings  relating  to  the
    effect of Paposhvili on the assessment of suicide  risk.  Consequently,
    the substantive Article 3 issues discussed  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  do  not
    alter the position relating to the six-point approach  outlined  in  J.
    The nature of the risk of suicide is likely to meet the N  paradigm  or
    the Paposhvili extension for the reasons I have already given.

263. The focus of the assessment is usually on  the  likelihood  of  suicide
    happening, taking  into  account  relevant  medical  evidence  and  any
    evidence relating to the availability of  support  and  treatment  that
    might ameliorate the risk.

264. The Supreme Court identified several procedural  requirements  outlined
    by the ECtHR in Paposhvili at [23] and went on to analyse the  decision
    as follows:

         "32. The Grand Chamber's  pronouncements  in  the  Paposhvili  case
             about the procedural requirements of article 3, summarised  in
             para  23  above,  can  on  no  view  be   regarded   as   mere
             clarification of what the court had previously  said;  and  we
             may expect that, when it gives judgment in  the  Savran  case,
             the Grand Chamber  will  shed  light  on  the  extent  of  the
             requirements. Yet observations on them may even  now  be  made
             with reasonable confidence. The basic principle  is  that,  if
             you allege a breach of your rights, it is for you to establish
             it. But "Convention proceedings  do  not  in  all  cases  lend
             themselves to a rigorous application of [that] principle ...":
             DH v Czech Republic (2008) 47 EHRR 3, para 179.  It  is  clear
             that, in application to  claims  under  article  3  to  resist
             return by reference  to  ill-health,  the  Grand  Chamber  has
             indeed modified that principle. The threshold, set out in para
             23(a) above, is for the applicant to adduce evidence  "capable
             of  demonstrating  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
             believing" that article 3  would  be  violated.  It  may  make
             formidable  intellectual  demands   on   decision-makers   who
             conclude that the evidence  does  not  establish  "substantial
             grounds" to have to proceed to consider  whether  nevertheless
             it is "capable of demonstrating" them.  But,  irrespective  of
             the perhaps unnecessary complexity of the  test,  let  no  one
             imagine that it represents an  undemanding  threshold  for  an
             applicant to cross. For the requisite capacity of the evidence
             adduced by  the  applicant  is  to  demonstrate  "substantial"
             grounds for believing that it is  a  "very  exceptional"  case
             because of a "real" risk of subjection to "inhuman" treatment.
             All three parties accept that Sales LJ was  correct,  in  para
             16, to describe the threshold as an obligation on an applicant
             to raise a "prima facie case"  of  potential  infringement  of
             article 3. This means a  case  which,  if  not  challenged  or
             countered, would establish the infringement: see para  112  in
             AXB v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  UKUT
             397 (IAC). As the tribunal explained  at  paragraph  123,  the
             arrangements in the UK are such that the decisions whether the
             applicant has adduced evidence to the requisite standard  and,
             if so, whether it has been successfully countered fall  to  be
             taken initially by the Secretary of State and, in the event of
             an appeal, again by the First-tier Tribunal.

         33.  In the event that  the  applicant  presents  evidence  to  the
             standard addressed above, the  returning  state  can  seek  to
             challenge or counter it in the manner  helpfully  outlined  in
             the judgment in the Paposhvili case at paras 187  to  191  and
             summarised at para 23(b) to (e) above. The premise behind  the
             guidance, surely reasonable, is that,  while  it  is  for  the
             applicant  to  adduce  evidence  about  his  or  her   medical
             condition, current treatment (including the likely suitability
             of any other treatment) and  the  effect  on  him  or  her  of
             inability to access it, the returning state is better able  to
             collect evidence about the availability and  accessibility  of
             suitable treatment in the  receiving  state.  What  will  most
             surprise the first-time reader of the Grand Chamber's judgment
             is the reference in para 187 to the  suggested  obligation  on
             the returning state to  dispel  "any"  doubts  raised  by  the
             applicant's evidence. But, when the reader  reaches  para  191
             and notes the reference, in precisely  the  same  context,  to
             "serious doubts", he will realise that "any"  doubts  in  para
             187 means any serious doubts.  For  proof,  or  in  this  case
             disproof, beyond all doubt is a concept rightly unknown to the
             Convention.
265. The procedural issues discussed in AXB and AM  (Zimbabwe)  clarify  the
    usual principles relating to the assessment of a  human  rights  claim.
    The overall burden of proof is on the appellant to produce evidence  to
    show that there are substantial grounds for believing that there  is  a
    real risk of serious harm amounting to  a  breach  of  Article  3.  The
    threshold is high in health cases if the risk does not emanate from the
    authorities in the receiving state. It is thus open to  the  respondent
    to produce evidence to show  that  appropriate  health  care  or  other
    effective mechanisms are available to reduce the risk of Article 3 ill-
    treatment below a real risk.

266. I have set out my assessment of the medical evidence earlier  and  that
    whilst  both  experts  have  reached  differing  opinions  as  to   the
    appellant's diagnosis, the one issue that  they  are  consistent  about
    concerns the risk of suicide and self-harm.

267. Dr W's report makes  reference  to  being  preoccupied  with  intrusive
    thoughts about the consequences of return to Afghanistan  and  reported
    that the worrying thoughts have become "overwhelming over the last  few
    months" and that he has "active suicidal ideation is  and  acknowledges
    at times that having thought that life was not worth living"  (at  page
    18). His prognosis based on his assessment of his mental state was that
    it "remains poor in the short term. They have been  recurrent  episodes
    of depression with an increased  risk  of  suicide.  He  has  intrusive
    traumatic thoughts." The opinion of Dr W is that the appellant needs to
    improve his mental health treatment with  pharmacological/psychological
    and psychotherapeutic approaches and that "his  risk  of  self-harm  is
    high". Dr W's view is that the risk of suicide while  in  the  UK  will
    increase once he is informed of any removal. The report  of  Dr  C  and
    also the OASys report sets out past incidents of self-harm.  The  first
    appears to have been on 19 October 2017  when  he  self-harmed  with  a
    razor  blade  causing  superficial  injuries  following  problems  with
    inmates. It is also recorded at page 36 of the appellant's bundle  that
    in January 2019 after being issued with deportation orders,  a  suicide
    attempt was recorded due to a voice telling him to harm himself.  There
    is reference to that being "unplanned  and  impulsive".  He  was  later
    prescribed   promethazine   (which   was   not   used   for   psychotic
    hallucinations, but an antihistamine used to promote sleep).

268. In his opinion (page 44 AB) Dr C observed that assessing  the  risk  of
    suicide was made more difficult because in his view he was  "maligning"
    (I think that that should mean malingering") and reached the view  that
    on balance he did not believe  his  attempts  in  prison  were  serious
    attempts to end his life but more likely to have been  due  to  boredom
    and a desire for better cell. However, Dr C considered that his harming
    and suicidal behaviour was consistent with a diagnosis of ADD. The view
    he expressed was that people with ADD are at a greater  risk  than  the
    general population to commit suicide. When combined with  the  presence
    of another disorder such as depression, which the appellant is prone to
    and may have previously  met  criteria,  the  chances  of  suicide  are
    associated with a four - 12 x higher risk.

269. Dr C considers that the appellant has a number of  risk  factors  which
    further increase the likelihood of  suicide  whilst  he  may  not  have
    attempted to have seriously wanted to end his  life,  the  risks  still
    apply. This is set out at paragraphs 120 - 124. During  the  assessment
    that was made last year, Dr C considered that he was not  expressing  a
    desire upon that assessment but clarified that that the  appellant  was
    "extremely impulsive and has a history of deliberate  self-harm".  Thus
    the  history  combined  with  the  risk  factors  for  this  particular
    appellant placed him at a  statistically  high  risk  of  suicide.  His
    opinion is consistent with the later view taken by Dr W that he is at a
    "very high risk of suicide if deported".

270. In his addendum report, Dr  C  amended  his  diagnosis  to  that  of  a
    schizotypal personality disorder which was unusual and  a  fairly  rare
    disorder. It is described at paragraph 22 of his  addendum  report  and
    again he confirms paragraph 25 that  there  is  a  "strong  impulsivity
    difficulty component to his presentation,  which  I  still  believe  is
    associated with ADD but may  be  better  attributed  to  a  personality
    disorder trait. At paragraph 27, he stated that "his  difficulties  may
    well become complicated by  drug  use,  malingering  and  exaggeration.
    However, although he may be malingering or exaggerating some aspects, I
    am in little doubt that he has  mental  health  difficulties  that  are
    serious, probably treatment resistant and cause a range of difficulties
    across domains." Dr C  confirms  at  paragraph  29  that  his  previous
    opinion regarding this to himself remains valid. He goes  on  to  state
    "however, now that I have greater clarity my opinion as it is difficult
    as a greater than I previously thought and the risks to him and  others
    greater than I previously expressed."

271. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent has not sought to challenge  the
    reports of Dr C in fact, he relied upon the  reports  when  making  his
    submissions on the issue of danger to the community and the section  72
    certification.

272. For the reason that I  have  set  out  earlier,  I  consider  that  the
    reports written by Dr C should have weight attached to them  and  I  am
    satisfied that he has the relevant expertise to reach the opinions that
    he has. Both medical experts  have  reached  the  same  view  that  the
    appellant is at a high risk of suicide in the event of any removal from
    the UK as a result of an unusual  and  serious  mental  health  problem
    which has  at  its  core  his  impulsivity  and  the  effect  upon  his
    behaviour. Whilst the letter from his mental health  worker  at  [p6AB]
    refers to the appellant  having  no  current  thoughts,  I  prefer  the
    evidence set out in the expert reports and in particular the reports of
    Dr C which provide background to his diagnosis and thus are more likely
    to be a  fuller  consideration  of  the  likely  present  risk  to  the
    appellant's well-being.

273. Thus I conclude that there  is  cogent  evidence  to  show  a  risk  of
    suicide on  return  and  therefore  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate a risk of him reaching the threshold  set  out  in  in  the
    decision of J v SSHD (as set out above).

274. I recognise that the threshold is high in  health  cases  if  the  risk
    does not emanate from the authorities in the  receiving  state.  It  is
    therefore open to the respondent  to  produce  evidence  to  show  that
    appropriate health care or other effective mechanisms are available  to
    reduce the risk of Article 3 ill-treatment below a real risk.

275. There has been no  reference  to  any  objective  material  during  the
    course of this hearing on behalf of the respondent or  any  submissions
    made to demonstrate that there are effective  mechanisms  available  in
    Afghanistan to reduce any risk of article 3 ill-treatment below a "real
    risk". Conversely, Ms Bartlam on behalf of the  appellant  relies  upon
    the objective material which demonstrates a  lack  of  adequate  mental
    health care provision in Afghanistan as set  out  in  the  key  passage
    index  and  reference  made  to   the   human   rights   watch   report
    "Afghanistan's silent mental health crisis dated 7/10/19, evidence from
    WHO  mental  health  Atlas  Afghanistan,  and  the   respondents   CPIN
    Afghanistan:  security  and  humanitarian  situation  and  health  care
    provision and by reference to the CG decision in AS (safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 00130.

276. When considering the latest country guidance decision, I  observe  that
    the tribunal stressed the importance of a fact specific  assessment  by
    reference to the returnee's personal characteristics. It is stated that
    in all cases an individualised  case-by-case  assessment  as  required,
    taking into account an individual's  personal  circumstances  including
    factors  such  as  his  age,  health,  disability,  languages   spoken,
    educational and professional background,  length  of  time  outside  of
    Afghanistan, connections to an experience of Kabul and family situation
    and relationships (at[252]). Whilst this  is  not  in  the  context  of
    article 3 considerations, in my judgement it has  some  relevance  when
    addressing this issue.

277. As set out in the submissions made by Ms Bartlam, the appellant has  no
    family support that he can call upon to assist him  in  re-establishing
    any form of life in Afghanistan or importantly to access the  important
    mental health provision that he requires or to  provide  him  with  the
    support upon return to reduce the "real risk" of article 3 harm. He has
    been absent from Afghanistan since 2009 and  has  no  education  and  a
    limited employment history.

278. There is no dispute that physical and mental  health  is  an  important
    factor in the decision makes reference to  the  "very  high  levels  of
    mental health problems in Afghanistan" which create "significant needs"
    (at [241]), there is a lack of trained  professionals  and  "inadequate
    infrastructure" ( at [241].

279. Ms Bartlam relies upon the evidence of Dr  Ahmad  as  set  out  in  the
    decision in AS. Dr Ahmed's view of the lack of mental health assistance
    in Kabul was described as consistent with the views  expressed  by  the
    UNCHR and other objective material and in particular that there were  a
    large number of people who  suffered  from  undiagnosed  and  untreated
    mental health problems, [146], that public healthcare is  poor  quality
    medications frequently counterfeit and that  the  psychiatric  services
    are "inadequate". Her evidence was that there is "little  understanding
    of mental  health"  and  "people  with  mental  health  conditions  are
    stigmatised and socially ostracised" (at [83]).

280. Dr Ahmed set  out  at  [83]  that  there  were  inadequate  psychiatric
    services and only one mental health hospital in Afghanistan  which  has
    only 60 beds for inpatients and 40 in  a  separate  facility  for  drug
    addicts.

281. The report from human rights watch  (pages  118  -121  AB)  also  makes
    reference to the population in Afghanistan and that half the population
    has experienced depression, anxiety,  or  post-traumatic  stress  as  a
    result of the conflict and violence over a prolonged period. Those  who
    seek treatment and who have experienced psychological distress  instead
    of being offered psychosocial support are being  told  that  they  have
    physical complaints and thus do not receive the help that they  require
    (page 119). Over the past 15 years,  the  government  has  trained  750
    psychosocial  counsellors  who  can   provide   basic   mental   health
    counselling but that those who  use  the  facilities  are  recorded  as
    suffering abuse such as forced hospitalisations and treatments. Further
    reference is made about the stigma attached to seeking help for  mental
    health.  That  is  supported  by  the  evidence  in  the  UK  that  the
    appellant's family relative does not want contact with him due  to  his
    mental health condition.

282. There is  no  dispute,  and  it  is  common  ground  in  light  of  the
    concession made on behalf of the respondent that the appellant  has  no
    support network or connections with Kabul. He is not  in  contact  with
    his family members and has no relatives or friends that he  could  call
    on for any assistance with his mental health condition or to assist him
    on return to Afghanistan. There is no evidence before the tribunal that
    he has a Tazkera and the lack of such a document prevents the returnees
    from accessing government services which would  include  mental  health
    provision.

283. The CPIN Afghanistan: security and humanitarian situation (version  7.0
    dated May 2020) sets out the position as to  healthcare  at  paragraphs
    6.1 - 6.6.6. It records that  the  challenges  in  providing  the  best
    possible  healthcare  relate  to  poverty  and   distance   to   health
    facilities, inadequate  access  to  priority  health  services  due  to
    distance, high cost, low awareness, insecurity, and shortage of  female
    healthcare providers. The UN special rapporteur report in  2017  stated
    "the healthcare challenges facing  the  displaced  included  specialist
    physical or psychosocial treatment needs due  to  conflict  or  trauma,
    which is not commonly available. While some  locations  for  internally
    displaced  persons  had  dedicated  clinics  providing   basic   health
    services, these were frequently poorly equipped, lack doctors and could
    not treat serious or emergency health  problems.  Restrictions  on  the
    construction clinics,  due  to  a  population  threshold  criteria  and
    funding shortages, meant that some communities lacked local  healthcare
    facilities  and  to  travel  long  distances  to  access   to   regular
    services.".

284. The material relied upon by Ms Bartlam also includes the UNAMA  special
    report Afghanistan: attacks on healthcare during the Covid 19  pandemic
    (June 2020) which in its contents refers to incidents affecting  health
    care provision during the period where there were 12 deliberate attacks
    and remaining three incidents involving incidental harm  to  healthcare
    caused by ongoing fighting. Since those incidents, it is reported  that
    the  situation  had  deteriorated;  the  Taliban  continued   abducting
    healthcare  workers  and  attacked  a  pharmacy,  the  Afghan  National
    Security  forces  carried  out  deliberate   acts   of   violence   and
    intimidation affecting a healthcare facility, workers, and delivery  of
    medical supplies. This is general objective material which demonstrates
    that the inadequacy of healthcare provision in Afghanistan has recently
    been exacerbated by the deteriorating security situation  the  country,
    targeted attacks on healthcare provision during the covid 19  pandemic,
    and thus supports the general material which demonstrates that for this
    appellant there is a real risk that he would not receive  treatment  or
    assistance to prevent a real  risk  of  article  3  ill-treatment  upon
    return. The tribunal has not been  provided  with  any  submissions  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State to  demonstrate  that  there  are  any
    available mechanisms appropriate for this particular appellant and that
    even if the state could provide support whilst in the UK, it  is  plain
    that there are no mechanisms or support available for the appellant  in
    Afghanistan.

285. For those reasons I am satisfied that there is a real risk  of  article
    3 ill-treatment and therefore his appeal is  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 3).



Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and the decision is set aside; the appeal  is  re-made  as
follows: the appeal is allowed on Article 3 grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed
     Date:  14/12/ 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
