
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/01002/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 October 2019                       |On 14 November 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     S T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Wood, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Cursha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By my decision promulgated on 3 September 2019, a copy of which is
    attached, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I now
    remake that decision.

 2. The appellant is appealing against a decision of the respondent dated 4
    June 2018 refusing her application for asylum, which was made on 5
    February 2014.

 3. The appellant's claim, in summary, is that:

      a) She has been the victim of trafficking and would be at risk from
         her trafficker and his associates in her home area of Albania
         where, because of corruption and the influence of her trafficker,
         she would be unable to rely on the protection of the state.

      b) It would not be safe for her to relocate to Tirana, or elsewhere in
         Albania, as the trafficker would be able to locate her and state
         protection would be inadequate.

      c) It would not be reasonable for her to relocate to Tirana and/or she
         would face very significant obstacles integrating into Albania
         because she is a single mother with two small children with mental
         health problems, limited education, and no family support.

 4. On 30 April 2014 the appellant's case was referred to the Competent
    Authority to consider whether there were reasonable grounds to believe
    she was the victim of modern slavery.  On 7 May 2014 she was informed
    that there were reasonable grounds to believe she was a potential
    victim of human trafficking.  However, on 4 January 2018, the Competent
    Authority reached the conclusion that there were not sufficient
    grounds, on the balance of probabilities, to believe that she was the
    victim of modern slavery.

 5. Although I have reviewed and considered the conclusive grounds decision
    of the Competent Authority, I recognise, as set out in ES (s82 NIA
    2002; negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC), that the decision
    by the Competent Authority is not of primary relevance to the
    determination of this asylum appeal, given that it was made on the
    balance of probabilities, and the correct approach is for me to
    determine for myself, based on all of the evidence in the round,
    applying the lower standard of proof applicable in protection claims,
    whether the appellant is entitled to asylum.

The Appellant's Claim

 6. The appellant claims to be from the north of Albania (born in Lezhe,
    and raised in Milot) and to have been educated to the equivalent of
    Year 12.

 7. She claims that in 2011 she began a relationship with a man who
    subsequently trafficked her.  She gave his first name as G, and I will
    refer to him as "G" in this decision.  The appellant claims that her
    family were upset that she was in a relationship with G, both because
    such a relationship was outside the norm and resulted in gossip about
    her, and because her father found out that G and his brother were
    involved in prostitution and drugs.

 8. She claims that G took her to Italy, promising that he would marry her.
     She claims that he took her to Italy using false identity documents.
    She claims that after about one week in Italy he confined her to a
    house with other girls and forced her into prostitution.  She claims
    that the house was raided by the Italian police, who returned her to
    Albania.

 9. The appellant claims that, following her return to Albania, she was
    ostracised by her family, apart from a cousin who gave her employment
    in his bar. She claims that whilst working in the bar she met the man
    she subsequently married.  She claimed that she did not tell her
    husband about the abuse she had suffered, and that they married on 18
    February 2013.

10. She claims that G and his associates saw her at a bar and started
    shouting abuse at her.  Her husband then, she claims, realised from the
    words G had used what had occurred and became very upset, and no longer
    wanted anything to do with her.  However, because she was pregnant, for
    the sake of the child, he assisted her in leaving Albania and
    travelling to the UK.

11. She claims to not have had any contact with her former husband or
    family since arriving in the UK.

12. After arriving in the UK, her child was born.  She has, since then, had
    another child.  She claims to have no knowledge of the father (the
    pregnancy resulting from a one-time encounter).

13. She claims to fear return to Albania because G would be likely to
    locate her, as it is a country where many people know each other.

The Respondent's Position in Respect of the Appellant's Account

14. The respondent accepted that the appellant was from Albania. Apart from
    this, the entirety of her account was rejected because of
    inconsistencies or lack of plausibility.

15. The following factors were identified in the Reasons for Refusal Letter
    of 4 June 2018 as undermining the credibility of the appellant's case:

      a) The appellant was aware of G's involvement with criminal activity
         before she left Albania with him.  The respondent stated that it
         was inconsistent for her to continue her relationship with G
         despite knowing about his involvement with serious criminal
         activity.

      b) The appellant was inconsistent about leaving Albania in 2012, as
         according to external information from the British Embassy in
         Tirana she did not leave or enter Albania at that time.

      c) The appellant was inconsistent about her time confined to a house
         in Italy because in answer to one question in her asylum interview
         she stated that she was not allowed to communicate with other girls
         kept in the house and in answer to a different question she stated
         that she could go out of the room to do some cleaning for a very
         little time.

      d) It was inconsistent that she did not seek protection from the
         Italian authorities when the house was raided.

16. A further inconsistency was raised by Ms Cursha at the hearing. In the
    asylum interview the appellant stated that her father wanted her to
    marry an older man. However, the appellant denied this had happened
    when asked about it in cross-examination. Ms Cursha submitted that this
    was a significant inconsistency that undermined the appellant's
    account.

17. Ms Cursha also highlighted that the document obtained from the British
    Embassy showing various times the appellant entered and exited Albania
    did not show entry from Italy. She argued that this undermined the
    appellant's account.

Findings of Fact

18. Having carefully considered all of the evidence, as well as the
    submissions of Ms Wood and Ms Cursha, I have reached the view that most
    (but not all) of the inconsistencies identified by the respondent are
    not in fact inconsistencies or are readily explained; and the
    appellant's account is plausible and consistent with the objective
    evidence. In particular:

      a) Her account of being lured to leave Albania with false promises of
         a relationship, as well as her account of being rejected by her
         husband and family, are consistent with the objective evidence, as
         summarised in the extant country guidance case TD and AD
         (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC).

      b) The respondent considered it inconsistent that the appellant would
         leave Albania with G despite parental disapproval and knowledge of
         his criminal past.  It is unclear why the respondent considered
         this an inconsistency, given that the appellant has been consistent
         throughout that this is what occurred. In any event, it is
         plausible that a 17 year old under the influence of a manipulative
         trafficker who she believed loved her would travel with him despite
         the disapproval of her parents.  That this is plausible is made
         clear at paragraph (c) of the head note to TD and AD where it is
         stated that "Some women are lured to leave Albania with false
         promises of relationships or work".

      c) It is not inconsistent with her claim that the information obtained
         from the British Embassy in Tirana did not show her leaving Albania
         for Italy in 2012 given that the appellant's case was that G took
         her out of Albania using false documents. That false documents were
         used is consistent with the appellant's account in that it is
         plausible a trafficker intending to exploit and hold captive his
         victim would use false documents to reduce the chance of her being
         located.

      d)  It was not inconsistent for the appellant to state that she was
         not allowed to communicate with other girls in the house in Italy,
         and also to state that she was allowed out of the room for a very
         little time in order to do cleaning.  Being allowed out of a room
         in order to clean does not mean that she was permitted to
         communicate with the other girls in the house.

      e) I do not consider it inconsistent that the appellant would wish to
         return to Albania upon being freed from the house in which she was
         held captive.  At that time, her captor (G) was located in Italy,
         with her; and returning to Albania would mean escaping from him.
         As a young woman/child who had been held captive for almost all of
         the time she had resided in Italy and had no knowledge or
         familiarity with Italy, I consider it plausible that she would seek
         return to Albania as soon as possible rather than request
         protection from the Italian authorities.

      f) The documentation provided from the British Embassy giving a record
         of the appellant's entry and exit from Albania shows six instances
         of her leaving, but no instances of her returning, to Albania.  It
         is reasonable to infer from this that a record is kept of exit but
         not of entry.  That being the case, it is not damaging to her
         credibility that there is no record on this document of her entry
         to Albania from Italy.

19. There is one inconsistency in the appellant's account that cannot
    easily be explained.  At the hearing, in response to cross-examination
    from Ms Cursha, the appellant was clear that her parents never intended
    to marry her to another person.  However, in her asylum interview, she
    stated that her parents wanted to marry her to someone else who was old
    but "good financially".  At paragraph 65 of the asylum interview she
    stated that her parents had "fixed the date of marrying me in July".

20. Ms Wood argued that a substantial amount of time had now elapsed
    between the interview (in 2014) and this hearing (in 2019) and it was
    not surprising that the appellant, who was now going through her third
    de novo hearing of this appeal, did not recollect everything
    accurately.  Whilst I acknowledge that memories fade with time and
    aspects of a claim might be forgotten, it does seem remarkable that the
    appellant has forgotten that her parents had fixed a day for her to
    marry in July 2012, which is what she stated in response to question 65
    of the asylum interview.

21. That said, after careful consideration, I have reached the view that
    despite this inconsistency, there is a reasonable degree of likelihood
    that the appellant has given a truthful account given that the overall
    account is consistent with the objective evidence, plausible and, for
    the most part, internally consistent. I therefore find as a fact that:

      a) The appellant is from the north of Albania, from a
         conservative/traditional family who (apart from one cousin) have
         severed contact with her and would not provide her with any support
         or assistance were she to return to Albania;

      b) the appellant does not have contact with the father of her children
         and would be returning to Albania as a single mother with two
         "illegitimate" children.

      c) The appellant has been the victim of trafficking, having been lured
         by G to Italy where she was confined for several months to a house
         and forced into prostitution.

      d) Following her return to Albania from Italy, the appellant was seen
         by G in a bar, which resulted in her history becoming known to her
         husband and the consequent breakdown of the marriage.



Risk on Return to Albania

22. The extant country guidance in respect of trafficked women from Albania
    is TD and AD.  Neither party suggested that there should be any
    departure from this case.  I therefore apply TD and AD to my findings
    of fact.

23. As found in TD and AD, it is reasonably likely that upon return to
    Albania the appellant will be referred to a shelter where, for a period
    of between six months and two years she and her children will be
    provided with accommodation, food and basic healthcare.  It is
    reasonably likely that whilst in the shelter she will be able to
    undertake some sort of vocational training and receive some childcare
    support.

24. Whilst in the shelter the appellant would not be at risk from G (or his
    associates) and the circumstances would not be unduly harsh.  However,
    the maximum amount of time she could expect to stay in a shelter is two
    years, whereupon she and her children would have to fend for themselves
    in Tirana or another part of the country.

25. It would not, in my view, be safe for the appellant to return to her
    home village (either directly upon return or after spending time in a
    shelter) given the ease with which she could be found by G in that
    location. In the event that G were to find her in her home area, I
    consider there to be a reasonable degree of likelihood that she would
    not receive adequate state protection given that (a) the objective
    evidence indicates that there is widespread police corruption in
    Albania and G may have influence in that location; and (b) she comes
    from a small conservative/traditional village where it is reasonably
    likely that the police will know her family and her circumstances and,
    because of the "shame" she will be perceived as having brought on her
    family, will not be inclined to support, or believe, her if she turns
    to them for assistance.

26. Given my findings about the risk the appellant would face in her home
    area, upon leaving the shelter she would need to internally relocate
    either to Tirana or another part of the country.

27. In my view, it is reasonably likely that the appellant will be safe
    from G and his associates in Tirana as there is not a real risk that he
    would come across her by chance or devote resources or time to trying
    to locate her. In the unlikely event that he did find the appellant,
    she would be able to approach the police for assistance. Even though
    there is corruption in the police force throughout Albania, there is
    not a reasonable risk that G would have influence over a police force
    outside of his home area or that they would have the same hostility
    towards the appellant as the police in her home village, as they would
    not know, and would not have heard rumours about, the appellant and her
    family.

28. However, even though internal relocation would be safe, I agree with Ms
    Wood that, in light of the appellant's particular circumstances, and
    having regard to TD and AD, relocating within Albania would not be
    reasonable and would be unduly harsh. This is because the appellant
    would be in Tirana (or another part of Albania) without any family
    support, with two "illegitimate" children, and without the means to
    obtain employment that would be sufficiently well-paid to secure
    accommodation for her and her children. It is also reasonably likely
    that she and her children will be the subject of social stigma, which
    will heighten her subjective fear of G tracing her and make integration
    more difficult. Moreover, in order to function within society, the
    appellant would need to give a false explanation for her reason for
    living in the area. Taking these factors together, and in particular
    having regard to the significant challenges it is reasonably likely the
    appellant will face as the single mother of two children without any
    wider family support, I consider internal relocation to not be a
    reasonable option for the appellant and her children.

29. As there is no reasonable internal location option available to the
    appellant, her removal from the UK would breach the Refugee Convention
    and article 3 ECHR. There will also be very significant obstacles to
    integration into Albania (for the same reasons that internal relocation
    would be unduly harsh) and therefore she also qualifies for leave to
    remain under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

30. The appeal is allowed on the basis that removal of the appellant from
    the UK would breach the U.K.'s obligation under the Refugee Convention
    and would be in breach of articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |                                    |
|                                    |Dated: 7 November 2019              |

