
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01043/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice Centre     |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 17th August 2018                          |On 9th November 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1977.  He appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Meyler) to
    dismiss his protection appeal.




    Anonymity Order


 2. This appeal concerns a claim for protection. Having had regard to  Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant asserted that he had a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    in Pakistan for reasons of his political opinion.  He states that he is
    a member of a  Kashmiri  political  group  called  the  United  Kashmir
    People's National Party (UKPNP),  who  advocate  Kashmiri  independence
    from Pakistan and are consequently perceived by the Pakistani  security
    forces to be Indian agents.  He claims that he  was  involved  in  this
    group, and suffered persecution as a result, before  he  left  Pakistan
    some years ago; he further claims that since his arrival in the  United
    Kingdom he has been elected to the office of  deputy  secretary-general
    of the organisation in Birmingham.


 4. The Secretary of State for the Home Department had by his letter  dated
    the  3rd  January  2018  rejected  the  entire  account  for  want   of
    credibility.  The  Appellant's  account  was  found  to  be  vague  and
    inconsistent and his claim to have a subjective fear undermined by  the
    fact that it had taken him until 2016  to  claim  asylum,  despite  the
    claimed events giving rise to the fear  having  taken  place  in  2010.
    Before the First-tier Tribunal, however, the Respondent  had  made  one
    concession as to fact. The Presenting Officer on the day accepted  that
    the Appellant is an active member of the UKPNP in the  United  Kingdom.
    An article confirming his post  as  Deputy  General  Secretary  of  the
    Birmingham branch had appeared in The Nation - a newspaper published in
    London for the Pakistani community - and  this  had  been  verified  as
    genuine.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal accepted the Respondent's concession in respect
    of the Appellant's role within the UKPNP in this country.  It  accepted
    [at 22] that the Appellant was, at some point at least, elected to  the
    role of Deputy Secretary General for the United Kingdom in  Birmingham.
     It further accepted that the UKPNP are  excluded  from  the  political
    process in Pakistani-administered Kashmir  and  that  there  have  been
    reports over several years of human rights abuses carried  out  by  the
    Pakistani intelligence services against perceived opponents there.  The
    leader of the UKPNP had been arrested, tortured and exiled in 1999  and
    had not been back to the country since [at 24-28].     The Tribunal had
    regard to a medical  report  by  a  Dr  Lodhi  and  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was suffering from depression [at 37].

 6. Beyond these matters, the Tribunal made no  positive  findings  in  the
    Appellant's favour.  In particular it found:

              i) The Appellant's evidence about events in Pakistan prior  to
                 his departure for the United Kingdom could  not  be  relied
                 upon. He had given  markedly  inconsistent  evidence  about
                 where he had been and where he had been living at  material
                 times [39-44],  a  witness  called  in  support  had  given
                 materially different evidence from the Appellant [42],  the
                 documentary evidence was inconsistent and  unreliable  [45]
                 the Appellant's account of why he had decided to  join  the
                 UKPNP made no sense [47-48], and the narrated chronology of
                 events was  inconsistent.  In  particular  the  Appellant's
                 claim that he had ceased all political activity following a
                 serious assault in April 2010 was not consistent  with  his
                 claim that he took up the post of General-Secretary in  May
                 2010 [49-50]; nor was his claim to have been kidnapped  and
                 tortured on two occasions in 2010 consistent with the  fact
                 that he returned to  his  home  area  in  Pakistan  on  two
                 occasions   in   2012   and    2013/14    [57].     Further
                 inconsistencies arising from the chronology are  identified
                 between paragraphs [52-59];


             ii) That Dr Lodhi's diagnosis of PTSD could not be relied  upon
                 because the Appellant had demonstrably given  him  a  false
                 medical history and had exaggerated his  symptoms  when  he
                 completed  the   Impacts   of   Events   Scale   for   PTSD
                 questionnaire   [33-37].


 7. Having reached those negative findings the Tribunal  squarely  rejected
    the Appellant's claim to have been involved in the UKPNP  in  Pakistan,
    or to have suffered persecution as a result of any such involvement:


         "60. In light of all the difficulties in the appellant's evidence I
         have identified above, I find that the appellant has failed to show
         before me that the facts he sought to rely on relating to events in
         Pakistan are established to the lower  standard  of  proof.  Taking
         into all the evidence before me,  including  all  the  difficulties
         with the appellant's evidence, some of which I have set out  above,
         I find that the appellant has not shown before  me,  to  the  lower
         standard of proof, that he was politically active in  Pakistan  for
         the UKPNP or that he was targeted on that account or any other.


         61. It is uncontentious that the appellant has been active for  the
         UKPNP in the UK, however I find that the appellant  would  have  no
         interest  in  pursuing  his  political  activities  on  return   to
         Pakistan, as he would stand nothing to gain from this.  Mr  Hussain
         submitted that I cannot make this finding as it was not put to  the
         appellant in cross-examination that his  activities  are  based  on
         ulterior moves, however I find, in light of all the difficulties in
         the appellant's evidence as explained above, that  this  conclusion
         is open to me on the evidence before me".

 8. She went on paragraph 64 to note: "there  was  no  country  information
    before me that the authorities take an interest in  the  activities  of
    the UKPNP abroad when failed asylum seekers are returned to Pakistan on
    their own passports. I re-emphasise that  the  appellant  has  returned
    twice to Pakistan in 2012 and 2013 and left in 2012 and 2014 on his own
    passport without any difficulties".    Finding no current risk of  harm
    in Pakistan, the appeal was dismissed.


 9. The Appellant now appeals on two grounds:

              i)  That  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  on  risk  are
                 irrational in light  of  the  accepted  evidence  that  the
                 Appellant is currently an  activist  for  the  UKPNP.   The
                 country background evidence indicates that UKPNP  activists
                 are at risk of human rights abuses;


             ii) It being accepted that he is an activist in this country it
                 should have been accepted that this was borne of a  genuine
                 political commitment; if this was doubted that is a  matter
                 that should have been put to the Appellant  in  order  that
                 had an opportunity to meet that challenge.

10. Mr Bates defended the determination on all fronts.






    Discussion and Findings


11. Before me Mr Jagadesham squarely acknowledged that two findings of  the
    First-tier Tribunal placed him in difficulty. The first  was  that  the
    Appellant's sur place political involvement is wholly cynical and  will
    not be continued in Pakistan [at  FTT  61].  The  second  was  that  no
    objective risk arises from the work he has already done  here  [at  FTT
    64].


12. As to the first of these  findings,  Mr  Jagadesham  submits  that  the
    Tribunal reached its conclusion unsupported  by  any  analysis  of  the
    evidence before it. The Appellant had asserted, and the Respondent  had
    accepted, that he played an active role in the UKPNP in  this  country.
    It was in those circumstances incumbent on the Tribunal to  ask  itself
    why. If it was to conclude, as it appears  to  at  paragraph  61,  that
    these activities were a cynical ploy to try and get refugee status, the
    Tribunal had to give some reasons for reaching that conclusion.

13. I am unable to accept that paragraph 61 amounts to a conclusion with no
    reasons. In  the  lengthy  and  cogent  reasoning  that  precedes  this
    paragraph the Tribunal sets out in considerable detail why it does  not
    believe the Appellant's evidence (as summarised at my 6(i) above).  The
    view taken by Judge Meyler is encapsulated at her paragraph 29: "it was
    an uncontentious fact that the appellant was a poor witness  before  me
    and Mr Hussain [counsel before  the  First-tier  Tribunal]  effectively
    conceded this before  me.  The  appellant  frequently  appeared  to  be
    dumbfounded by the fairly straightforward questions asked and hesitated
    or paused for  long  periods  before  answering".    Among  the  fairly
    straightforward questions asked of the Appellant was an enquiry  as  to
    what motivated him to join the UKPNP: as the Tribunal sets out  at  its
    paragraphs 47-48, he was unable to give a coherent  response.  Further,
    at paragraph 58 of the determination, the Tribunal concludes:  "I  find
    that it is not reasonably likely that a genuine  UKPNP  activist  would
    have no awareness of the possibility of  claiming  asylum,  given  that
    their own chairman has done so..."(my  emphasis).   Even  if  one  sets
    aside what might be termed  the  generally  negative  findings  on  the
    Appellant's entire case, these reasons go  directly  to  whether  Judge
    Meyler accepted that the Appellant's UK-based activities were motivated
    by genuine political commitment or not. On the evidence before her  she
    was plainly entitled to conclude that the Appellant  did  not  in  fact
    hold such a commitment, and that he would desist  from  any  activities
    once he had returned to Pakistan.


14. As to the second finding Mr Jagadesham took me  to  references  in  the
    objective evidence to the  Pakistani  intelligence  service  (the  ISI)
    mounting   surveillance   operations   against    perceived    Kashmiri
    separatists, and to human rights abuses committed  by  the  police  and
    army in  Kashmir.   I  am  not  satisfied  that  any  of  that  country
    background material is capable of demonstrating any error on  the  part
    of Judge Meyler. That is because none of it suggests that there is  any
    surveillance  of  perceived  Kashmiri  separatists  in  the   Pakistani
    diaspora.    There was no such evidence before Judge  Meyler.  As  such
    she was entitled to conclude that there was no risk  arising  from  any
    sur place activities in Birmingham.   The evidence that was highlighted
    by Mr Jagadesham  was  exclusively  concerned  with  the  treatment  of
    activists in Kashmir. Given the finding  that  the  appellant  was  not
    going to continue his activities once removed from the  United  Kingdom
    it was of little relevance to her risk assessment. I  also  record  the
    very good point made by Mr Bates that this Appellant is not  even  from
    Kashmir. Navigating her way through decidedly inconsistent evidence  on
    the point Judge Meyler concluded  that  the  Appellant  lived,  at  all
    material times, in Matore, a suburb of Rawalpindi, and it is  to  there
    that he would return. He may also have  spent  some  time  with  family
    members in Taxila and/or Wah Cantt, neither of which are in Kashmir. It
    is very difficult in  those  circumstances  to  see  why  he  might  be
    affected by human rights abuses in that region.

15. I find no error in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Tribunal has conducted a careful and detailed analysis of the  evidence
    before it and  reached  cogent  and  well-reasoned  conclusions.    The
    appeal is therefore dismissed.


    Decisions

16. The appeal is dismissed.

17. There is an anonymity order.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           30th October 2018


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 4th April 2018 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Keane


