
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/01054/2015
                                                               PA/01055/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reason  Promulgated       |
|On 10 May 2017                       |On 21 June 2017                      |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                     S A
                                     S W
                         (anonymity directions made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D Balroop of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr S Witwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Pakistan born on 9 September  1989  and
    11 May 1984, respectively. They appealed against the  respondent's  two
    separate decisions dated 26 August 2015, refusing to grant them  asylum
    and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, MK Lawrence dismissed their appeals on  26  February  2016.  The
    appellant appealed against the decision and were granted permission  to
    appeal and Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan who found that the decision  of
    the first-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an  error  of  law  and
    remitted the appeal to the first-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 2. The appeal came before Judge O'Garo of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  who
    dismissed the appellants appeal. The appellants appealed  against  this
    decision and First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  refused  permission  to
    appeal. Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington  granted  permission  to  appeal
    stating that the credibility finding by the Judge was merely based on a
    minor discrepancy and thus  the  reasoning  is  adequate.  She  further
    stated  that  the  timeline  was  overly  rigid  when   rejecting   the
    credibility of the second appellant and the reasoning relied overly  on
    the Secretary of State's refusal letter without further explanation and
    referred to the case of MK (duty to give reasons). Pakistan [2013] 641

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in her decision found the following which
    I summarise. The appellants claim that they are  homosexuals  and  have
    entered into a civil partnership which  demonstrates  the  strength  of
    their relationship. They fear that if they are  returned  to  Pakistan,
    they will  be  mistreated  or  even  killed  because  of  their  sexual
    orientation.

 5. The appeals are interlinked and the Judge  proceeded  to  consider  the
    First appellant's claim, saying that if she finds his evidence credible
    that he is in a homosexual relationship with the second appellant,  she
    will be able to reach a finding of the second appellant's claim that he
    is also a homosexual.

 6. The Judge found that  the  appellant  at  his  screening  interview  at
    question 4.2, was asked to explain briefly why he cannot return to  his
    home country to which he answered, "because I have a civil  partnership
    with my boyfriend and someone has told my father and mother as well.  I
    don't know where from, but someone sent pictures to my father, I  don't
    know how". The Judge compared this answer to his answer at  his  asylum
    interview at question 64 when the appellant was asked when  his  family
    found out about their relationship and the appellant's answer  to  that
    was "I have a family friend who attended our wedding he has  gone  back
    to Pakistan. His name is Numan; he had some photos on his telephone  of
    our wedding day. He went to our house and he showed them those photos".



 7. The Judge found that the appellant stated at  his  screening  interview
    that he does not know  how  his  parents  found  out  about  his  civil
    partnership. At his asylum interview,  however,  he  said  his  parents
    found because his friend Numan attended their wedding  and  showed  the
    photographs to his parents. The Judge did not find it credible that the
    appellant at his screening interview would not  know  how  his  parents
    found out yet at his asylum interview was able to  give  full  details,
    including the name of the man who attended his wedding and who returned
    to  Pakistan  and  showed  his  father  the  photographs.   The  second
    appellant's evidence in this regard was at question 198, was asked  how
    his family came to know of his sexuality. He replied  that  his  friend
    Numan told them. At question 199 he stated, "when he went  to  Pakistan
    he had money. After two weeks or a month he  did  not  have  money.  He
    asked for money and I gave him some. He told me that he  was  going  to
    show these photos to my family. I thought he might be  kidding  and  he
    was serious. He showed the photos to my family".

 8. The Judge then considered the second  appellant's  screening  interview
    and noted that his answer was different to  that  given  by  the  first
    appellant at his screening interview. The second appellant said that he
    is claiming asylum because he is in a partnership but made  no  mention
    of any threats. The Judge was entitled to take this into  account  this
    omission by the second appellant as damaging credibility.

 9. The Judge then turned to the timeline of the asylum claim, specifically
    as to when the appellant became aware that he was at risk on his return
    to Pakistan which he claims was when his father  found  out  about  his
    sexuality. At question 129 of the first appellant's  asylum  interview,
    he was asked why did he not claim asylum earlier stated,  "when  I  got
    the phone call. I realise my life of that risk  in  my  life  has  been
    threatened. Then I applied for asylum because that was the only way  to
    live here". The Judge then turned to his answer at question  68,  where
    the appellant was asked when did his father  telephone  and  threatened
    him, to which he replied it was in April after Numan went to his house.
    At question 66, the appellant said that Numan  left  for  Pakistan  two
    weeks after their wedding.

10. The Judge found this to be an important discrepancy  in  the  timeline.
    She stated that both appellants attended the Asylum Screening  Unit  on
    27 March 2015 to claim asylum and the reason given at question 129  was
    that his father threatened  him.  The  Judge  noted  that  on  his  own
    evidence, noted at question 68, the appellant said that his father  did
    not know about his sexuality  until  April  2015  which  could  not  be
    possible on the evidence of both appellants.

11. The Judge also noted the discrepancy in both appellants' answers as  to
    when Numan left the United Kingdom for Pakistan. The  second  appellant
    when asked why he claimed asylum on 27 March, which was less  than  two
    weeks after his wedding, he said that he cannot confirm the  dates  and
    said that Numan left a week after the wedding.  The  first  appellant's
    response at question 70 was that all he knows is that  Numan  left  two
    weeks after their wedding. The Judge found that at the  time  that  the
    appellants claimed asylum on 27 March  2015,  according  to  their  own
    evidence their families would not have known about their sexuality.

12. The Judge found that the appellant's credibility is have seriously been
    undermined  by  the  inconsistencies  noted.  She  found  that  if  the
    appellant's claims were genuine, they would  be  consistent,  in  their
    evidence.

13.  The  Judge  found  that  although  they  have  entered  into  a  civil
    partnership, that in itself does not demonstrate that  they  are  in  a
    genuine same sex relationship or that they are homosexuals.

14. She further noted that when Mr Collins, Home Office presenting  officer
    questioned the appellants for why they were not wearing  wedding  bands
    and both gave inconsistent answers as  to  where  their  bedding  bands
    were.

  Discussion and findings whether there is an error of law


15. I have given anxious scrutiny to the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and have taken  into  account  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    submissions at the hearing. The issue in the appeal for the  first-tier
    Tribunal Judge to decide was whether the appellants are  in  a  genuine
    homosexual relationship. She considered the  first  appellant's  appeal
    and stated that if she  finds  him  credible,  the  second  appellant's
    appeal would succeed on those bases. Therefore, the credibility and the
    consistency in their evidence was central to the  Judge's  analysis  of
    the evidence.

16. The Judge found that there were inconsistencies in  the  evidence.  The
    appellant said at his asylum interview that his family found out  about
    his sexuality and civil partnership in  April  2015  when  one  of  his
    wedding guests, namely, Numan went to Pakistan and  showed  his  family
    photographs of the wedding day.  However, at  his  screening  interview
    the appellant said that he did not know how his father  had  found  out
    about a civil partnership and that someone  has  told  his  father  and
    mother and he does not know from where "but someone sent pictures to my
    father."

17. The Judge was entitled to find not credible that  the  appellant  would
    not have known at his screening interview how his father found out  but
    at his asylum interview be able to give full details.  Furthermore,  in
    light of the second appellant's evidence that Numan was trying to bribe
    him, it is not at all credible the appellant would  not  know  how  his
    father found out, at his screening interview.

18. The Judge found that the second appellant at his screening interview at
    question 4.2 omitted to say he had been threatened. He  said  that  his
    reason for claiming asylum was because he is in a partnership and  made
    no mention of any threats. The Judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    second appellant's omission at his  screening  interview  went  to  his
    credibility and took this evidence in the round.

19. Furthermore, the appellant's evidence at his asylum interview that  his
    father threatened to kill him does not  accord  with  his  evidence  at
    question 4.2 of his screening interview where the appellant  said  that
    when his father found out, he told him that "this is not good, but this
    is my life".

20. The  Judge  noted  that  at  question  129  of  the  first  appellant's
    interview, he was asked why did he not claim asylum earlier to which he
    replied, "when I got the phone call I realise my life was at risk in my
    life had been threatened then I applied for asylum because that was the
    only way to live here". She compared  this  answer  to  his  answer  at
    question 68 where he said that his father rang and  threatened  him  in
    April after Numan visited him and said at question 66 that  Numan  went
    to Pakistan two weeks after the wedding.

21. The Judge also considered the second appellant's answer to question 198
    of asylum interview when he was asked how his  family  knew  about  his
    sexuality and he had said at question 199, when Numan went to Pakistan,
    he had money and after two weeks or a month he did not have  money  and
    asked the second appellant for money and he gave him some.  The  second
    appellant's evidence was that it was  three  or  four  days  after  the
    wedding, he spoke to Numan who asked him for money.  He  also  said  at
    question 206 that two weeks after Numan asked for money,  he  spoke  to
    his family.

22. The Judge took into account the second appellant's answer  at  question
    215 when he was asked why he claimed asylum on 27 March which was  less
    than two weeks after their wedding. His response  was  that  he  cannot
    confirm the dates but Numan left a week after the  wedding.  The  Judge
    found that this was clearly not consistent with the  first  appellant's
    response at question 70 of his asylum interview when he said  that  all
    he knows is that Numan left for Pakistan two weeks after their wedding.

23. The Judge found that the answers  given  by  both  appellants  and  the
    timeline was not consistent. The evidence was that his family found out
    in the second week of April and their marriage took place on  16  March
    2015. The appellants gave different timelines for when  Numan  went  to
    Pakistan and told his parents.  The Judge found that  as  of  27  March
    2015 it was  not  possible  that  his  father  knew  of  his  sexuality
    according to the time line.

24. The Judge stated that there are other  consistencies  which  have  been
    noted by the respondent in her reasons for refusal letter for which the
    appellant has not been able to give a  credible  explanation  and  that
    this further discredits his credibility but did not  set  them  out.  I
    will set out some of the other credibility findings in the reasons  for
    refusal letter, for completeness and to determine whether a differently
    constituted  Tribunal  could  decide  the  appeal  differently  on  the
    evidence.

25. When the second appellant was asked at question 119, to describe how he
    met the first appellant, he stated that they met at a pub at Old  Camps
    Street in Tooting Broadway. However, the first appellant said that they
    met at a pub in Old Compton's Street in Soho. Tooting Broadway and Soho
    are in completely different locations. It would be  expected  that  the
    appellants would be consistent about when they first met. This goes  to
    the credibility of the appellant and to the credibility of his claims.

26. The second appellant did not have  much  information  about  the  first
    appellant at his asylum interview. He  did  not  know  when  the  first
    appellant came to the United Kingdom and what he studied here.  He  did
    not know whether the first appellant had worked in the  United  Kingdom
    and was unaware of how the  first  appellant  realised  his  sexuality.
    Similarly, the first appellant did not know where the second  appellant
    went to school and why he came to the United Kingdom and whether he had
    any gay relationships in Pakistan or what  he  studied.  This  lack  of
    knowledge  about  each  other  is  not  consistent   with   a   genuine
    relationship.

27. There was also an  inconsistency  in  the  evidence  as  to  where  the
    partnership ceremony took place. The second appellant stated  that  was
    in Ealing Broadway and the first appellant said that it took  place  in
    Hammersmith town hall. It is not in the least credible that both  would
    give a completely different venue for where that marriage ceremony took
    place. This also goes to their credibility and to  the  credibility  of
    their claim.

28. When the second appellant was asked, who proposed first, he said "I  do
    not know whose idea it was to get married" and then said,  "I  think  I
    was the one to propose first". When the appellant was asked why he does
    not recall such a significant event as a proposal, he  did  not  answer
    the question put to him but when given a second opportunity to explain,
    he said that he thinks he mentioned it first "as far  as  I  remember".
    This vague response and inability  to  remember  a  recent  significant
    turning point  in  his  life,  goes  to  his  credibility  and  to  the
    credibility of  this  claim  that  the  appellants  are  in  a  genuine
    homosexual relationship.

29. The Judge took all the evidence into account, in the round and came  to
    a sustainable conclusion. I find that there is  no  perversity  in  the
    reasoning of the Judge and the conclusions that she arrived at  on  the
    evidence. I find that no material error of law has been established  in
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision. I find that she was  entitled
    to conclude that the appellants are not credible and nor is their claim
    that they are homosexuals and they are not entitled  to  be  recognised
    refugees or to be granted humanitarian protection in this country based
    on their claimed homosexuality.

30. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  this  dispose  of
    the appeal.

DECISION

I find that there is no error of law and I dismiss the appeal




     Dated this 17th day of May 2017

Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Mrs S Chana





