
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01179/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 July 2019                      |On 25 July 2019                      |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Faryl, instructed by Broudie Jackson & Canter


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies promulgated on 30 January 2019 in
    which he allowed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  17
    January 2017 to refuse her asylum  and  humanitarian  protection.   The
    matter was previously heard by the judge to whom it was remitted  by  a
    decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis.

 2. The first decision is one in which the judge allowed  the  appeal  also
    and it is of note  that  Judge  Alis  considered  in  his  decision  at
    paragraphs 8 and 9 whether it was the matter should be remitted back to
    the First-tier Tribunal and noted that there was  no  objection  to  it
    being remitted back to Judge Davies.

 3. It is we consider of great concern that Judge Davies in effect  ignored
    what he was told to do by the Upper Tribunal.  Judge Davies should  not
    at any stage have remitted the appeal to the respondent for  a  Section
    55 assessment, he had no power to do so, and the ground of appeal  that
    a decision is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  is  no  longer  one
    available.

 4. What Judge Davies did when remaking the decision is equally  a  failure
    properly to make findings of fact which are reasoned, and which address
    the law properly.  It is inadequate to state only what the  judge  said
    at paragraphs 9 and 10 of his decision:

         "9.  I make it clear in relation to this matter I have  taken  into
             account all the public  interest  considerations  set  out  in
             Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
             2002.  In my view the failure by the  respondent  to  properly
             and fully consider Section 55 when making his initial decision
             was an act that  indicates  the  respondent  did  not  act  in
             accordance with the law.  I  accept  that  the  appellant  can
             satisfy  me  that  a  proposed  removal  will  amount  to   an
             interference and the interference would have  consequences  of
             such gravity as to potentially engage the operation of Article
             8.  It is clear from her evidence that that is the case.

         10.  Having  established  that  interference  as  I  have  found  I
             conclude  on  the  balance  of  probability  it  was  not   in
             accordance with the law because the respondent at the date  of
             his original decision had not properly  and  fully  considered
             his obligations under Section 55.  It also appears to me  from
             the evidence I have considered that the  interference  of  the
             appellant as established is not proportionate  to  the  public
             end sought to be achieved, namely the maintenance of effective
             immigration control, taking into account her circumstances and
             the circumstances of the child."

 5. There are simply no findings of fact here.  It  is  inadequate  and  we
    regret that we have no option other than to  find  that  this  decision
    must be set aside owing  once  again  to  a  failure  by  Judge  Davies
    properly to make relevant findings. Both parties were in agreement with
    this and that there  was  now  no  alternative  to  this  appeal  being
    remitted, once again, at considerable  and  unnecessary  cost,  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and we set it aside.

 6. The appeal is remitted to a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal
    for a fresh decision on all issues

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 18 July 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul




