

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01591/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester CJC
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 21st February 2019                               On 13th March 2019



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                    K A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mrs L Butler (Solicitor, Fountain Solicitors)
For the Respondent:         Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim was heard
   by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey at Birmingham n the 31st of July 2018.
   For the reasons given in the decision promulgated on the 15th of August
   2018 the appeal was dismissed with the Judge rejecting the credibility of
   the Appellant's account of events in Iraq. Permission to appeal was
   sought on the basis that the Judge had not applied relevant country
   guidance cases when assessing the Appellant's return and internal
   relocation. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that that was
   arguable.

2. There was no rule 24 response from the Home Office. It was observed by
   the Home Office that there was no challenge to the Judge's credibility
   findings but accepted that the Judge had erred in not applying the
   country guidance. For the Appellant it was submitted that the appeal
   should simply be allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

3. Given the concession by the Home Office there was common ground that the
   decision contained an error of law which was material. There was
   reference in the hearing to there now being evidence relating to the
   Appellant's mental state, however that was not relevant to the question
   of whether the Judge made an error although it could be relevant to the
   assessment to be made.

4. As the error is that the Judge did not effectively complete the decision-
   making process and with there being no challenge to the Judge's
   credibility findings I indicated at the hearing that the appeal should be
   remitted to Judge Pacey to complete the process. That would enable the
   Appellant to serve the additional medical evidence and to make
   submissions accordingly.

5. As the Judge rejected the core of the Appellant's account it would be
   open to the Judge to find that the Appellant had not shown that he either
   did not have a CSID or other relevant documentation or had not shown that
   he was unable to obtain it. That would inform the decision to be made in
   the application of the country guidance case relating to return and
   internal relocation. In remitting the case to Judge Pacey the Appellant
   is to serve any medical evidence to be relied on no later than 7 days
   before the next substantive hearing.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law in that the decision is incomplete.

I do not set aside the decision but remit the decision to First-tier
Tribunal Judge Pacey to assess the Appellant's return to Iraq in the light
of the applicable country guidance cases.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)


Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 12th March 2019







