
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01343/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 9 November 2020                  |On 12 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     SS
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of  31
January 2020 refusing his asylum and human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 10  June  1987.  He  entered
the UK on 7 October 2020 with leave to enter  as  a  Tier  4  student  valid
until 11 February 2012. He overstayed  and  was  eventually  served  with  a
removal notice when arrested on 22  March  2016  for  immigration  offences.
Removal directions were set for his return to Pakistan  on  26  April  2016,
but were cancelled  when  he  claimed  asylum  on  20  April  2016.  He  was
interviewed about his claim in December 2019 and his claim  was  refused  on
31 January 2020.

The basis of the appellant's claim was that he feared return to Pakistan  as
he was gay. He claimed to have been abused by his uncle when aged  10  years
and to have realised that he was gay when he was 17 years old  after  having
sex with a male friend, U. The relationship with U continued  for  2  and  a
half years, in secret, and ended when they were caught  by  his  father  and
brother. He moved class at school and told his father that it was a  one-off
occasion. Following that incident, he tried to be attracted  to  girls,  due
to the pressure from his family, but was sure that he was  gay.  He  decided
to come to the UK to study as he  would  have  more  freedom  here.  However
after arriving  here  his  father  discovered  that  he  was  gay  when  his
brother's friend spotted him coming out of  a  gay  club  with  a  man,  his
friend E, and informed on him to his family. He feared being  killed  if  he
returned to Pakistan.

The respondent did not accept the  appellant's  account  of  being  gay  and
concluded that he would be at no risk on return  to  Pakistan.  It  was  not
accepted that there would be a breach of Article 3 or 8 if  he  was  removed
from the UK.

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and his appeal  was
heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 12 March  2020  by  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Oliver. The appellant's evidence before the  judge  was  that  he  had
been introduced to gay nightclubs in the UK  by  D,  with  whom  he  was  no
longer in contact, that he had first gone to gay clubs at the  beginning  of
2011 and that he had had a relationship with E, the friend with whom he  had
been spotted when coming out of a gay nightclub.  The  judge  heard  from  a
further witness, a friend A who had known the appellant since 2014, and  had
two letters before  him  from  long-standing  friends,  all  confirming  the
appellant's sexual orientation, and a letter from  his  GP  confirming  that
they had spoken about his sexuality.

Judge Oliver  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  homosexual,
rejecting his explanation for the delay in his claim,  noting  the  lack  of
supporting evidence and having  regard  to  contradictory  evidence  in  the
appellant's account of his father's ongoing need to keep an eye  on  him  in
the UK. He considered that the  appellant  was  at  no  risk  on  return  to
Pakistan and that  his  removal  would  not  breach  his  human  rights.  He
accordingly dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge  Oliver's  decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on the following grounds: that the judge had  accorded  undue
weight to his delay in claiming  asylum;  that  the  judge  had  reached  an
irrational conclusion about him giving contradictory  evidence  in  relation
to his father keeping an eye on him; that the judge had unlawfully  required
corroboration of his family's hostility towards him; and that the judge  had
failed to consider material evidence such as his claim to have  been  abused
by his uncle as a child and his visits to gay clubs.

Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but was  granted
by the Upper Tribunal on 30 July 2020.  The respondent provided  a  Rule  24
response, submitting that the judge had not materially erred in law.

The matter came before me and both parties made submissions.

Mr Gajjar expanded upon the grounds of appeal, relying in particular on  the
first two grounds.

Ms Everett, in her submissions, accepted  that  the  Rule  24  response  had
rejected all the grounds of appeal, but found that she was unable to  defend
the judge's decision in relation to the first two grounds. She  acknowledged
that the judge had found the appellant's claim to be  a  weak  one.  However
she accepted that she could not defend the  judge's  reasoning  at  [36]  in
relation to the appellant's delay in making his  claim,  whereby  he  linked
the appellant's awareness of claiming asylum to his  visits  to  gay  clubs,
and neither could she defend  his  finding  at  [34]  that  the  appellant's
account about his father keeping an eye on him was contradictory.

In light of Ms Everett's concession, which I find to  be  properly  made,  I
agree that Judge Oliver's  findings  and  conclusions,  as  referred  to  in
grounds 1 and 2, are unsustainable and that his decision  contains  material
errors of law.

Both parties agreed that the  matter  had  to  go  back  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

Accordingly, I set aside Judge Oliver's decision in its  entirety,  with  no
findings preserved and remit the case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
heard de novo before a different judge.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge Oliver.


Signed:  S Kebede Dated: 9 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
