
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01351/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 June 2017                       |On 26 June 2017                 |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                     E D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Collins counsel instructed by Sentinel Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1992 and is a national of Albania.

3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

4. This was an appeal by the Appellant against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on 17  May  2016  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  refuse  the
   Appellants application refugee status in the UK.

5. On 11 May 2015 the Appellant applied for asylum. She  claimed  that  when
   she was in her third year at University her father told her  she  was  to
   marry a man that [she had] never met. She was unhappy with this  but  was
   assaulted by her father and told she had no choice. In December 2014, she
   began a relationship with a male called [N] who advised her to flee  from
   Albania with him when she was told by  her  father  that  her  engagement
   would go ahead in April 2015. On 9 April 2015 she fled to Italy  and  was
   taken to an isolated villa where she expected to meet [N]  but  was  told
   she would never see him again. She was detained,  beaten  and  forced  to
   work as a prostitute. On 20 April 2015 she was trafficked into the UK and
   taken to a house where she forced to work as a prostitute. About 20  days
   after her arrival she was able to  escape.  On  22  August  UKVI  made  a
   positive reasonable grounds  decision  but  on  19  August  2015  it  was
   concluded that she was not a victim of human trafficking.

6. The Judge in his decision

      . Accepted that the Appellants father was abusive  and  attempted  to
        make her agree to a marriage she did not want.

      . Accepted that the Appellant had in fact been trafficked to  the  UK
        for sexual exploitation.

      . He found that there was sufficiency of  protection  and  there  was
        assistance for victims of trafficking such as the Appellant who was
        intelligent and resourceful.

      . Found that he Appellants mental health issues would be addressed in
        the state shelters.

7. The Appellant appealed that decision and the error of  law  hearing  came
   before me on  30  September  2016.  I  found  that  errors  of  law  were
   established and that the decision was set aside in so far as  it  related
   to the inadequacy of the assessment of the risk on return by reference to
   the Appellants individual circumstances; and the two  matters  that  were
   conceded by Mr Mc Vitie that the Judge failed to consider the risk of  re
   trafficking and the Judge failed to consider paragraph 276ADE (vi) of the
   Rules in that her experience even if it fell short of meeting the  burden
   of establishing that she was entitled to refugee status was  such  as  to
   amount to very significant obstacles to reintegration.

8. The matter was adjourned for a rehearing before me.

9. I heard evidence from the Appellant  who  adopted  the  contents  of  her
   previous witness statements. She additionally confirmed  that  since  the
   date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing she had not had any contact  with
   anyone in Albania.  She also  confirmed  that  the  supplementary  bundle
   contained her medical records which showed that she  had  now  also  been
   prescribed half-Beta Prograne  because  she  was  having  panic  attacks,
   palpitations and had trouble breathing.

10. Mr Mc Vitie had no questions for the Appellant in cross examination.

Final Submissions

11. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Mc Vitie made the following submissions:

12. This was a case where there had been  a  previous  unchallenged  finding
   that the Appellant had been trafficked.

13. He accepted that I was required  to  consider  the  Appellants  personal
   circumstances as set out in her evidence and the  expert  report  against
   the guidance given in TD

14. In relation to the experts report he suggested it was problematic.  Thus
   for example at page 13  in  relation  to  the  argument  that  she  could
   relocate and the risk that  her  registering  could  be  checked  as  the
   register could  be  accessed  the  source  of  this  conclusion  was  the
   'perceptions of colleagues'. This was an unreliable  source  for  such  a
   conclusion.

15. In relation to the guidance given  in  TD  he  set  out  in  detail  the
   Appellants risk factors.

16. The expert stated that there were honour killings but accepted that  the
   state prosecuted them and severe sentences were handed down.

17. This Appellant could  utilize  the  support  available  and  as  a  well
   educated person could relocate, and in relation to this he relied on  the
   CIG on Freedom of Movement.

18. He argued that the risk of re trafficking was low.

19. In relation to paragraph 276ADE(vi) he suggested that this ran  parallel
   to the asylum claim although the burden of proof was, if anything, higher
   and the same  arguments  were  relevant:  she  speaks  Albanian  and  had
   cultural connections.

20. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Collins submitted that :

21. He relied on his skeleton argument.

22. The expert report added little to what was said  in  TD  which  was  set
   down for hearing because of the vintage of the previous guidance found in
   AM and BM.

23. The relevant factors were not a checklist but  the  Appellant  had  been
   honest in her account that while she had attended University  her  father
   had not allowed her to complete the course. She had never  worked.  While
   medical treatment was available in Albania  her  mental  health  problems
   enhance her vulnerability and that enhanced her risk of re trafficking.

24. This Appellant lived in Shishak which was only 11km from Durres  and  31
   from Tirhana. The Appellants in AM and BM and TD and  AD  were  from  the
   North of Albania. They faced a localised risk.  This  Appellant  was  not
   from the North and would have more difficulty in relocating to Tirhana as
   she would not be relocating from the far North but from  much  closer  to
   Tirhana

25. The issue in this case is one of vulnerability.  The  additional  factor
   to be taken into account added by TD was the availability  of  a  support
   network and this Appellant would have none.

26. Thus in determining the issue of internal  relocation  I  was  not  only
   whether her family and the traffickers could find her  but  would  it  be
   unduly harsh in her individual circumstances.

27. In respect of honour killings state protection was ineffective.

28. In relation to paragraph 276 ADE(vi) he suggested that I  must  look  at
   life outside the shelters. The Appellant was unlikely  to  be  accessible
   while in the shelters but once she left there would be  very  significant
   obstacles to her having a reasonable life in Tirhana or anywhere else.

29. The  medical  evidence  of  her  mental  health  problems  enhanced  her
   palpable vulnerability.

30. Given the unchallenged finding that the Appellant father had beaten  her
   in the past for refusing to marry the man of his choice if he  found  out
   that she had been trafficked she would be at risk.

31. There was nothing in TD to suggest that the conclusion of paragraph  182
   of AM 'it is not possible to reach a clear conclusion that  there  is  in
   all cases for a victim of trafficking a sufficiency  of  protection  from
   her former traffickers.' He identified material in the Appellants  bundle
   and from the Respondents own 2016 document that showed the  law  was  not
   always  effectively  applied.  This  informs  the  decision   about   the
   sufficiency of protection that it is ineffective and patchy.

32. In relation  to  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  her  argued  that
   corruption was endemic and is she relocated she is obliged  to  register.
   There was a danger that if someone was interested  in  finding  her  they
   could.

33. The  Appellants  medical  records  showed  a  long-standing  history  of
   depression and that her dosage of late had increased.

34. The evidence was clear that it was unusual for women to  live  alone  in
   Albania. If she left the shelter there was a real risk of re trafficking.

35. If I was against him in respect of the protection claim his  'fall  back
   'position was that the Appellant should succeed under paragraph 276ADE.

Legal Framework

Asylum

36. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that  the  Applicant  will
   be granted asylum if the provisions of that paragraph apply.  The  burden
   of proof rests on an Appellant to satisfy me that he or she falls  within
   the definition of refugee in Regulation 2 of the  Refugee  or  person  in
   need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006  (which
   I shall refer to as the Qualification Regulations) as read with Article 1
   (A) of the refugee Convention. In essence, an Appellant will have to show
   that there are substantial grounds for believing that  the  Appellant  is
   outside his or her country of nationality or, if applicable, his  or  her
   country of habitual residence, by  reason  of  a  well  founded  fear  of
   persecution for Refugee Convention reason and  is  unable  or  unwilling,
   owing to such fear, to avail himself or herself of the protection of that
   country.


Caselaw

37.  In TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92  (IAC)  it  was  held
   that much of the guidance given in AM & BM (Trafficked women) Albania  CG
   [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) is maintained. Where that guidance has been  amended
   or supplemented by this decision it is in italics:

     i)       It is not possible to set out a typical profile of trafficked
        women from Albania: trafficked women come from  all  areas  of  the
        country and from varied social backgrounds;

    ii)      Much of Albanian society is  governed  by  a  strict  code  of
        honour which not only means that trafficked women would  have  very
        considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their home  areas  on
        return but also will affect their ability to  relocate  internally.
        Those  who  have  children  outside   marriage   are   particularly
        vulnerable. In extreme cases the close relatives of the  trafficked
        woman may refuse to have the trafficked woman's child  return  with
        her and could force her to abandon the child:

   iii)      Some women are lured to leave Albania with false  promises  of
        relationships or work. Others may seek out traffickers in order  to
        facilitate their departure from Albania and their establishment  in
        prostitution abroad. Although such women cannot  be  said  to  have
        left Albania against their will, where they have fallen  under  the
        control of traffickers for the purpose  of  exploitation  there  is
        likely to be considerable violence within the relationships  and  a
        lack of freedom: such women are victims of trafficking;

    iv) In the past few years the Albanian government has made  significant
        efforts to improve  its  response  to  trafficking.  This  includes
        widening  the  scope  of  legislation,  publishing   the   Standard
        Operating Procedures, implementing an effective  National  Referral
        Mechanism, appointing  a  new  Anti-trafficking  Co-ordinator,  and
        providing training  to  law  enforcement  officials.  There  is  in
        general a Horvath-standard sufficiency of protection, but  it  will
        not be effective in every case. When  considering  whether  or  not
        there is a sufficiency of protection for a  victim  of  trafficking
        her particular circumstances must be considered;

     v)      There is now in place a reception and reintegration  programme
        for victims of trafficking. Returning victims  of  trafficking  are
        able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases'  may  be
        able to stay there for up to 2 years. During  this  initial  period
        after return victims of trafficking are  supported  and  protected.
        Unless  the  individual  has  particular  vulnerabilities  such  as
        physical or mental health issues, this option cannot  generally  be
        said to be unreasonable; whether it is must be determined on a case
        by case basis;

    vi)  Once asked to leave the shelter a victim of trafficking  can  live
        on her own. In  doing  so  she  will  face  significant  challenges
        including,  but  not  limited  to,  stigma,  isolation,   financial
        hardship and uncertainty, a sense of physical  insecurity  and  the
        subjective fear of being found either by their families  or  former
        traffickers. Some women will have the capacity to  negotiate  these
        challenges without undue hardship. There will however be victims of
        trafficking  with  characteristics,  such  as  mental  illness   or
        psychological  scarring,   for   whom   living   alone   in   these
        circumstances  would  not  be  reasonable.  Whether  a   particular
        appellant  falls  into  that  category  will  call  for  a  careful
        assessment of all the circumstances;

   vii) Re-trafficking is a  reality.  Whether  that  risk  exists  for  an
        individual claimant will turn in part on the factors  that  led  to
        the  initial  trafficking,  and  on  her  personal   circumstances,
        including her background, age, and her willingness and  ability  to
        seek help from the authorities. For  a  proportion  of  victims  of
        trafficking, their situations may mean  that  they  are  especially
        vulnerable  to  re-trafficking,  or   being   forced   into   other
        exploitative situations;

  viii) Trafficked women from Albania may well be members of  a  particular
        social group on that account alone. Whether they  are  at  risk  of
        persecution on account of such membership and whether they will  be
        able to access sufficiency of protection from the authorities  will
        depend  upon  their  individual  circumstances  including  but  not
        limited to the following:

        (a) The social status and economic standing of her family

        (b) The level of education of the  victim  of  trafficking  or  her
        family

        (c) The victim of trafficking's state of health,  particularly  her
        mental health

        (d) The presence of an illegitimate child

        (e) The area of origin

        (f) Age  and

        (g) What support network will be available.

Findings

38. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round  before  reaching
   any findings.  I  have  done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
   compartmentalised my findings in some respects below,  I  must  emphasise
   the findings have only been made having taken account of the evidence  as
   a whole including the written and oral evidence  of  the  Appellant,  the
   background material and the expert report of Dr Korovilas.

39. The factual background against which I must assess the Appellants  claim
   is largely undisputed given that I preserved the Judges central  findings
   relating to her claim. The Appellant fears that she is at risk on  return
   both from her own family who she has dishonoured by refusing an  arranged
   marriage and from those who trafficked her from Albania for  the  purpose
   of prostitution. I preserved the finding of the  Judge  that  she  had  a
   genuine fear of her father and the traffickers if she were returned.

40. In relation to her fear of risk of violence  from  her  father  and  the
   sufficiency of protection offered by the state in  her  home  area  I  am
   satisfied my starting point must be that the level  of  threat  from  her
   father will be significantly greater if her family were to find  out,  as
   is reasonably likely, that she had not simply fled from his offer  of  an
   arranged marriage but had become a victim of trafficking for the  purpose
   of prostitution. I also accept having read  Dr  Korovilas's  report  that
   there is a threat from both her family but that of the man she refused to
   marry as they would also feel dishonoured.

41. I have considered the COI April 2016  Albania:  Women  fearing  domestic
   violence which relies on an old country guidance case of DM  (Sufficiency
   of Protection - PSG - Women - Domestic Violence) Albania CG [2004]  UKIAT
   00059 where the Tribunal held that the  state  offers  a  sufficiency  of
   protection against domestic violence although it is  equally  clear  from
   the report of Dr Korovilas that honour killings are a regular and  common
   occurrence. Furthermore even this document then goes on to state at 2.4.5
   that :

   'There are legal remedies available for women fearing domestic  violence,
   although perpetrators are not always properly prosecuted and punished  by
   the courts. There were  reports  of  police  failing  to  respond  to  or
   investigate  complaints  of  domestic  violence  and  some   cases   were
   identified where police officers tried  to  reconcile  the  victims  with
   their perpetrators. '

42. The ability and willingness of the  state  to  offer  protection  for  a
   victim of violence who has also been the subject of trafficking must also
   be based in my view on an assessment of their personal  circumstances  as
   set out in TD. In this case  therefore  I  take  into  account  that  the
   Appellant is a young woman of 25 who comes  from  a  strict,  traditional
   Muslim family indeed she describes them as 'fanatical'.  While  I  accept
   that she started University it is accepted that she did not complete  her
   studies and have never lived or worked otherwise than in Shijak which  is
   only 32 Km from Tirhana and indeed only 1km from Durres where the man who
   brought about her trafficking, N, came from.

43. The Appellants fear is of her family both immediate and extended as  she
   indicates in her witness statement that her whole family are  traditional
   in that they would support her father  rather  than  her.  The  Appellant
   would have no support network based on the facts as her family understood
   them to be when she left  Albania,  that  she  had  refused  an  arranged
   marriage. I am satisfied however that the risk from her family  would  be
   exacerbated if they were to find out  that  she  had  been  a  victim  of
   trafficking for the purpose of prostitution.  The  vulnerability  of  the
   Appellant in this case  is  further  exacerbated  by  her  mental  health
   problems. Again the  undisputed  facts  are  that  the  Appellant  is  on
   medication for depression and panic  attacks  (citalopram),  palpitations
   (Half Beta Prograne, PTSD. This medication is  set  out  in  her  medical
   records (page 32) supplementary bundle)  Her  unchallenged  evidence  was
   that rather than decreasing her prescription has increased.

44. I am satisfied therefore  that  looked  at  cumulatively  that  in  this
   Appellants circumstances  the  state  would  not  afford  her  sufficient
   protection in her home area from her family  and  that  of  her  rejected
   suitor or from the traffickers whose origins may be as near as Durres  11
   km way from her home town.

45. I have considered whether it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant  to
   relocate within Albania and I accept that the  starting  point  is  still
   that contained within AM at paragraph 187 which concluded that  'internal
   relocation is unlikely to be effective for most victims of trafficking'.

46. If she lived away from her home area I accept that initially  she  could
   live in a shelter and I have looked at sub heading (v) and (vi) of  TD  .
   It clear from all the material before me that this  is  not  a  permanent
   solution as there  are  only  4  shelters  and  places  are  limited  and
   therefore eventually the Appellant would have to leave  the  shelter  and
   live elsewhere. Those same factors which were relevant to the ability  of
   the state to offer sufficient protection  are  equally  relevant  to  her
   ability to face  the  challenges  of  living  outside  the  shelter.  The
   Appellant would be a young single woman without any  support  seeking  to
   reintegrate into a patriarchal  society  in  which  the  family  was  the
   principal unit for welfare, mutual support and employment. It could prove
   difficult to withhold information about her origins: Dr Korovilas  points
   out at page 13 that property owners and employers often demand  to  speak
   to the father, brother or other male relative before they will enter into
   any agreement. It is also suggested by Dr Korovilas that if she relocated
   within Albania her presence could become known to her  family  or  anyone
   else interested in tracing her because the high levels of  corruption  In
   Albania  rendered  the  registration  records  of  local   municipalities
   vulnerable. I note that if she relocated to Tirhana she would not be very
   far from her home area or from Durres and that Tirhana might be the place
   that she would be  expected  to  relocate  to  and  would  thus  be  more
   vulnerable there.

47. The Appellants mental  health  problems  are  addressed  in  the  UK  by
   medication and counselling  but  she  still  suffers  from  those  issues
   although she is  safe  and  it  seems  to  me  that  the  stress  in  her
   circumstances of living alone, keeping her whereabouts secret from anyone
   who had previously known her, in fear of being found by her family,  that
   of her rejected fianc� or the traffickers in a country with the size  and
   population of Albania, would not be reasonable.

Conclusions on Asylum

48. I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof on  her  to
   show that she has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  reason
   recognised by the Geneva Convention. Accordingly, the Appellant's removal
   would cause the UK to be in breach of its obligations  under  the  Geneva
   Convention.


Conclusions on ECHR

49. On the facts as  established  in  this  appeal,  there  are  substantial
   grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
   treatment in breach of ECHR.


Decision


50. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


51. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


52. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.


Signed                                                              Date
23.6.2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
