
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01177/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8th August 2017                    |On 25th  August 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                 Abdul Bari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Alban of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 15th July  1998.   He
    arrived in the UK on 10th June 2012 and applied for asylum on 19th July
    2012.  That application was refused on 10th May 2013 but owing  to  the
    Appellant's age he was granted discretionary leave until 10th  November
    2015.  The Appellant applied for leave to remain on 5th November  2015.
    That application was refused for the reasons given in the  Respondent's
    letter of 18th January 2016.  The Appellant appealed,  and  his  appeal
    was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lagunju  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 4th October 2016.  She decided to dismiss  the
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds for the reasons given in  her
    Decision dated 26th January 2017.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal
    that decision, and on 16th May 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal  for  the  following  reasons.   It  was
    accepted by the Respondent and found by the Judge  that  some  time  in
    2011 the Appellant was abducted by the Taliban and  later  released  on
    payment of a ransom.  Two or three months later the Appellant's  father
    was kidnapped and as his family was unable to  pay  a  ransom,  he  was
    killed.  However, the Judge found that the Appellant had failed to show
    that he was at risk of being forcefully recruited by the Taliban partly
    because his mother, brothers and sisters  still  lived  in  the  family
    home.  The Judge was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on return, and concluded that it  was  safe
    for the Appellant to return to his home area.  In the alternative,  the
    Judge found that the Appellant could safely relocate to Kabul and  that
    it was not unreasonable for him to do so.  At the hearing before me, Ms
    Alban referred to her Skeleton Argument and submitted  that  the  Judge
    had erred in law in coming to these conclusions.  It was not in dispute
    that the Appellant  was  persecuted  when  he  was  abducted  in  2011.
    However the Judge failed to consider the implications of  this  finding
    as given in paragraph 339K of HC 395  and  Article  4(4)  of  Directive
    2004/83.  As there was  past  persecution,  the  burden  was  upon  the
    Respondent to  show  that  there  were  good  reasons  to  believe  the
    persecution would not be repeated as found by the ECtHR in JK v Sweden.
     The Judge had failed to consider the  appeal  from  that  perspective.
    The Judge found that the Appellant could safely relocate to Kabul,  but
    that finding was tainted by  the  Judge's  failure  to  make  a  proper
    finding as to the risk of future persecution.

 4. In response, Ms Aboni argued that there was no such error of law as the
    Judge had directed herself appropriately and had given adequate reasons
    for her decision.  The Judge accepted the Appellant's evidence but made
    no finding that the Appellant had been persecuted  in  the  past.   The
    Judge found that the Appellant had not explained  his  fear  of  future
    persecution by the Taliban.  The Judge considered the  decision  in  AK
    (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 000763 (IAC) and found  that
    as the Appellant still had family living in Afghanistan,  it  would  be
    reasonable as not unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to Kabul.

 5. Ms Alban made other submissions to me which I need  not  deal  with  in
    this Decision as I find that the Judge made a material error of law and
    that therefore her decision must be set aside and the decision  in  the
    appeal remade in the First-tier Tribunal.  It was not in  dispute  that
    the Appellant had suffered an abduction in 2011.   Although  the  Judge
    did not make a specific finding as such, this can  only  be  viewed  as
    persecution or serious harm.  If the Judge thought it was not,  it  was
    an error for her not to say so and explain  why.   As  there  was  past
    persecution or serious harm, it behoved the Judge to consider  risk  on
    return in the light of paragraph 339K of HC 395.   This  provides  that
    such past persecution must be regarded as a serious indication  of  the
    Appellant's well-founded fear of future persecution  on  return  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  will  not  be
    repeated.  The Judge failed to deal with this issue at  all.   I  agree
    with the submission of Ms Alban that such a failure renders the Judge's
    internal relocation finding as unreliable.

 6. At the request of Ms Aboni, I decided not  to  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision in the appeal but to remit that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for it to be remade there under the  provisions  of  paragraph
    7.2(b) of the Practice Statements.  There is more  fact-finding  to  be
    done in respect of risk on return.

Notice of Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    The decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

 8. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  I was not
    asked to do so, and indeed I find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Dated 25th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

