
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01381/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2019                           |On 02 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     MM
                       (Anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal of Counsel instructed by Birnberg Pierce&
                    Partners, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan Tamil born in 1981. On 04 September  2002
    he  arrived  and  sought  subsidiary  protection  because   he   feared
    persecution on return to Sri Lanka on account of his  involvement  with
    the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). The Respondent (the  SSHD)
    refused the  application  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  rights  became
    exhausted on 15 May 2003. The SSHD reviewed  the  Appellant's  case  in
    March 2011 as a "Legacy" case and decided he had no basis to remain  in
    that United  Kingdom.  On  04  May  2012  the  Appellant  made  further
    representations which were refused on 25 September 2013 and  made  more
    representations on 05 November 2014.

 2. The Appellant has no partner or dependants. He has made a  claim  based
    on his private life in the United Kingdom and his right for  it  to  be
    respected protected by Article 8 of the European Convention.

The SSHD's decision

 3. On 12 January 2018 the SSHD rejected the further representations with a
    right of appeal. The Appellant had relied on claimed  past  association
    with the LTTE and the Eelam People's  Democratic  Party  (EPDP).  These
    claims had been dismissed by an Immigration  Adjudicator  on  28  April
    2013 in respect of which the Appellant had  not  sought  permission  to
    appeal. The SSHD relied on those findings. The Appellant  had  supplied
    recent evidence from his mother about a visit she had made on  16  July
    2014 to Sri Lanka where she stated she had been  questioned  about  the
    Appellant. He had also supplied a letter of  29  October  2017  from  a
    member of the Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) parliament
    and DVD evidence  of  his  attendance  at  a  demonstration.  The  SSHD
    considered the evidence and did not find it showed the Appellant  would
    be at real risk on return. The SSHD claimed it had not been possible to
    identify the Appellant on the DVD.

 4. The SSHD reviewed the case law on Sri Lanka and on sur place claims and
    concluded the Appellant would not be at risk on return.

 5. The Appellant did not meet any of the  time  critical  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  for  discretionary  leave
    based on his private life. The SSHD  accepted  the  Appellant  suffered
    from the conditions identified in  a  letter  from  his  GP  and  after
    referring to the background evidence about the availability of  medical
    facilities in Sri Lanka decided the return  of  the  Appellant  to  Sri
    Lanka would not engage the State's obligations under Articles 2 or 3 of
    the European Convention. There were no exceptional circumstances  which
    might justify the grant to the  Appellant  of  leave  on  compassionate
    circumstances by way of reference to paragraph 353B of the  Immigration
    Rules.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The Appellant appealed and by a decision  promulgated  on  02  November
    2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Keane  found  the  Appellant  had
    attended political events and demonstrations in the United  Kingdom  as
    well as meetings of the TGTE but there was no evidence he was known  to
    the Sri Lankan authorities or would be perceived by them as  having  an
    adverse profile. He rejected the Appellant's account of  events  before
    he left Sri Lanka. He gave little weight  to  the  Appellant's  private
    life in the United Kingdom developed during  a  substantial  period  of
    time when his immigration status had been precarious. He dismissed  the
    claim based on the Appellant's medical circumstances  by  reference  to
    the jurisprudence in N v UK (App.26565/05) and J  v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ.629.

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis the Judge had:

      a)  failed to consider the Appellant's extensive diaspora  involvement
         with the Tamil movement

      b) did not give sufficient regard to the letter  of  20  October  2014
         from the member of the TGTE parliament at Appellant's  bundle  (AB)
         p.221

      c) failed to make a clear finding on the evidence of  the  Appellant's
         aunt about her 2014 visit to Sri Lanka at AB p.217

      d) erred in  concluding  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would  not  be
         interested in the  Appellant  on  return  by  not  considering  the
         relevant  country  guidance  in  GJ  and  others  (post-Civil  War:
         returnees) [2013] UKUT 49

      e) did not adequately consider the medical evidence and  suicide  risk
         and

    (f)  to raise a query whether the  Appellant's  representative  at  the
         hearing  was  a  person  qualified  within  the  meaning  of   s.84
         Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  to  represent  the  Appellant  by
         reference to a statement made by his current solicitors

8.   On 10 December 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lambert  extended
    time for applying for and granted permission to appeal because  it  was
    arguable the Judge had failed to make a finding about the  evidence  of
    the Appellant's aunt and had not analysed  the  evidence  presented  to
    show the Appellant had established a profile of  sur  place  activities
    which would bring him to the attention of the Sri  Lankan  authorities,
    irrespective of the adverse findings made in  relation  to  his  claims
    about events in Sri Lanka before he came to the United Kingdom.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

9.   The Appellant did not attend in relation to which  I  make  no  adverse
    finding.

Submissions for the Appellant

10.  Mr Toal referred to the aunt's letter at Appellant's bundle (AB)  p.217
    and paragraphs 15-16 of his witness statement at  AB  p.27.  The  issue
    before the Judge had been the likely consequences  on  the  Appellant's
    return to Sri Lanka in the light of his claimed sur  place  activities.
    It was accepted that mere participation in such  activities  would  not
    alone place an individual at risk on return as found at  paragraph  336
    of GJ and others.

11.  The Judge had found at paragraph 10 of his decision the  Appellant  had
    been involved in various sur place activities critical of or opposed to
    the Sri Lankan government. He submitted that the  description  of  such
    activities which the Judge gave did not  fairly  reflect  the  evidence
    before him. The TGTE's parliamentarian's letter described the Appellant
    as  an  activist  distributing   leaflets,   attending   meetings   and
    demonstrations etc to expose the "Tamil genocide". The distribution  of
    leaflets and other activities created a nexus with the TGTE. The letter
    dated 29 June 2018 at AB pp.32-33 from  the  TGTE  Deputy  Minister  of
    Sports  and  Community  Health  also  referred   to   the   Appellant's
    involvement with the TGTE, stating he  had  volunteered  in  organising
    public events as well as  attending  various  "projects".  The  gap  of
    almost 4 years  between  the  two  TGTE  letters  also  demonstrated  a
    continuity of involvement.

12.  The Judge had concluded at paragraph  10  there  was  no  evidence  the
    Appellant was known to the Sri Lankan authorities but in order to reach
    this conclusion he  had  needed  to  consider  the  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's aunt. Regardless, his conclusion the Appellant  was  of  no
    interest was not reasonable in the light of the  evidence  of  his  sur
    place activities.

13.  The Judge was obliged to consider the evidence and  state  reasons  why
    he found little weight could be attached to this  correspondence.  This
    was important since the TGTE is a movement proscribed by the Sri Lankan
    authorities  and  returnees  may  be  questioned  by  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities on return whether they have been involved in Tamil diaspora
    activities. He referred to paragraphs 12-13 of the judgment in UB  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ. 85 mentioning evidence from the  British
    High Commission in Colombo.

14.  The decision contained a material  error  of  law  and  should  be  set
    aside.

Submissions for the SSHD

15.  Ms Isherwood submitted there was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision although it was accepted the Judge had not made  reference  to
    the evidence from the Appellant's aunt. It was to  be  noted  that  the
    hearing before the Judge had proceeded by way of  submissions  only.  I
    noted from the Judge's  record  of  Proceedings  that  the  reason  the
    Appellant had not given evidence was that he had taken medication which
    had had an adverse effect on him and his then Counsel had  judged  that
    in all the circumstances he should not be called to give evidence.

16.  The Judge  accepted  the  Appellant  had  engaged  in  some  sur  place
    activities. These had been described by the Appellant as  described  in
    paragraphs 19ff. of his statement of 2 July 2018  at  AB  pp.28ff.  She
    referred to the last sentence of paragraph 336 of  GJ  and  Others  and
    head note para. 8. The Appellant's account of events in Sri  Lanka  had
    been rejected by the First-tier Tribunal in 2003. That decision had not
    been challenged. Relying on GJ and  Others  the  Judge  had  sufficient
    reason to find the Appellant would not be at risk on return.

17.  The Court of Appeal at paragraph 24 of UB (Sri Lanka) had found that:

         "... consideration of the risk to the Appellant turns not merely on
         him showing that he was actually a member of the TGTE,  but  relies
         on his membership being detected on arrival in Sri Lanka. There  is
         no suggestion that this Appellant is on any list of individuals  of
         interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka. The objective findings by
         the FTT are clear that  any  activity  by  the  Appellant  in  this
         country, even if observed or recorded, was no level and not  likely
         to  carry  risks.  That  activity  itself  would  not   demonstrate
         membership of the TGTE. In addition, I bear in mind the very  clear
         findings that the Appellant lied and exaggerated in  alleging  mis-
         treatment during  his  last  visit  to  Sri  Lanka,  and  thus  his
         credibility is low."

    Additionally, at paragraph 10 of his decision the Judge had noted  that
    the Sri Lankan authorities would take account of the  possibility  that
    an individual would engage in sur place activities to bolster  a  claim
    for subsidiary protection. They would not  perceive  the  Appellant  as
    having any motive to destabilise the Sri Lankan government.  There  was
    no evidence that any details of the Appellant's  sur  place  activities
    had been placed on the Internet.

18.  The decision did not contain any  material  error  of  law  and  should
    stand.

Response for the Appellant

19.  Mr Toal replied that the evidence of the Appellant's aunt was material
    because if it was accepted it showed the Sri Lankan authorities already
    had an interest in the Appellant. It  was  notable  that  although  the
    Judge had not heard any oral testimony he had  accepted  a  substantial
    part of the Appellant's evidence. It could not be said that  it  was  a
    foregone conclusion the aunt's evidence would have  been  rejected  and
    there were no express findings that the Appellant was  so  unworthy  of
    credit that any evidence he produced could not be accepted as credible.

Error of Law Consideration

20.  At the end  of  the  hearing  I  reserved  my  decision.  There  was  a
    discussion whether if I found an error of law I should proceed  to  re-
    make the decision. Mr Toal referred to the concerns of his  instructing
    solicitors about the original representation afforded the Appellant  at
    the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and Ms Isherwood noted that  the
    Appellant had then been represented by Counsel from whom there  was  no
    statement. The decision to proceed without the Appellant had been  made
    by Counsel. Mr Toal countered that this  was  a  claim  for  subsidiary
    protection and anxious scrutiny was required. The aunt's  evidence  was
    important and there were questions about the conduct of the  appeal  in
    the First-tier Tribunal. In the any event, even if I  were  immediately
    to find an error of law decision, neither party was ready to proceed to
    a re-hearing, if one was necessary.

21.   The  determination  promulgated  on  26  April  2003  dismissing   the
    Appellant's asylum claim made extensive  adverse  credibility  findings
    against him. That determination has not  been  successfully  challenged
    and the findings about the Appellant's account of events before he left
    Sri Lanka should be the starting point for  the  consideration  of  his
    present appeal. There was no evidence before the Judge  in  2018  which
    sought to upset the Adjudicator's findings.

22.  The Judge found the Appellant had engaged in Tamil diaspora  activities
    against the Sri Lankan authorities. There was documentary evidence from
    the Appellant's aunt that the Sri Lankan authorities had an interest in
    the Appellant. The Judge did not make any finding on that evidence.

23.  The Upper Tribunal in GJ and others (post-Civil  War:  returnees)  (Sri
    Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 319 noted that forced returnees are in the travel
    documentation process or on arrival asked about  their  sympathies  for
    the LTTE and that the Sri Lankan authorities consider London  to  be  a
    hotspot of Tamil separatist activity. Further, the Upper Tribunal noted
    that the Sri Lankan authorities use photographic recognition technology
    at Tamil diaspora separatist demonstrations: see paragraphs  308,  324-
    326 and 335. It also found there was no risk to  returning  Tamils  who
    had merely and only attended demonstrations.

24.  With this in mind, I find the Judge  erred  in  law  in  not  giving  a
    sufficient analysis of the precise nature and extent of the Appellant's
    Tamil separatist activities in London in which he found  the  Appellant
    to have engaged. Given the comments in GJ and others referred to in the
    preceding paragraph,  it  was  an  error  of  law  to  limit  the  risk
    assessment to the Appellant on return to a finding that there would  be
    nothing to differentiate the Appellant from  any  other  returning  Sri
    Lankan and that if questioned the authorities  would  readily  conclude
    they never had an interest in the Appellant: see paragraph  12  of  the
    Judge's decision. The Appellant would be distinguished by the fact that
    he would be a forced Tamil returnee from  an  international  centre  of
    Tamil separatism who had, even on the Judge's own findings, engaged  in
    Tamil separatist activities.

25.  I make no specific findings on the matters  referred  to  in  paragraph
    7(f) above but would comment there appears to be no explanation why the
    Appellant's aunt was not called  to  give  oral  testimony  or  why  an
    adjournment was not sought  in  the  light  of  the  claimed  temporary
    incapacity of the Appellant to give oral testimony. With this in  mind,
    I consider the safest course is to set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal and not to preserve any findings  of  fact.  Accordingly,
    and having regard to the extent of the fact-finding exercise which will
    be necessary on the hearing afresh of the appeal, it is remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

26.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  contains  an  anonymity  direction
    although it gives no reason why it is proportionate  to  the  need  for
    transparency in the Tribunal's administration of justice.   This  is  a
    subsidiary protection appeal and on that basis and because  the  matter
    was not addressed at the hearing before me I propose  to  continue  the
    anonymity direction.



SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.
    The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh.
    Anonymity direction continued.


DIRECTIONS

    The Appellant's bundle in the Tribunal file  is  missing  pages  35-218
    (inclusive) and the Appellant's solicitors are  directed  to  file  the
    missing pages with the First-tier Tribunal promptly  after  receipt  of
    notice of the re--hearing.


                             Anonymity Direction

Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellant or  any  family  member.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, both the Appellant and the Respondent.   Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 26.  03.
2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

