
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01214/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 February 2018                  |On 23 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                               Cristina Ndona
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr G Brown, instructed by CAB (Bolton)
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Durance promulgated 25.8.17, dismissing on  all  grounds
    her appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    19.1.16, to reject her protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    16.1.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 16.2.18 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision should be set aside.

 5. After hearing the submissions of the two representatives I reserved  my
    decision, which I now make.

 6. The single ground of appeal alleges procedural irregularity leading  to
    unfairness in the making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This requires a consideration of the chronology and the events  on  the
    day of the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing on 10.8.17.

 7. The appellant, a citizen of Angola, first came to the  UK  on  a  visit
    visa in March 2015. She did not claim asylum until July 2015, which was
    made on the basis of a risk of persecution on religious grounds,  being
    a member of the Seventh Day Adventist Church known  as  Luz  de  Mundo,
    which it is claimed is perceived as anti-government. She  also  claimed
    asylum on  grounds  of  imputed  political  opinion  arising  from  her
    relationship to her partner JP, said to be a pastor of  the  Church  in
    Huambo,  who  had  informed  her  by  telephone  on  3.5.15  that   the
    authorities had destroyed the church and are looking for her.  She  has
    had no contact with him since then and does not know where he is.

 8. The application was refused in the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    (RFR) of 19.1.16.

 9. The appeal was first heard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before  Judge
    Wellesley-Cole in August 2016. The appellant did not attend the  appeal
    hearing and it proceeded in her absence. After the judge concluded  the
    hearing, a message was received from  the  Citizens  Advice  Bureau  in
    Bolton, which had only been instructed only shortly before the hearing,
    requesting an adjournment. The judge considered  the  request  was  too
    late and proceeded to decide the appeal. In  the  decision  promulgated
    13.9.16 the protection claim was dismissed on all grounds.

10. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ford on 5.10.16, on the basis  of  information  received
    that the appellant may have been misinformed as  to  the  date  of  the
    hearing, so that proceeding in her absence was arguably unfair  and  in
    error of law.

11. In her decision of December 2016, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  agreed
    with the view of Judge Ford and set the decision aside, remitting it to
    be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. It was against that  background  that  the  appeal  came  before  Judge
    Durance on 10.8.17.

13. At the outset of the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing, Judge  Durance
    was informed by Mr Brown, who then and now  acted  for  the  appellant,
    that the appellant had disclosed to him that she had left a document at
    home which she had never  previously  disclosed  to  either  her  legal
    representatives or the Home Office. The indicates were that  it  was  a
    warrant of some description, which she had allegedly received in 2016.

14. At [5] of the decision, Judge Durance noted that the issue of documents
    had been raised both within the screening interview and the substantive
    interview, both taking place in 2015. The  judge  considered  that  the
    appellant had had more than ample time to disclose the document or  its
    existence and refused Mr Brown's application to adjourn. In  doing  so,
    at [7] the judge noted that there was no good reason advanced  for  the
    failure of the appellant to  produce  the  document  between  her  2015
    interviews and the hearing of the appeal in August  2017,  despite  the
    fact that she has had legal representation at all material times.

15. In oral evidence, the appellant  said  that  she  had  stated  back  in
    November 2015 that she was to receive a document  the  following  week,
    which was a  warrant  for  her  arrest,  confirming  that  the  Angolan
    authorities were looking for her. She maintained that she had  received
    the document sometime in 2016 but could not recall the exact date.  She
    also said she forgot to notify her solicitors about it and that she had
    left it at home. Asked why she had not provided this document  earlier,
    given that she was told at interview to submit any such document  along
    with a translation, she said she forgot to mention it to her solicitor.



16. Judge Durance invited Mr Brown to ask the appellant in  evidence  about
    her rebuttal statement which addressed the RFR, and  which  RFR  raised
    the issue of documentation, by stating, "You  have  not  submitted  any
    documents in relation to your claim." According to [9] of the decision,
    a problem then arose  because  the  statement  made  reference  to  RFR
    paragraph numbers when the RFR in the respondent's bundle has  no  such
    paragraph numbering. The judge explained that he stood the matter  down
    so that enquiries could be made with the appellant's  solicitors  about
    the RFR numbering and the rebuttal statement. The judge also  told  the
    appellant that he would release her until 2pm, in order that she  could
    retrieve the document from home. In the meantime, the judge dealt  with
    a different case in his list.

17. When the appeal hearing resumed at 2.35pm, the document in question was
    produced by the appellant. The 'original'  has  been  retained  on  the
    court file. It is  evidently  in  Portuguese  and  headed  'Mandado  De
    Captura,' the meaning of which would not be surprising if  were  arrest
    warrant. Mr Brown sought an adjournment of the appeal, now  part-heard,
    in order to obtain a translation of the document. The judge noted  that
    the envelope in which the document was handed up indicated that it  had
    been received by the appellant on 14.7.16.

18. Mr Brown's argument  was  that  the  appellant's  case  was  that  this
    untranslated document was an arrest warrant and indicated that she  was
    wanted  alongside  her  husband.  The  appellant  confirmed  that   she
    understood Portuguese and indicated that she would be sent to prison on
    return. Mr Brown submitted that it would be wrong to  speculate  as  to
    the contents of  the  document,  but  that  it  may  be  vital  to  the
    appellant's case.

19. Judge Durance considered the adjournment request and the guidance in Ex
    Parte Marin [1994] Imm AR 172, but refused the application, noting  the
    following relevant factors, reformatted by me a little differently:

      a) The appellant had been interviewed on  two  separate  occasions  in
         2015 and specifically questioned about documentation  (AIR  2-7,  &
         93). She said that she would produce a document to show  that  they
         were searching for her in Angola, stating that a  'relative'  would
         send it to her through DHL, and  that  she  would  receive  it  the
         following week, which would have been late November 2015.  At  that
         point she was advised to submit the document  to  the  Home  Office
         with a UK certified translation, within 10 working days. At Q93 she
         was asked how and when she found out that this document existed, to
         which she replied that she knew of its existence when she  went  to
         Croydon (for the screening interview) and was told that they needed
         that document;

      b) The RFR pointed out that she had  not  produced  any  documents  in
         relation to her protection claim;

      c) The appellant had received the RFR as long ago as January 2016  and
         her representatives had prepared a rebuttal statement going through
         the RFR paragraph by paragraph, and, despite that process and  that
         statement, she at no time disclosed to her representatives that she
         had the document she referred to in her interview and was expecting
         to receive. One might well find this omission astonishing,  if  not
         incredible;

      d) That whilst the Tribunal had to take into account the interests  of
         fairness, it also had to take into account the  efficient  dispatch
         of court business and that fairness related to both fairness to the
         appellant and to the respondent;

      e) That the overriding objective of the Tribunal as  set  out  in  the
         Tribunal Procedure Rules is allied to issues of cost and delay, not
         only in relation to the present appeal  but  to  other  individuals
         awaiting their appeal hearings.  If  the  proceedings  were  to  be
         adjourned, another person's appeal would also  be  delayed  in  due
         course. That also impedes the  respondent's  function  to  maintain
         immigration control;

      f)  There  was  no  indication  of  poor  legal  representation,   the
         representatives having diligently prepared a RFR rebuttal statement
         for the appellant.  Addressing  the  RFR  paragraph  by  paragraph.
         Again,  it  would  be  very  surprising  if  the   issue   of   any
         documentation in support, and specifically that which the appellant
         referred to in her  substantive  asylum  interview,  had  not  been
         canvassed;

      g) That to all intents and purposes, the appellant was  the  architect
         of her own misfortune, and could blame no one other  than  herself,
         so that any issue of fairness arose solely from the failings of the
         appellant;

      h) That the appellant had  had  12  months  to  act  on  the  RFR  and
         considering  Ladd  v  Marshall,  there  was  no  reason  why   with
         reasonable diligence this document could not have  been  served  on
         the respondent and the Tribunal at an earlier date.

20. Although the judge refused the adjournment, further complaint  is  made
    that he proceeded to admit the document "to be considered  holistically
    alongside the appellant's evidence." In due, course,  applying  Tanveer
    Ahmed and the duty to consider the reliability of the evidence  in  the
    context of the whole, the judge found that little weight could be given
    to the arrest warrant document.

21. The judge went on at [37] to note that whilst the appellant's case  was
    that the arrest warrant was addressed to both herself and her  partner,
    on its face his name is not referenced anywhere. In re-examination,  Mr
    Brown asked the appellant further about the  document,  asking  her  to
    identify on the document where JP was named. At that point she admitted
    that his name did not appear on it.

22. The judge further took  into  account  that  if  the  document  was  as
    important to the appellant's case as claimed, she would have been  able
    to adequately describe what it set out. The judge noted  that  she  was
    unable to explain the reference to  '8  annos'  which  appears  in  the
    document. Mr Brown submitted that it would be wrong to speculate as  to
    the contents, but the judge observed that even without any translation,
    it was obvious that her evidence as to its  contents  was  lacking  and
    unsatisfactory. In effect, the judge found it not credible that she had
    not taken the time and  effort  to  know  its  contents,  understanding
    Portuguese as she admitted. The judge found that this apparent  absence
    of curiosity undermined the credibility of her claim.

23. The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal, which need not be set  out  here  in  any  further
    detail. The appellant sought and was granted permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

24. The grounds submit that even though the appellant was at fault  in  not
    bringing the documents to the attention of her representatives earlier,
    and even though invaluable court time and  public  expense  might  have
    been incurred as a result of her delay, the judge should  have  applied
    the test  of  fairness,  balancing  those  considerations  against  the
    potential risk to the appellant's life on return to Angola, and granted
    an adjournment for translation of the document.

25. Reliance is placed on Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418
    (IAC), in which the Upper Tribunal cited the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SH
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1284, at [13]: "First, when  considering  whether  the  Immigration
    Judge  ought  to  have  granted  an  adjournment,  the  test  was   not
    irrationality. The test was not whether his decision was properly  open
    to him or was Wednesbury unreasonable or perverse. The  test  and  sole
    test was whether it was fair."

26.  In  granting  permission  on  16.1.17,  Judge  Osborne  considered  it
    'patently arguable' that having provided the appellant the  opportunity
    to obtain the said documents, the judge arguably should have  adjourned
    to enable them to be translated and the best possible  evidence  to  be
    placed  before  the  Tribunal.  "It  is  difficult  to  understand  how
    untranslated documents can be considered holistically if their contents
    cannot be understood."

27. In the light of the above history and for the reasons stated herein,  I
    am not satisfied that there was any procedural unfairness  in  refusing
    the adjournments sought, either that at the outset of the  hearing,  so
    that  the  appellant  could  retrieve  the  document,  or   after   its
    production, for a translation.

28. The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3)(h) empowers the Tribunal to  adjourn
    a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives  under  the  Rules
    which the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to"  when  exercising  any
    power under the Rules. It follows  that  they  are  the  issues  to  be
    considered on  an  adjournment  application  as  well.  The  overriding
    objective is deal with cases fairly and justly.   This  is  defined  as
    including  "(a) dealing with the case in ways which  are  proportionate
    to the importance of the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  the
    anticipated costs and the resources of the parties and of the Tribunal;
    (b) avoiding unnecessary  formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
    proceedings; (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that  the  parties
    are able to participate fully in the proceedings; (d) using any special
    expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay  so  far  as
    compatible with proper consideration of the issues".

29. The Upper Tribunal held in Nwaigwe that if a Tribunal refuses to accede
    to an adjournment  request,  such  decision  could,  in  principle,  be
    erroneous in law in several respects: these include a failure  to  take
    into  account  all  material  considerations;   permitting   immaterial
    considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a fair  hearing;
    failing to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting  irrationally.   In
    practice, in most cases  the  question  will  be  whether  the  refusal
    deprived the affected party of his right to a fair hearing.   Where  an
    adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it is  important
    to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal acted  reasonably.   Rather,  the  test  to  be
    applied is that of fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected
    party's right to a fair hearing?

30. The appellant had stated back in 2015 that she was expecting a document
    that would show that the authorities were looking for her. Clearly, she
    was alive to its alleged importance in the consideration of her  asylum
    claim. The importance of producing the document to the Home  Office  as
    soon as possible was also impressed on her in interview, on  more  than
    one occasion. Even though, apparently, it was not received  until  July
    2016, and thus after the date of the RFR, in the circumstances of  this
    case the importance of raising it with her legal representatives cannot
    have escaped her. No or no adequate reason was given to  Judge  Durance
    for not doing so, and significantly, no reason has been advanced to me.
    Neither has there  been  any  satisfactory  explanation  for  not  even
    mentioning it to her legal representatives when they were preparing the
    detailed paragraph by paragraph  response  to  the  RFR,  which  itself
    pointed out she had submitted no documentation. The appellant had ample
    and every opportunity  to  produce  the  document  and  for  it  to  be
    translated. She had it for  more  than  12  months  before  the  appeal
    hearing was listed in the First-tier Tribunal. Whilst the document  may
    have been important to the appellant's case, in  the  context  of  this
    history fairness does not demand that the appeal be adjourned to remedy
    her abject and utterly unexplained and lengthy failure to  produce  and
    delay in producing the document at an earlier stage so as to enable  it
    to be presented in an acceptable format in support of her case.

31. In the circumstances, I find no unfairness to the appellant in refusing
    the first adjournment request.

32. As it happens, having refused the first adjournment request, the  judge
    took the opportunity arising from a break in the hearing to  allow  the
    appellant to retrieve the document from home. Mr Brown  suggested  that
    by doing this the judge tested the existence of the document, and  that
    it was in fact produced supported the appellant's credibility. I am not
    satisfied  that  this  was  a  'test  of  its  existence;'  it   simply
    highlighted the flexibility of the  judge's  approach  at  that  stage,
    since in practical terms to allow her to do so presented no unnecessary
    delay to the proceedings. It follows that there can be no unfairness in
    the first refusal to grant an adjournment.

33. When finally produced at the hearing  the  document  was  untranslated.
    Nevertheless, the judge decided to admit it and treat it  holistically,
    in other words to assess it in the context of the evidence as a  whole,
    dealing with it as best he could and giving such weight as  appropriate
    to an untranslated document.

34. For the same reasons as highlighted by Judge Durance and considered  in
    some detail above, I also  find  no  unfairness  to  the  appellant  in
    refusing an adjournment  for  translation  at  this  later  stage.   In
    reality, the case for an adjournment at this second stage  was  little,
    if any, stronger than it was at the outset of the  hearing  when  there
    was no document before the Tribunal. The same issues of fairness apply.



35. Whilst the document was potentially important to the  appellant's  case
    and the risk of prejudice potentially  significant,  there  were  other
    competing considerations. Fairness has to be considered in  respect  of
    both  parties,  not  just  the  appellant.  There  was  some  (limited)
    prejudice to the respondent  in  that  delay  would  be  occasioned  in
    dealing with the case efficiently and  in  good  time.  An  adjournment
    would also have disrupted the work of the Tribunal.  The  interests  of
    justice generally lay in the efficient resolution of appeals and  court
    business. Judge Durance  referenced  the  delay  to  other  appellants'
    appeals if this case were to be  adjourned  and  had  to  be  relisted.
    Finally,  and  more  significantly  the  appellant  was  entirely   and
    personally responsible for creating the difficulty  which  led  to  the
    adjournment application. If the appellant was  disadvantaged,  she  was
    the author of her own misfortune. The Tribunal is not obliged to  offer
    an indefinite, open-ended opportunity for an appellant to  continue  to
    prepare, revise or improve her  case,  whether  by  the  production  of
    further documents or adjourning to obtain a translation of  a  document
    she has had in her possession for more than 12 months  and  never  once
    bothered to mention to her legal representatives, even when  they  were
    preparing her detailed response to the RFR.

36. I am satisfied that the decision to refuse the adjournment was not only
    properly open to the judge, but that on the facts of this case  refusal
    of the adjournment was entirely fair to the  appellant.  She  had  been
    given a fair opportunity to prepare her case for  the  appeal  hearing,
    repeatedly warned and advised to produce  all  relevant  documentation,
    and had every opportunity to produce that documentation to the Tribunal
    in any acceptable format at  what  must  have  been  several  different
    stages of the preparation of the case for appeal. She had ample time to
    draw  the  documentary  material  to  the  attention   of   her   legal
    representatives and for them to advise her, take  it  into  account  in
    preparing her RFR rebuttal statement, and to serve it and otherwise act
    upon it appropriately. The failure to  produce  this  document  with  a
    translation was entirely her responsibility and a matter  entirely  and
    knowingly within her own control; she has no one else  but  herself  to
    blame. There remains no or not satisfactory explanation for her failure
    to produce this evidence earlier.

37. Asking the important (rhetorical) question whether the refusal  of  the
    adjournment for a translation of the alleged arrest warrant was fair to
    the appellant, on the facts of this case and for the  reasons  set  out
    herein, I find that the answer must  be  that  it  was  fair,  even  if
    potential prejudice arises. I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
    afforded a fair hearing of her protection claim appeal.

38. In reaching this conclusion I have  taken  into  account  that  in  his
    submissions to me, Mr Brown made a related additional argument  to  the
    effect that the judge was also in error in  admitting  and  considering
    the document whilst not granting at the same time the  opportunity  for
    it to be translated.  I do not accept that it was  unfair  or  improper
    for the judge to admit the document in its untranslated state. Had  the
    appellant simply produced the document  from  her  pocket  and  without
    warning during her evidence, it would have been admitted  in  the  same
    way as it would have done if it had been an  untranslated  document  in
    the appellant's bundle, in the context of the evidence as a whole. Such
    is by no means unique in the experience of the Tribunal. It is not  the
    Tribunal's  responsibility  to  obtain  a  translation,  or  to  refuse
    admission if no translation is present. The judge  properly  considered
    the reliability and the weight to be given to  the  document,  applying
    Tanveer Ahmed principles. That included the evidence of  the  appellant
    as to the contents of the untranslated document, but nevertheless in  a
    language which she told the Tribunal  she  understood.  The  judge  was
    entitled to take into account in assessing weight and reliability  that
    the appellant had asserted that the document was addressed to both  her
    and her partner, but in reply to Mr Brown's own question admitted  that
    his name did not appear anywhere on it. There was no  error  in  taking
    that information  into  account,  as  well  as  the  apparent  lack  of
    awareness, knowledge or curiosity as to the contents of  the  document.
    The reference to what '8 annos' meant, or comments about  the  language
    of the document being in a familiar script, were not  material  to  the
    weight or reliability of the document, or the outcome of the appeal and
    I do not accept that the judge engaged in speculation. The fact remains
    that the appellant's assertions as to what the document stated was  not
    supported by the appellant's own evidence as  to  its  contents,  which
    served to undermine its reliability even further.

39. I am satisfied that the judge of the First-tier Tribunal deal with  the
    matter carefully and appropriately and that the decisions to refuse the
    adjournments and to address the limited weight and reliability of  such
    an untranslated document do not disclose unfairness to the appellant or
    any other material error of law.

Decision

40. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.






Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007. I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee  Awards
in Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
