
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01913/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 17 March 2021                 |On the 8 April 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     L T
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Liberia,  appeals  with  permission
         against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Forster)
         (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")  who   dismissed   his
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         20 October 2020.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 17 March 2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business which has been consented to and not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant so that he could listen and observe  the
         hearing. There were no issues regarding  sound,  and  no  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.



Background:

      4. The immigration history of the appellant is set out in the decision
         of the FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in  the
         bundle.  On  14  September  2018,  the  appellant  made  an  online
         application for a six month multi-entry business visa issued on  24
         September 2018 and valid until 24 March 2019. The stated  intention
         of the visit was to attend a training course.  The  appellant  left
         Liberia on 18 November 2018 flying via Ghana where he stayed before
         travelling on to the UK.

      5. The appellant made a claim for asylum on 10 January 2019.

      6. The basis of his claim related to events that had  taken  place  in
         Liberia before he left on 18 November 2018. The appellant  set  out
         that as a result of having spoken out at a press  conference  where
         he exposed mishandling of funds by the local legislative caucus, he
         began to receive  numerous  phone  calls  and  texts  from  unknown
         individuals making threats against his life.  Following  this,  men
         were observed outside of his house and in November 2018,  when  the
         appellant was not at home but attending a  funeral,  unknown  armed
         men had entered the house and intimidated his 10-year-old cousin in
         to  disclosing  the  appellant  whereabouts.  He   later   received
         threatening text messages on the 15th and 16th of November and also
         on 17 November five unknown armed men entered the house when he was
         not  present  and  had  asked  his  wife  about   the   appellant's
         whereabouts. The appellant had contacted the police  the  following
         day on the 18th of November and then on the same day had  left  for
         the United Kingdom. Whilst in the UK on 26 December  2018,  unknown
         individuals burn down the family home in Liberia.

      7. The respondent refused his claim in  a  decision  letter  dated  12
         February 2020.

      8. The appellant appealed that decision to the FtT (Judge Forster)  on
         the 7 October 2020. In a decision promulgated on 20 October 2020 he
         dismissed his appeal.  The FtTJ accepted the factual basis  of  the
         appellant's claim and identified  at  [22]  that  the  issues  that
         required determination was whether there would  be  adequate  state
         protection for  the  appellant  against  the  risks  identified  if
         returned Liberia and whether internal  relocation  was  reasonable,
         could be carried out safely and without being unduly harsh.

      9. Having set out those issues, the judge considered the  evidence  in
         the light of the country materials at [22]- [33]  but  reached  the
         conclusion  that  the  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  a  lack  of
         sufficient protection to the Horvath standard  for  the  appellant.
         He had found on the evidence that the threats of harm described  by
         the appellant were made by nonstate agents and that the individuals
         concerned were engaged in criminal activity on  their  own  account
         but could not properly be characterised as "agents  of  the  state"
         (at [25 - 26]). As to the issue of internal  relocation,  the  FtTJ
         address this at [36 - 39] finding that whilst he might be known for
         his activities, he had not been prominent since 2018.  The  problem
         is the experience were localised and that he had  not  demonstrated
         that the influence of the local officials he had  accused  extended
         throughout  the  country.  The  judge  found  that  the   appellant
         "overstates his position as a public figure."  Notwithstanding  the
         size of Liberia (at [36]), and after  considering  the  appellant's
         personal circumstances at [37] the  FtTJ  concluded  that  internal
         relocation would be safe, reasonable,  and  not  unduly  harsh.  He
         therefore dismissed the appeal.

     10. Permission to appeal was sought and permission was granted  by  DIJ
         Shaerf on 26 November 2020 for the following reasons:

             "The Appellant's account of what happened to  him  in  Liberia
             was accepted. The Judge at paragraph 26 of his decision  found
             the perpetrators were non-state agents.  At  paragraph  27  he
             referred to the failure of the Liberian state to implement its
             anti-corruption laws but arguably  fails  to  take  this  into
             account in his finding at  paragraph  29.  The  Judge  made  a
             finding at paragraph 29 of  his  decision  that  the  external
             evidence shows Liberia has a functioning police force: yet  at
             paragraph 33 he refers to background evidence that the  police
             lack the basic but essential tools to do their  job  and  that
             low pay in the public sector is an incentive for  bribery  and
             again mentions that the anti-corruption  laws  are  not  fully
             implemented. It  is  arguable  that  these  aspects  have  not
             adequately been taken into account or addressed by  the  Judge
             in his conclusions at paragraphs 29 and 34.

             At paragraph 34 the Judge finds the  police  in  Liberia  lack
             resources and are susceptible to corruption and misconduct. He
             also finds the evidence does not show there is a systematic or
             institutional  unwillingness  to  provide  protection  to  the
             victims of non-state actors. He does not address  the  ability
             of the police to provide a  sufficiency  of  protection.  This
             arguably is an error of law.

             The grounds disclose arguable errors  of  law.  Permission  to
             appeal on all grounds is therefore granted."



The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     11. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of  the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face-
         to-face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties. I am
         grateful for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

     12. Ms Cleghorn,  who  had  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         appeared on behalf of the appellant and  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal.  There was no Rule 24 response issued on  behalf
         of the respondent. I  heard  oral  submissions  from  each  of  the
         advocates are set out in the record of proceedings and to  which  I
         have had regard.  I  intend  to  consider  those  submissions  when
         addressing the three grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant.

     13. I am grateful  for  the  clear  and  helpful  submissions  by  both
         advocates.



Ground 1:

     14. Dealing with ground one, it is submitted on behalf of the appellant
         that the FtTJ's findings at  [25]  and  [26]  on  those  intent  on
         causing harm to the appellant were contradictory.

     15. Those two paragraphs read as follows:

             "25.   The   appellants   allegations   of   corruption    and
             misappropriation of funds are made against individuals in  the
             xxxxx Caucus. The respondent submits [pic] that the  appellant
             is unable to demonstrate that these individuals were  involved
             in  the  incidents  that  he  experienced  but  to  the  lower
             standard, I find that there is a connection [pic]between  them
             and what happened  to  him.  This  is  because  the  appellant
             accused them of corruption and the made against him are linked
             to the allegations he made.

             26.   The  individuals  concerned  were  engaged  in  criminal
             activity on their own account and are not agents of the state.
             The risk to the appellant does not come  from  agents  of  the
             Liberian state. The individuals named  by  the  appellant  may
             have influence because of their official  positions  but  they
             are not agents of the state."

     16. Ms Cleghorn submits that the  appellant  had  made  allegations  of
         corruption  and  mismanagement  of  funds  by  individuals  in  the
         legislative caucus and that the FtTJ found at [25] that there was a
         connection between them and what had happened to the appellant  but
         at [26] did not accept that they were state agents. In essence,  Ms
         Cleghorn submits that if there is a connection between  individuals
         in the caucus and the corruption and misappropriation of funds,  it
         is difficult to see how the individuals are involved on  their  own
         account and not as agents of the state.

     17. She further submits  that  even  if  the  judge  in  distinguishing
         between state sanctioned actions and rogue actors, it does not make
         them any less agents of the state because  they  are  acting  in  a
         rogue capacity.

     18. Finally Ms Cleghorn submits that the issue is  whether  the  agents
         can act with impunity because they are protected by  the  positions
         they hold and the connections that they have.

     19. Mr Avery on behalf of the respondent submits that there is no error
         in the FtTJ's approach and that  those  concerned  were  acting  as
         individuals and not as part of the state. He submits that  this  is
         demonstrated by  the  fact  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  the
         resources of the state had been mobilised against the appellant.

     20. I have given careful  consideration  to  the  submissions  made  on
         behalf of the appellant and have done so  in  the  context  of  the
         evidence before the FtTJ.

     21. The FtTJ accepted  the appellant's account that following  a  press
         conference he held in October 2018, that he had received threats to
         his person,  and  it  was  also  accepted  that  during  the  press
         conference the appellant had exposed the position that  the  caucus
         in the area had squandered  and  misappropriated  funds  that  were
         meant for a development fund.

     22. The incidents in relied on can be summarised as follows:

          1) In October 2018 following the press conference, the  appellant
             received  calls  and  text  messages   from   unknown   people
             threatening his life. The appellant contacted orange  GCM  but
             found  that  the  numbers  were  not  registered.  He  made  a
             complaint to the police but claimed that the complaint was not
             investigated (at para 6 w/s).

          2) On 19 October 2018, the appellant stated that he became  aware
             from people in the community that one  individual  was  asking
             where the appellant lived (w/s para 8). The appellant was  not
             provided with any details of the individual as  they  did  not
             know them (Q 45 AI).

          3) The appellant spent the night at a friend's home but kept  the
             house under observation and later  that  night  saw  some  men
             outside his house (w/s para9). They  did  not  break  in.  The
             appellant was not able to identify the  men  (Q  48  AI).  The
             appellant informed the police the next day who said they would
             look into the matter and took down a statement (Q 59 AI).

          4) On 3 November 2018, whilst the appellant  and  his  wife  were
             away at a funeral but having left his 10-year-old  cousin  and
             17-year-old cousin in the home (Q 82 AI) armed men broke  into
             the  house  and  tried  to  "push  him  or   intimidate"   the
             appellant's  10-year-old  cousin  to  tell  them   where   the
             appellant was (Q 63 AI). His cousin was not injured (Q 66)   (
             although w/s para 11 refers to being hurt) but said  that  the
             men had said  that  they  were  continuing  to  look  for  the
             appellant. The appellant informed the police. It is also  said
             that the appellant was told by some officials  (identified  as
             the pastor; Q105 AI) who advised him to leave the country.

          5) On 15 and  16  November  2018,  the  appellant  received  text
             messages involving threats. The appellant said  he  could  not
             remember the content, but they were threatening (Q1 40 AI).

          6) On 17 November, the appellant received a call  from  his  wife
             and told him not to go home because some unidentified men  had
             broken into the home. The men had  questioned  her  about  his
             whereabouts  (Q1  19  AI).  The  appellant's  wife  could  not
             identify them (Q182 AI). The appellant reported  the  incident
             to the police the following day  and  then  left  Liberia  via
             Ghana for the UK on 18 November 2018.

          7) On 26 December 2018, the appellant's house was burnt down. The
             appellant stated that he considered that the agents  had  been
             paid to do this by "individuals who had wanted to get  rid  of
             me because they never knew I left the country."  (AI  question
             160).

     23. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he came to  the  adverse
         attention  of  the   local   caucus   having   spoken   about   the
         misappropriation of funds.  There  is  no  dispute  that  the  FtTJ
         accepted that this had occurred.

     24. The FtTJ also found that "there is a connection  between  them  and
         what happened to him" and that it was a  result  of  the  appellant
         having accused them of corruption and that the threats made against
         him were linked to the allegations he made (  at  [25]).  The  FtTJ
         went on to find that those individuals were not agents of the state
         (at [26]).

     25. Having considered the submission  in  the  light  of  the  evidence
         before the FtTJ, I do not consider that  the  FtTJ  fell  into  any
         error by categorising the individuals as those who were engaging in
         criminal  activity  on  their  own  account  or  acting  as   rogue
         individuals rather than as agents of the state. As the FtTJ went on
         to find, whilst they may have had influence in the local  area  due
         to  their  position  in  the  caucus,  they   were   not   properly
         characterised as agents of the state  given  the  evidence.  As  Mr
         Avery submitted, there was no evidence before  the  FtTJ  that  the
         individuals concerned had used or sought to use  the  resources  or
         apparatus of the state against the appellant. For example, they had
         not directed the police to act against him or to  issue  an  arrest
         warrant against him.

     26. Whilst Miss Cleghorn submits that they should be  characterised  as
         "agents of the state" because they are protected by their positions
         and the connections  they  have,  in  my  judgement  that  was  not
         supported by the evidence. There was no evidence  before  the  FtTJ
         that these individuals had sought to mobilise any of the  resources
         of the state against the appellant.  Furthermore,  on  the  factual
         account accepted by the FtTJ, the appellant's own evidence was that
         after he had  spoken  out,  those  who  were  concerned  about  his
         comments had asked people in the community about where he lived  in
         an effort to locate him. If they were state agents, they would have
         access to information such as his home address and there would have
         been no need to raise  suspicion  and  pre-warn  the  appellant  by
         asking people in the community about where he lived.

     27. I therefore find no error  of  law  in  the  FtTJ's  assessment  at
         paragraphs 25 and 26  on  the  basis  advanced  in  behalf  of  the
         appellant.



Ground 2: sufficiency of protection:

     28. The second ground advanced in behalf of the  appellant  relates  to
         the issue of sufficiency of protection. Miss Cleghorn submits  that
         the judge considered the background country materials and concluded
         at [27] that "the government did not implement the law  effectively
         and officials often engaged in corrupt practices with impunity. The
         judge then referred to the "functioning police force and that there
         are anticorruption agencies  able  to  investigate  allegations  of
         corruption" (at [30]). However, she submits  that  the  judge  then
         concluded that notwithstanding the unexplained deaths  of  whistle-
         blowers and that the appellant's account of what happened  him  was
         consistent with articles in his bundle, it did not lead  the  judge
         to conclude that there was not a lack of sufficiency protection  to
         the "Horvath standard" ( at [30 ] and [31]).

     29. Miss Cleghorn drew the tribunal's  attention  to  the  decision  at
         paragraph [34] and that the judge went on  to  accept  that  whilst
         there was a functioning police force, it lacked resources  and  was
         susceptible to corruption and mis-conduct. She submitted  that  the
         incidents relied upon  by  the  appellant  had  not  been  disputed
         however the judge concluded that the evidence had not  demonstrated
         a "systematic or institutional unwillingness to  afford  protection
         to nonstate actors ( at [34]) and  that  it  was  "not  ideal"  but
         nonetheless was to the "Horvath standard" ( at [35]).

     30.  Miss  Cleghorn  relied  upon  two  points  from  those  identified
         paragraphs. Firstly,  that  the  Horvath  standard  would  only  be
         relevant if the individuals were not members of the caucus, that is
         if they were nonstate actors relying on the words of Lord Clyde  as
         follows:

             "there must be in place a system of  domestic  protection  and
             machinery for the detection,  prosecution  and  punishment  of
             acting is  contrary  to  the  purposes  which  the  Convention
             requires to have protected stop or importantly there  must  be
             an ability and a readiness  to  operate  that  machinery.  But
             precisely where the line is drawn beyond  that  generality  is
             necessarily a matter of the circumstances of  each  particular
             case."

     31. It is further submitted that state protection should be measured by
         the "availability of the system for the protection of  the  citizen
         and a reasonable willingness by the state to  operate  it."  It  is
         therefore submitted that the state had either ignored or failed  to
         protect whistle-blowers in the past, including the  appellant,  and
         as demonstrated the members of the caucus  have  the  influence  to
         ensure that protection is not available to the appellant, thus  the
         judge erred in law. She submits that as he has been  persecuted  in
         the past, it is a strong indication of a continued fear and that on
         the appellant's factual  account,  the  persecutors  are  still  in
         positions of power and have the motivation to silence him.

     32. In oral submissions Miss Cleghorn submitted that the finding by the
         FtTJ that there was "no systematic or  institutional  unwillingness
         to afford protection" was  an  erroneous  finding  because  if  the
         appellant were targeted, it would not have to  be  systematic.  She
         submitted that the judge had fallen into error by taking the  wrong
         approach and that the appellant's case was that there would  be  no
         sufficiency of protection to the Horvath standard.

     33. Mr Avery in behalf of the respondent submitted  that  he  had  some
         difficulties with ground 2 and as to what the error of law was.  He
         submitted that the FtTJ did consider the country materials  as  set
         out in his decision and considered the appellant's account  in  the
         light of that. Before the FtTJ  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
         appellant had been persecuted by the police or even that  those  he
         had had difficulties  with  were  unduly  influencing  the  police.
         Furthermore, when looking at the individual incidents  relied  upon
         by the appellant, it was difficult to see  what  the  police  could
         have done in the light of the lack of evidence or  information  and
         when applying the Horvath standard, a  state  cannot  provide  100%
         protection. In essence he submitted,  the  grounds  were  simply  a
         disagreement with the conclusion reached.

     34. When considering the issue of sufficiency of protection,  the  FtTJ
         made a self-direction to the decision in  Horvath  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department (2001) 1 AC 489 where it  was  held
         that whether protection was sufficient was  a  "practical  standard
         which takes proper account of the duty which  the  state  owes  its
         nationals..." and that "the sufficiency of state protection is  not
         measured by the existence of a real risk of an abuse of rights  but
         by the availability of a system for the protection of a citizen and
         a reasonable willingness of the state to operate it".

     35. In Horvath v Home Secretary [2001] 1 AC 489 Lord Hope said this:

             "... I consider that the obligation to afford  refugee  status
             arises only if the person's own state is unable  or  unwilling
             to discharge its own duty to  protect  its  own  nationals.  I
             think that it follows that, in order to satisfy the fear  test
             in a non-state agent case, the applicant  for  refugee  status
             must show that the persecution which he fears consist of  acts
             of violence or ill-treatment against which the state is unable
             or unwilling to provide protection. The applicant may  have  a
             well-founded fear of threats to his  life  due  to  famine  or
             civil war or of isolated acts of violence or ill-treatment for
             a Convention reason which may be perpetrated against him.  But
             the risk, however severe, and the fear, however  well-founded,
             do not entitle him to the status of a refugee. The  Convention
             has  a  more  limited  objective,  the  limits  of  which  are
             identified by the  list  of  Convention  reasons  and  by  the
             principle of surrogacy."

     36.  Lord Clyde put it in similar terms at 510f, as follows:

             "There must be in place a system of  domestic  protection  and
             machinery for the detection,  prosecution  and  punishment  of
             acting contrary to the purposes which the Convention  requires
             to have protected. More importantly there must be  an  ability
             and readiness to operate that machinery."

     37. Lord Clyde added at 511c that " it  will  require  cogent  evidence
         that the state which is able to afford protection is  unwilling  to
         do so, especially in the case of a democracy" and also at 511  Lord
         Clyde  held  that  "corruption,  sympathy  or  weakness   of   some
         individuals in the system of justice does not mean that  the  state
         is unwilling to afford protection".

     38. In general terms, a state's protection has to  be  wide  enough  to
         cover the ordinary needs of its citizens for protection. Protection
         may still be insufficient, to prevent persecution in  a  particular
         case or in a particular subcategory of cases,  if  an  individual's
         (or subcategory of person's) needs for protection are  out  of  the
         ordinary or exceptional. However, recognition that a  person's  (or
         subcategory  of  person's)  individual  circumstances  may  require
         "additional protection" has an important limit.  As  emphasised  in
         Horvath, protection is a practical standard. In Lord Clyde's  words
         at [60], "no-one is entitled to an absolutely guaranteed  immunity.
         That would go beyond  any  realistic  practical  expectation".  The
         decision should not be read  as  deciding  that  there  will  be  a
         sufficiency of protection whenever the authorities in the receiving
         state are doing their best.  If  this  best  can  be  shown  to  be
         ineffective, it may be that an applicant can establish  that  there
         is an inability to provide the  necessary  protection.  But  it  is
         clear that it is a practical standard. The fact that a  system  may
         break down  because  of  incompetence  or  venality  of  individual
         officers  is  generally  not  to  be   regarded   as   establishing
         unwillingness or inability to provide protection.

     39. The FtTJ stated at [23]:

             "As held by the House of Lords in Horvath, it is the  duty  of
             the home state to provide protection  against  persecution  of
             its own nationals. If there is  insufficiency  of  protection,
             international protection is available. No  state  can  provide
             complete protection against isolated and random  attacks.  The
             standard to be applied is, therefore,  not  that  which  would
             eliminate all risk and would thus amount  to  a  guarantee  of
             protection in the  home  state,  but  is  rather  a  practical
             standard, which [pic]takes proper account of  the  duty  which
             the state owes to all its nationals. There must be in force in
             the country in question a system of criminal  law  which  does
             not exempt a particular class of victims from  the  protection
             of the law, makes violent by [pic] the persecutors  punishable
             by sentences commensurate with the gravity of the  crimes  and
             demonstrates a reasonable willingness by the  law  enforcement
             agencies to detect, prosecute and punish offenders".

     40. When considering the issue  of  sufficiency  protection,  the  FtTJ
         carried out an assessment of the  country  evidence  at  paragraphs
         [27]-[35] taking into account both the evidence advanced on  behalf
         of the respondent, primarily set out in  the  decision  letter  and
         also the material relied upon by the appellant.

     41. At [27] the FtTJ referred to the evidence in the US  Department  of
         State country report on human rights practices 2018 - Liberia.  The
         Ministry  of  Justice  Republic  of  Liberia  stated  "the  Liberia
         National police (LNP) is the frontline force of  internal  security
         in the fight against crimes, the protection of life  and  property,
         and in the maintenance of the rule of law, as directed by  statute.
         Vision- provide an effective, efficient,  and  professional  police
         service that is community-based and  ideas  to  the  principles  of
         democratic policing.

     42. The respondent relied upon the US Department of  State  report  and
         the section under the heading "role  of  the  police  and  security
         apparatus" set out at paragraph [63]. It stated as follows:

             "The Ministry of Justice has responsibility for enforcing laws
             and maintaining order through supervision of the NNP  and  the
             other law enforcement agencies. The Armed  Forces,  under  the
             Ministry of National defence, provide external security  would
             also   have   some   domestic    security    responsibilities,
             specifically coastal patrolling by the coastguard.

             Civilian authorities generally  maintained  effective  control
             over  the  security  forces,  although  lapses  occurred.  The
             government has mechanisms to investigate and punish abuse. The
             INC HR reported that  violent  police  action  and  harassment
             during arrests with the most common complaint  of  misconduct.
             The LNP's professional standards division (PSD) is responsible
             for  investigating  allegations  of  police   misconduct   and
             referring cases for prosecution. There were  instances  during
             the  year  in  which  civilian  security  forces  acted   with
             impunity. A  2016  police  act  mandates  establishment  of  a
             civilian complaint review Board to improve accountability  and
             oversight,  but  as  of  December,  the  board  had  not  been
             constituted....."

     43. The FtTJ at [27] then went on to refer to Section 4 "corruption and
         lack of transparency in government". The  FtTJ  did  not  cite  the
         whole of the paragraph but made reference to, "the  law  calls  for
         integrity in government service and immune rates multiple  offences
         related to corrupt acts by officials". However,  I  note  that  the
         section continues, stating that "the government did  not  implement
         the  law  effectively,  and  officials  often  engage  in   corrupt
         practices with impunity." The FtTJ did however state that the  full
         section had been reproduced in the  decision  letter.  The  country
         material cited went on to refer to  the  Liberia  Anti  -Corruption
         Commission (LACC) which the judge had made reference  to  at  [28].
         This was to prevent, investigate and prosecute cases of  corruption
         among  public  officials.  There  was   reference   to   the   LACC
         Commissioner accusing the LACC chairman  of  financial  impropriety
         and mismanagement of funds who denied the allegations and  that  it
         was unclear if the allegations had been  investigated.  The  Centre
         for  transparency  and  accountability  in  Liberia  (CENTAL)   the
         president appointed heads  of  the  Liberia  extractive  industries
         transparency initiative and the internal audit agency  without  the
         required recruitment  and  vetting  processes  and  suggested  that
         direct presidential  appointments  outside  established  procedures
         undermined the independence of those anticorruption agencies.

     44. Further on in the material, reference was made to action  taken  by
         the LACC. It was recorded that "the government dismissed or in some
         instances  suspended   officials   for   alleged   corruption   and
         recommended others for prosecution. The government generally failed
         to charge higher  ranking  officials  of  corruption  and  tend  to
         recommend prosecution against low-level civil  servants  but  there
         were some exceptions. In February, the  River  Crest  County  Court
         circuit  found   Senator   Teahjay   guilty   of   misappropriating
         development funds during his 2009 - 2014 tenure  as  superintendent
         of Sinoe county. The court ordered the Senator to  pay  $50,000  in
         restitution within nine months or  face  imprisonment,  the  LAC  C
         confirmed that he paid.  Prosecutors  expressed  concern  that  the
         judge should not rule on  more  serious  crimes  in  the  senator's
         indictment,  including  charges  of  economic  sabotage,   criminal
         conspiracy et cetera. In  November,  the  government  arrested  and
         filed charges against senior  officials  at  the  National  Housing
         authority for allegedly extorting  money  from  a  company.  As  of
         December court date had not yet been  set.  Further  reference  was
         made to a report calling on the government investigate  former  and
         current officials involved in  the  hundred  and  hundred  and  $20
         million purchase of an  oil  block.  The  President  established  a
         special  Presidential   Review   Committee   to   investigate   the
         allegations which was endorsed by the House of Representatives.  In
         September it was unknown if any of the committee's  recommendations
         had been followed.

     45. Further  reference  was  made  to  "police  corruption  remained  a
         problem. The LNP  investigated  reports  of  police  misconduct  or
         corruption, and authorities  suspended  or  dismissed  several  NNP
         officers. The most prevalent form  of  police  corruption  was  the
         solicitation of "on the  spot"  finds  at  roadblocks  for  traffic
         offences. The PSD reported cases of bribery for  traffic  offences,
         and authorities suspended or dismissed  several  NNP  officers  for
         misconduct. On April 10, the NNP  dismissed  an  NNP  officer  that
         tampering with a criminal investigation into the death of a  woman.
         The NNP officer allegedly investigated the case  without  authority
         and the detained and extorted money from suspects in the case."

     46. The FtTJ also addressed the evidence relied upon by  the  appellant
         (see [30]-[33]). The FtTJ took into  account  the  appellant's  own
         experiences  as  evidence  of  the  state's  inability  to  provide
         protection and also the content of articles that were  provided  by
         the appellant which were described by the judge as follows "  about
         a central  bank  official  disappeared  after  the  publication  of
         reports of "shady dealings" at the bank, about  unexplained  deaths
         of people connected to  financial  irregularities,  and  about  the
         death of a whistle-blower involved in the investigation of a public
         official" (at [30]).

     47. At [32] the FtTJ set out the US Department of State report of 2019,
         noting that the respondent had cited the 2018  report.  Again,  the
         FtTJ  cited  section  4  dealing  with  corruption  and   lack   of
         transparency in government. But  the  FtTJ  recorded  that  "it  is
         recorded that in June 2019 sitting legislature representatives were
         indicted on corruption charges following an  investigation  by  the
         Liberia anticorruption commission (LACC). The  officials  concerned
         were accused of embezzling development funds. The former speaker of
         the house were implicated in the allegations. Whilst the  FtTJ  did
         not expressly say so, that evidence provided later support for  the
         earlier evidence from 2018.

     48. At [33] the FtTJ referred to a further document relied upon by  the
         appellant "U4 anticorruption helpdesk, Liberia published  September
         2019  reporting  on  the  extent  of  corruption  in  Liberia,  the
         legislative framework and  anticorruption  institutions.  The  FtTJ
         noted that  "corruption  is  a  serious  problem  in  the  Liberian
         government. It is stated  that  the  police  and  criminal  justice
         system does not enjoy high  levels  of  public  trust.  The  police
         lacked the basic but essential tools to do their job.  Low  pay  in
         the public sector is an incentive for bribery. Civil  and  criminal
         justice system scores poorly, 97 out of 135 countries. Against that
         background it is recorded that the Liberian  legislative  framework
         calls for integrity in government service and  enumerates  multiple
         offences related to corrupt acts by officials,  including  bribery,
         intimidation, and abuse of office. There are criminal penalties for
         mismanagement  of  public  funds   and   bribery.   There   is   an
         anticorruption policy and strategy to combat corruption.  Reference
         is made to the Liberia Anti- Corruption Commission (LACC) which was
         established to investigate and prosecute cases of  corruption.  The
         US State Department's 2018 report is cited as  saying  the  written
         laws of Liberia are  not  fully  implemented  and  officials  often
         engage in corrupt practices with impunity.

     49. Against that evidential background, I do not consider that the FtTJ
         was an error in reaching  the  view  that  the  objective  material
         demonstrated that Liberia had a functioning police force  and  that
         there are anticorruption agencies able to  investigate  allegations
         of corruption.  Nor  was  the  judge  in  error  for  reaching  the
         conclusion that  the  background  material  did  not  in  his  view
         demonstrate a systemic (rather than  systematic)  or  institutional
         unwillingness to afford  protection  to  the  victims  of  nonstate
         actors. He went on  to  observe  that  "Liberia  has  a  system  of
         criminal law which does not discriminate against particular classes
         of  victims  and  demonstrates  a  reasonable  willingness  by  law
         enforcement agencies to detect, prosecute and punish offenders"   (
         see [29] and at [34]and 35]).

     50. Furthermore,  whilst  there  was  evidence  that  the  police  were
         susceptible to corruption, the material identified  that  the  most
         prevalent form of police corruption was the solicitation of "on the
         spot" finds at roadblocks to traffic offences. However the material
         set out that the LNP investigated reports of police  misconduct  or
         corruption and that authorities have suspended or dismissed several
         NNP officers. The evidence before the judge  demonstrated  that  in
         respect of the police, Liberia had an independent and  active  body
         (LMP and PSD, as well  as  disciplinary  board  which  investigated
         allegations  of  misconduct  by  the  police  and  army  personnel.
         Additionally, Liberia also had an  anticorruption  commission.  The
         FtTJ at [28] accepted the submission made by the presenting officer
         that the LACC which was tasked to investigate and  prosecute  cases
         of corruption amongst public officials (which  was  the  allegation
         made by the appellant about the caucus) was an avenue open  to  the
         appellant so that he could report his complaints of  corruption  to
         the body. I observe that there was no evidence before the  tribunal
         that the appellant had taken the step to report any  complaints  of
         corruption to this body who were tasked  to  expressly  investigate
         and prosecute such cases.

     51. It is also clear that the FtTJ did not only consider  the  material
         relied upon by the respondent but also that of  the  appellant  and
         did not simply consider generalised evidence of the sufficiency and
         ability of the state to offer protection (in the general sense) but
         also against the background of the appellant's own  experiences  as
         evidence of the state's inability to provide protection ( see [30]-
         ][33]).

     52. As Ms Cleghorn submitted the judge had been directed to articles in
         the appellant's bundle which referred to those in the  position  as
         "whistle-blowers". She submitted  that  the  articles  demonstrated
         that the state had failed to protect such individuals  and  in  the
         context of the appellant's claim, demonstrated that the members  of
         the caucus at the influence  to  ensure  protection  would  not  be
         available to the appellant.

     53. I find no error in the  FtTJ's  approach  when  he  considered  the
         evidence in  those  documents  alongside  the  other  evidence  and
         against the appellant's account  (see  reference  by  the  FtTJ  at
         [31]). However it is important to consider  the  content  of  those
         articles. In respect of the article concerning the  bank  official,
         it refers to him releasing a report concerning missing billions and
         that he was found "mysteriously dead"  in  an  alleged  hit-and-run
         accident. However the article does not conclude  that  this  was  a
         murder also the article refers to the police  having  taken  action
         where it was reported that "five persons were picked  up  over  the
         weekend by the police". Other articles  refer  to  incidents  where
         action was taken by the police and were recorded as being "actively
         investigated" (see incident referring to the journalist, documented
         at A 33, A 34, and A 25 where a suspects were arrested.

     54. In the light of the content of the material, it  was  open  to  the
         FtTJ to reach the  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  account  was
         consistent with the articles in that this was evidence of  criminal
         activity but that it did not lead him to conclude  that  there  was
         necessarily a lack of sufficiency of protection  to  the  standards
         set out in Horvath, as notwithstanding evidence as  to  corruption,
         the police were seen as actively investigating such incidents.

     55. I do not accept the submission made by Ms Cleghorn that  the  state
         has ignored or failed to protect those referred to in the material.
         When reading the contents of the report as I have set out above, it
         demonstrated  the  police  and  other  agencies  were  involved  in
         investigating, arresting,  and  apprehending  those  concerned  and
         demonstrates not only a willingness but also  an  ability  to  take
         action.

     56. Furthermore I do not accept the submission made by Ms Cleghorn that
         the evidence in the articles  when  seen  against  the  appellant's
         account  shows  that  the  caucus  have  the  influence  to  ensure
         protection is not given to the appellant. Such a submission is  not
         supported by the evidence relating to the appellant's  own  account
         and the ability of the police to provide protection.  As  Mr  Avery
         submitted, there was no evidence  that  the  caucus  has  used  any
         alleged influence against the appellant nor is there  any  evidence
         that they had been able to unduly influence the police or any other
         agency of the state. This is supported by the lack of evidence that
         they had used agencies such as  the  police  to  either  arrest  or
         silence him. The appellant was able to leave the country using  his
         own passport with no difficulty. There was no  suggestion  that  he
         had ever been arrested himself at the behest of the individuals  he
         feared.

     57. I also accept the submission made by Mr Avery that when considering
         the factual basis of the incidents relied upon  by  the  appellant,
         that it is difficult to see what the police could have  done  other
         than that reported by the  appellant.  The  appellant  on  his  own
         account was not able to provide very much evidence to  the  police.
         He could not describe  the  individuals  asking  about  him  on  19
         October 2018 (Q 41), nor could his wife provide any  identification
         evidence. Whilst the appellant made a complaint to the police,  the
         appellant  could  not  provide  specific  details   or   additional
         information to assist  the  police  in  locating  the  individuals.
         Furthermore the  willingness  and  the  ability  of  the  state  to
         investigate the individuals concerned rely upon the  assistance  of
         the person making the  complaint.  Following  the  incident  on  17
         November and the report made to  the  police,  the  appellant  left
         Liberia the following day and did not stay and assist the police in
         any investigation that was to  take  place.  In  fact  the  written
         evidence before the tribunal also demonstrated that the police  did
         take active action. At page 68  in  relation  to  the  incident  in
         December 2018 the report refers to  an  investigation  having  been
         conducted by the police and that they were attempting to  identify,
         locate and apprehend  the  perpetrators  (see  supporting  document
         six).

     58. As the FtTJ identified at [28] there was  also  a  further  revenue
         open to the appellant which expressly dealt with the  investigation
         and prosecution of cases of corruption amongst public officials but
         that the appellant  had  not  sought  to  utilise  that  avenue  of
         complaint by making a report to them. There was  no  evidence  from
         the tribunal that he did so.

     59. The sake of completeness, I should also deal with  paragraph  9  of
         the grounds. It is submitted there that the Horvath standard  would
         only be relevant if the individuals were not members of the caucus,
         that is if they were non-state actors. However in the  decision  of
         Svazas v SSHD EWCA Civ 74 (a case which  concerned  persecution  by
         state agents and the level of protection required  to  meet  this),
         Stuart-Smith LJ said  that  what  was  necessary  was  a  practical
         standard of  protection.   The  more  senior  the  police  officers
         involved in the actions against the  appellant,  the  more  it  was
         necessary for the state to demonstrate  that  its  procedures  were
         adequate and enforced as far as possible. There is also a series of
         gradations between abuse by state agents,  which  is  tolerated  or
         authorised by the state, and rogue officials, who from time to time
         abuse their positions. Stuart Smith LJ and  Simon  Browne  LJ  both
         said that the same criteria for an insufficiency of  protection  as
         outlined in Horvath applied 'provided it  is  borne  in  mind  that
         where the police are concerned a higher standard of  protection  is
         required'. Therefore the "Horvath  standard  is  relevant  to  both
         nonstate actors and state actors.

     60. In summary, I find there to be no error in the assessment  made  by
         the FtTJ on the evidence was before him and the conclusions reached
         on that evidence that the material did not demonstrate  a  lack  of
         sufficiency of protection for the appellant taking into account his
         own individual circumstances was open to the FtTJ to make.



Ground 3:  Internal relocation:

     61. The third ground advanced on behalf of the appellant challenges the
         assessment of internal relocation. Ms. Cleghorn on  behalf  of  the
         appellant submits that  the  FtTJ  at  [38]  made  a  finding  that
         although the appellant may well "be known and  recognised  for  his
         activities... He has not been prominent since 2018." The  FtTJ  did
         not accept the appellant's account that there was nowhere  for  him
         to "hide" in Liberia but that the evidence established that Liberia
         had a population of around 4.8 million,  the  size  of  the  police
         forces only 4000 strong in the size of the army is only 2000. Thus,
         she  submitted  while  there  may  be  "no  geographical  or  legal
         restrictions on the  appellant's  ability  to  relocate  internally
         within Liberia" (as found by the judge at [33]), he failed to  take
         into account that when taking out  of  account  Monrovia  and  xxx,
         there are only a few areas in which he could  relocate.  Given  the
         size of the police force and the army, any corrupt members  of  the
         caucus would be in a position to use their influence  to  find  the
         appellant by using the police and army given that he was known  for
         his activities and a profile.  Thus,  she  submits,  following  the
         guidance in the decision of Januzi, it would be  unduly  harsh  for
         someone  with  the  appellant's  past  experience  and  profile  to
         relocate within a country with such a small population. She submits
         that "word will travel quickly" and that his persecutors  would  be
         able to find and locate him.

Legal framework:

     62. Applications for asylum and humanitarian protection  are  addressed
         in part 11 of the Immigration Rules. Rule 339O, which  is  included
         in part 11, deals with the possibility of "Internal relocation". It
         states:

             "(i) The Secretary of State will not make:

                  (a)  a grant of refugee status if in part of the country
                  of origin a person would not have a well-founded fear of
                  being persecuted, and the person can reasonably be
                  expected to stay in that part of the country; or

                  (b)  a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of the
                  country of return a person would not face a real risk of
                  suffering serious harm, and the person can reasonably be
                  expected to stay in that part of the country.

             (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of origin or
             country of return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary
             of State, when making a decision on whether to grant asylum or
             humanitarian protection, will have regard to the general
             circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and to
             the personal circumstances of the person.

             (iii)    (i)  applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to
             return to the country of origin or country of return."

     63. The House of Lords gave guidance as to the test to  be  applied  in
         Januzi v Home Secretary [2006]  UKHL  5,  [2006]  2  AC  426.  Lord
         Bingham, with whom the other members of the House agreed,  said  at
         paragraph 21:

             "The  decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all   relevant
             circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of
             origin, must decide whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
             claimant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to
             expect him to do so."

     64. The House of Lords returned to the subject of  internal  relocation
         in AH (Sudan) v Home Secretary [2007] UKHL 49, [2008] 1 AC 678.  It
         stressed that the test quoted in the  previous  paragraph  provided
         the correct approach to the problem  of  internal  relocation,  and
         Lord Bingham observed in paragraph 5:

             "The humanitarian object  of  the  Refugee  Convention  is  to
             secure a reasonable measure of protection  for  those  with  a
             well-founded fear of persecution in their home country or some
             part of it; it is not to procure  a  general  levelling-up  of
             living standards around the world, desirable though of  course
             that is."

     65. For her part, Baroness Hale explained at paragraph 21:

             "By definition, if the claimant had  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution, not only in the place from which he has fled, but
             also in the place to which he might be returned, there can  be
             no question of internal relocation. The  question  presupposes
             that there is some place within his country of origin to which
             he could be returned without  fear  of  persecution.  It  asks
             whether, in all the circumstances, it would be unduly harsh to
             expect him to go there. If it is reasonable to expect  him  to
             go there, then he can  no  longer  claim  to  be  outside  his
             country  of  origin  because  of  his  well-founded  fear   of
             persecution."

     66. In SC (Jamaica) v Home Secretary [2017] EWCA Civ 2112, [2018] 1 WLR
         4004, Ryder LJ noted (at paragraph 36) that:

             "the evaluative exercise is intended to be holistic and ... no
             burden or standard of proof arises in relation to the  overall
             issue of whether it is reasonable to internally relocate".

     67. The assessment of internal relocation has to be seen in  the  light
         of the FtTJ's earlier assessment that it was the behaviour of rogue
         individuals and that it  was  not  state  assisted.  There  was  no
         evidence before the FtTJ that the individuals  concerned  had  used
         any apparatus of the state  to  influence  or  otherwise  harm  the
         appellant. Consequently, the submission made that  the  appellant's
         persecutors would be able to find him wherever he located to has to
         be seen against that background.

     68. The FtTJ when addressing this issue properly took into account  the
         size of Liberia as "relatively small"  with  a  population  of  4.8
         million (at [36]). However at [38] the  judge  expressly  addressed
         the argument that he had a profile which would  bring  him  to  the
         attention of those he claimed were intent on causing him harm.  The
         FtTJ accepted that he might be recognised was entitled to take into
         account that the appellant had not been prominent in  any  activity
         since 2018. Furthermore, the  judge  was  also  entitled  to  place
         weight on the fact that the appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate
         that the influence of the local officials he had  accused  extended
         throughout the country, however small. The  judge  found  from  the
         evidence at [38] that:

             "the appellant has not demonstrated that the influence of  the
             local officials he accused of  corruption  extends  throughout
             the country. I find the appellant overstate his position as  a
             public figure and I do not accept a statement  that  there  is
             nowhere for him to hide in Liberia."

     69. This finding is consistent with the evidence  before  the  tribunal
         that the individuals concerned were not able to exert influence  in
         the home area by the use of the police in  arresting  or  otherwise
         detaining the appellant or preventing him from  continuing  in  his
         employment or to stop him from leaving  the  country.  It  is  also
         consistent with the evidence from the appellant's own account  that
         those who are seeking him were not able to locate him when  he  was
         in a different area. The appellant's evidence was that in  November
         when in old Congo town, unknown individuals were asking  about  his
         whereabouts when he was only 20 minutes away from his home.

     70. I accept  the  submission  made  by  Mr  Avery  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent that notwithstanding the size of the country, there  was
         no evidence that the individuals  that  the  appellant  was  having
         difficulties with had any influence outside of the local  area  nor
         that they had any inclination to pursue him outside the area  after
         such a lapse of time.

     71. At paragraphs [36 - 37] the FtTJ properly addressed  the  issue  of
         internal relocation in accordance with the law  and  based  on  the
         appellant's personal profile and  characteristics.  The  FtTJ  took
         into account the appellant's age and his health and that there were
         no geographical restrictions or legal restrictions to  prevent  his
         ability to relocate, and that he spoke the language and dialect (at
         [36]). The FtTJ took into account the nature of his  qualifications
         and his previous employment history and that  he  travelled  around
         the country to do his job  previously.  The  judge  considered  the
         objective material in the US State Department report and reach  the
         conclusion that the appellant had "skills and  experience  to  find
         employment on return". He took  into  account  that  the  financial
         support that had been provided for him whilst in the  UK  would  be
         likely to continue to assist him  in  re-establishing  himself  and
         that whilst he would face some practical difficulties starting life
         in  a  new  area,  the  appellant  had  not  adduced  evidence   to
         demonstrate his ability to lead a relatively normal life judged  by
         the standards in Liberia (at [37]).

     72. Consequently, based on the factual findings that he made concerning
         the events and those whom the FtTJ considered were  not  agents  of
         the state, the FtTJ carried out a full assessment and evaluation of
         the alternative  of  internal  relocation  and  gave  adequate  and
         sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusion that based  on  his
         profile, the lapse  of  time  and  the  lack  of  any  evidence  to
         demonstrate that the individuals concerned had influence outside of
         their local area or any inclination to pursue him further,  led  to
         the conclusion that he would be able to live safely in another part
         of Liberia.

     73. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision of the FtTJ should stand.



Notice of Decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated    26 March 2021

