
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/01995/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16 November 2017                        |  On 7 December 2017             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                    RCBA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Harris, of Counsel, instructed by Messrs Duncan
                    Lewis &  Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Baldwin who, in a determination promulgated  on
    26 April 2017, dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bolivia, born on  11  October  1975.   He
    entered Britain in December 2006 as a visitor.  He was  encountered  by
    Immigration Officers  in  2013  and  served  with  form  IS151A  as  an
    overstayer.  He made human rights applications on  19  April  2013,  31
    October 2013 and 20 June 2014, all of which were refused.  In June 2015
    he claimed asylum.   His  application  was  refused  and  certified  as
    clearly unfounded in  October  2015.   It  was  then  reconsidered  and
    refused with a right of appeal in February 2016.

3.   The appellant said that he had had no difficulties whatsoever  when  he
    lived in Cochacabama in Bolivia.  He had come to Britain  for  economic
    reasons in 2006 as a visitor, intending to  stay  on.   He  had  met  a
    Bolivian woman here called C with whom he had a relationship  and  with
    whom he fell out.  She and her brother,  F,  whom  he  asserted  was  a
    murderer, were also from Bolivia and after his relationship had  broken
    up they had threatened him as to what would happen  to  him  should  he
    return to Bolivia.  He also asserted that C had a cousin, I C,  who  is
    now in prison but who was member of the T gang, named after a man  whom
    I had murdered, and that members of  the  T  gang  had  threatened  his
    mother in April/May 2013 and that at that time his sister and  brother-
    in-law had been kidnapped for 8 or 9 hours by the gang.

4.    The judge noted the evidence, which included a  report  from  a  Jorge
    Derpic, which he stated had the hallmarks  of  being  "a  fairly  well-
    researched and very balanced document".   The judge concluded  that  on
    the basis of the evidence before him  and the fact  that  C  and  F  C,
    although they had displayed animosity to the appellant in the past, had
    not harmed him nor indeed had had contact with him for the  last  three
    or four years, there was  no  reason  why  he  should  fear  them  and,
    secondly, having analysed the report from Mr Derpic, he concluded  that
    it was most unlikely that the appellant would be sought by the  T  gang
    or that they would have any interest in him as their interests  centred
    around burglary, threats and extortion.

5.    In any event the gang was based in Cochabamba and internal  relocation
    would be open to the appellant should he return to Bolivia.

6.    Moreover, the appellant has a partner here who is from Brazil  and  it
    was possible that he would be able to go to Brazil with her.   He  said
    there was no objective evidence to show that the  appellant  could  not
    join his partner in Brazil or that they could not settle in due  course
    in Agentina, Peru and Chile - possibilities mentioned by Mr  Derpic  in
    his report.  He stated that the appellant would have a better chance if
    living and working  in a country where Spanish  was  spoken  given  his
    very limited English.

7.   When assessing the appellant's credibility the judge took into  account
    the fact that he had overstayed in Britain and that he had  made  three
    applications here on human rights grounds before applying  for  asylum.
    The judge found that the appellant had not made out a well-founded fear
    of persecution and therefore dismissed the appeal  on  asylum  grounds.
    For similar reasons he dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

8.   Lengthy grounds of appeal were submitted,  the  first  being  that  the
    judge had not made clear findings in relation to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's former partner and her family had threatened "to  have  the
    appellant returned to Bolivia and  killed/harmed  on  his  return"  and
    secondly whether or not family members  had  been  kidnapped  by  their
    associates.   The grounds argue  that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to
    describe as a lack of "pursuit of or animosity towards  the  appellant"
    the attitude of C and F for the last three years in Britain and  in  so
    doing had failed to consider the  nature  of  the  threat  against  the
    appellant as the case was that he had been threatened in the event that
    he returned to Bolivia and that explained why he had not been  targeted
    further whilst in Britain.

9.   Secondly, they argue that the judge had been wrong to  state  that  the
    fact that his former partner C had telephoned  him  after  his  release
    from detention to enquire how he was "which hardly suggests she remains
    antagonistic towards him" despite  the  fact  that  was  not  what  had
    happened as C had rung him to "know what he was doing"  which  was  not
    the same as asking how he was  and  was  much  more  threatening.   The
    grounds pointed out that in his statement he  had  stated  that  C  had
    threatened him over and over again and that F5s family  had  threatened
    his family in Bolivia.

10.  It was argued that the judge was wrong to describe  a  meeting  between
    the appellant's current partner and C as a chance encounter as  it  was
    the appellant's claim that his partner had been watched by  C's  sister
    and was wrong to  rely  on  a   lack  of  recent  contact  between  the
    appellant and the Cs as indicating that he was not at risk  on  return.
    Moreover the judge had been wrong to exclude the consideration of  risk
    other than the risk of killing and it was stated that he had misapplied
    the standard of proof.  It was further stated that he had inappropriate
    reliance on credibility findings in  relation  to  internal  relocation
    and in his consideration the expert evidence in  relation  to  internal
    reconciliation.

11.  Ms Harris  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  referred  to  the
    appellant's witness statement regarding what had happened to his family
    in Bolivia.  She argued moreover that the judge's findings of fact were
    scant particularly given the complicated nature of this case  and  that
    there was clear evidence of the  strength  of  the  T  gang  and  their
    ability to harm the appellant.

12.  Mr Tufan argued that this was a simple  and  not  a  complicated  case.
    The appellant would, whatever happened,  be  able  to  relocate  within
    Bolivia. His only reason for not being able to relocate was that he had
    not lived in another city other than Cochabamba but the nature  of  the
    country meant that it was not unreasonable to expect him to relocate in
    Bolivia.  Moreover, the appellant had not suffered in  England  and  it
    was some time since there had been any contact between F and C  or  the
    appellant's family and the Tancara gang in Bolivia.


Discussion

13.  There is  little  merit  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   It  is  simply
    incorrect to suggest that the judge did anything other than  employ  an
    appropriate standard of proof which he clearly set out in paragraph  23
    of the determination.  He did properly consider all  the  evidence  and
    his analysis of the report of Mr  Derpic  is  lengthy  and  considered.
    Moreover the report itself is, as the judge says, a balanced report and
    the judge follows that and the conclusions therein and  having  weighed
    up those conclusions was entitled to find that the appellant would  not
    be at risk in Bolivia but that, in  any event, internal relocation  was
    open to him.  He was entitled to take into account the length  of  time
    since the appellant had had any contact or indeed his partner  had  any
    contact with C and F here.  Clearly if they wanted  to  harm  him,  and
    from the evidence it is clear that there is very substantial bad  blood
    between him and C and F, they would have been able to do so  here:  the
    appellant had not suggested that F is able to exert  self  control  and
    had stated that F has been violent in this country. The reality is that
    the threats and  the   violence  he  claims  all   took  place  in  the
    aftermath of  the breakup of the appellant's  relationship with  C  and
    appear  to be, in part, threats to make the  a  sure  ensure  that  the
    appellant did not do anything which could lead  to  F  being  deported.
    With regard to the telephone call and also the meeting  in  the  street
    when the appellant's wife met C, the reality is that the call  and  the
    meeting were not followed up by any act of violence.  Moreover,  taking
    the appellant's assertion  that  his  sister  and  brother-in-law  were
    detained in Bolivia it is not asserted that they  were  harmed,    that
    incident was over 4 years ago and there is nothing to indicate that any
    interest had been shown in them since that  time.  The  fact  that  the
    judge did not specifically mention  that  part  of  the  claim  is  not
    material given the  assertions as to what happened and the  passage  of
    time.

14.   In any event, there is no reason why C and F should  wait  to  arrange
    for him to be harmed in Bolivia and it is certainly not the  case  that
    they could arrange for him to  be sent to Bolivia.   Moreover there  is
    no reason why the gang itself should wait for him to  return  and  then
    endeavour to harm him in Bolivia - that does not  appear  to  be  their
    interest or their modus vivendi in Cochabamba.

15.  I would add that I consider the judge was fully entitled to  find  that
    the appellant would be able to relocate in Bolivia let alone be able to
    go to another South American country where he  would  be  able  to  get
    work.  There is nothing to  suggest  that  he  would  not  be  able  to
    relocate in Bolivia and he gave no reason for doing  so.   The  judge's
    conclusions were reached after taking into account  the  report  of  Mr
    Derpic which it is clear that he had read. Although Mr Derpic refers to
    the "gamble" of internal relocation that was taken into account by  the
    judge and, in any event, appeared to be in relation  to  the  appellant
    trying to obtain the protection of  the  police  through  an  "official
    guarantee" through the police, but there  is  no  indication  that  the
    appellant would consider drawing attention to himself in  that  way.  I
    would add that he appears to refer to threats to the appellant and  his
    family over the last 3 years - that appears  to  be  in  error  as  the
    threats were clearly  nor  continuing  and,  as  Mr  Derpic  states  in
    paragraph 19 the appellant has not heard from or had contact with the C
    family since 2013.

16.   The assertion that the judge ignored any  danger  other  than  killing
    when he considered the appellant's  claim  is  lacking  in  merit:  the
    reality is that the judge did not consider  that  the  appellant  would
    come to harm  and  that  conclusion  is  clearly  not  limited  to  the
    appellant's fear of being killed.

17.  Finally, I find that the judge  was  fully  entitled  to  be  sceptical
    about the appellant's claim given his immigration history and the  fact
    that he made three applications for leave to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds before claiming asylum.  That has been blamed on  his  previous
    solicitors but there is no evidence whatsoever of any  complaint  about
    them and there seems no reason why the appellant would  not  have  told
    them of his fears.  In all I consider that this is a well-balanced  and
    thorough  judgment.   Moreover,  I  would  emphasise  that  no  reasons
    whatsoever have been given   to  show  that  the  appellant  could  not
    relocate internally within Bolivia or indeed that he could not  live in
    another Latin American  country should he wish.

  18. I therefore find that  the  judge  reached  findings  and  conclusions
    which were fully open to him and  that  he  reached  those  conclusions
    after a proper and detailed consideration of the  evidence.  The  judge
    was entitled to dismiss this appeal on asylum grounds and for the  same
    reasons to dismiss it on human  rights  grounds.  His  decision  should
    stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   [pic]                  Date: 5 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

