
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01234/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25th September 2018                |On 16th October 2018           |


                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL KELLY


                                   Between

                                  HEMIN ALI
                          (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY 0F STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This decision follows a resumed  hearing  of  the  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge I Hillis, promulgated on the 25th
    August 2017, to dismiss the appellant's appeal against refusal  of  his
    Protection Claim. The appeal has  a  somewhat  complicated  background,
    which I endeavoured to summarise at paragraphs 2 and 3 of  my  decision
    promulgated on the 27th April 2018. In that decision I  concluded  that
    the judge had erred in respect of only  one  of  the  four  grounds  of
    appeal for which permission to appeal had been granted.


 2. Given that Ms Patel made several attempts to widen  the  scope  of  the
    resumed hearing, I shall set out the limited basis upon which  I  found
    that Judge Hillis had made an error  of  law  and  the  reasons  why  I
    considered it necessary to conduct a resumed hearing:


           The second ground arises from  the  judge's  decision  that  the
           appellant was excluded  from  humanitarian  protection.  In  the
           course  of  explaining  why  he  found  that   the   appellant's
           conviction was "a serious crime" for the purposes  of  paragraph
           339D of the Immigration Rules, the judge  relied  upon  what  he
           described at paragraphs 32 and 33 as Ms Patel's 'concession'  in
           this regard. The grounds, which were settled by Ms Patel,  state
           that she had only accepted this "... within the context  of  the
           automatic deportation provisions i.e. sentenced to  imprisonment
           for more than 4 years". I confess that  I  find  this  assertion
           somewhat surprising given that  (a)  the  appeal  had  not  been
           remitted on this  basis,  (b)  Judge  Roberts  had  specifically
           preserved Judge Dearden's decision under Article 8 (wherein  the
           threshold of 4 years' imprisonment is  directly  relevant  under
           section 117C of the 2002 Act), and (c) Ms  Patel  had  confirmed
           that the appellant was  no  longer  pursuing  his  appeal  under
           Article 8 (paragraph 23). I am nevertheless prepared  to  accept
           that due to a degree of confusion and misunderstanding Ms  Patel
           may not have appreciated that  the  appellant's  conviction  was
           germane to the question of whether  the  appellant  fell  to  be
           excluded from humanitarian  protection  and  that  she  did  not
           therefore have a fair opportunity  to  argue  the  point.  I  am
           fortified in reaching this  conclusion  by  the  fact  that  the
           respondent does not appear to have raised the  issue  in  either
           her Reasons for Refusal Letter or in submissions at the  hearing
           before the First-tier Tribunal. This gives rise to an  issue  of
           potential unfairness. I will therefore provide Ms Patel with  an
           opportunity to make further submissions to me upon this issue at
           a resumed hearing. This is on  the  basis  that  not  only  must
           justice be done but must manifestly be seen to be done  and  the
           appellant should not therefore assume that the  outcome  of  the
           appeal will necessarily be  affected  thereby.  It  may  however
           become relevant if the appellant were to succeed in  challenging
           my decision on the third and fourth grounds (below).


 3. I would add that the appellant has  the  option  of  pursuing  a  fresh
    Protection Claim based on country guidance issued  since  Judge  Hillis
    promulgated his decision. It is therefore right  that  he  should  know
    where he stands upon the issue of exclusion before deciding whether  to
    do so. I make this point because Ms Patel sought to persuade me that  I
    should reopen and reconsider the whole issue of internal armed conflict
    in Iraq, with a view to allowing the appeal on Article 3 grounds should
    she fail in her argument that he  is  not  excluded  from  Humanitarian
    Protection. It is however far  too  late  to  consider  it  within  the
    context  of  the  present  proceedings.  Moreover,   I   have   already
    specifically held that Judge Hillis did not make an error of law in his
    assessment of this issue (see paragraph 6 of my earlier decision). This
    decision will therefore  be  confined  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant fell  to  be  excluded  from  Humanitarian  Protection  under
    paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules as I had originally intended it
    should be.

 4. Judge Hillis set out the terms of paragraph  339D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules at paragraph 29 of his  decision,  the  relevant  part  of  which
    reads:

           A person is excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection ...
           where ...:


                 i) ...
                ii) ...
               iii) there are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  they
                    constitute a danger to the community or to the  security
                    of the United Kingdom; or
                iv) there are serious reasons for considering that they have
                    committed a serious crime; or
                 v) ...

 5. The conviction that engages the potential operation  of  the  exclusion
    provisions is for an offence of wounding with intent to cause  grievous
    bodily harm committed on the 25th November 2010 for which the appellant
    was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 10 years on the  28th  March
    2011. The appellant was part of what the sentencing judge described  as
    a joint premeditated attack on the victim who  was  repeatedly  stabbed
    causing what fortunately proved to be non-fatal injuries.


 6. Ms Patel drew my attention to various passages in an OASyS report dated
    the 20th November 2015. This shows that the appellant continues  to  be
    subject to a significant number of stringent licence conditions [L38 of
    the appellant's bundle of documents]. It also shows that the  appellant
    achieved the status of 'enhance prisoner' on  the  basis  of  his  good
    behaviour whilst  in  prison.  Ms  Patel  also  reminded  me  that  the
    appellant had been released  from  his  sentence  of  imprisonment  and
    subsequent  immigration  detention  on  the  22nd  December  2015  (now
    approaching three years ago) and had not  since  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities. Moreover, he  continues  to  receive  the
    ongoing support of the Probation Service. Given all these  factors,  Ms
    Patel argued that it could not be said that there were serious  reasons
    for considering that the appellant currently constitutes  a  danger  to
    the community of the United Kingdom.

 7. Whilst attractively framed, I reject Ms Patel's arguments. It  is  true
    that  the  OASyS  report  is  now  nearly  three  years'  old.  It   is
    nevertheless the most recent risk assessment before the Tribunal.  With
    regard to the likelihood of  the  appellant  causing  serious  harm  to
    others, the risk to children and known  adults  is  assessed  as  being
    'medium' whilst the risk to the general public is assessed as 'high'. I
    also note that the appellant at that time continued to deny the offence
    of which he had been convicted by a jury  and  harboured  "considerable
    antipathy to the victim".


 8. Further, and in any event, it is difficult to see how  the  offence  of
    wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm  can  be  viewed  as
    anything other than "serious". Both the nature of  the  offence  itself
    ("grievous" meaning 'really serious') and the term of the  sentence  of
    imprisonment (10 years) demonstrates the seriousness  of  the  offence.
    Additionally,  the  sentencing  judge  described  the  offence   as   a
    "deliberate, premeditated, and planned  attack  for  revenge  in  which
    knives were taken to the scene for the purpose  of  inflicting  serious
    bodily injury". I thus have no doubt  that  this  was  a  very  serious
    offence indeed.

 9. It  follows  from  the  above  that  the  appellant  is  excluded  from
    Humanitarian Protection and, should he choose to  make  a  fresh  claim
    based on the humanitarian situation in Iraq, the  most  that  he  could
    hope for is to be granted the limited protection of Article  3  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

Anonymity not directed



Signed:
                            Date: 1st October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

