
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01159/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2017                            |On 13 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR TA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by Linga & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson promulgated on 20  March
    2017 to allow the respondent's appeal  against  refusal  to  grant  him
    asylum.
2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the basis that  the  judge  had  not
    considered the Istanbul Protocol in  relation  to  the  medical  report
    within this appeal and even though  he  found  the  respondent's  claim
    lacked credibility, he relied on the medical evidence  alone  to  allow
    the appeal.  The Secretary of State also argued that the  judge  failed
    to take into account relevant case law such as Mibanga  v  SSHD  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 367.

3.   The respondent will from now on be referred to  as  the  applicant  for
    ease of reference.

4.   The applicant is a national of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1975.

5.   The applicant's evidence is that in April 2007, he left Sri  Lanka  and
    went to India because the leader of the LTTE ordered everybody to go to
    India and seek refuge.  He lived in Mandavan Camp  in  Rameswaram.   He
    was given papers and returned to Sri Lanka illegally in September 2010.
     He went back because the LTTE had been destroyed.  He  worked  in  the
    fishing industry in Sri Lanka until  2012  when  he  was  arrested  and
    detained for a week in Valvettithay Camp.  He was then moved to  Palaly
    Camp for three months.  He was released in September 2012 and taken for
    an operation.  He was arrested again on 2 May 2013 by  the  Sri  Lankan
    army and detained until October 2015.   He  was  released  unofficially
    because his father paid a bribe.  On 13 January 2015 he went to Ureluva
    Camp, showed his pass and was beaten.  He left Sri Lanka on 21  October
    2015 after his father arranged for a visa.  He arrived in the UK on  23
    October 2015 and claimed asylum at the port.  He did  not  enter  using
    his own passport.  His asylum application was refused in a letter dated
    26 January 2016.

6.   Having heard  the  evidence  of  the  applicant  and  following  cross-
    examination, the judge made the following findings:

         "34. Taking all the above inconsistencies and  contradictions  into
             account, allied to s.8(3)(a) of the 2004 Act, I find that  the
             Appellant lacks credibility.  Based on that evidence I do  not
             accept that he was a member of the LTTE, or  did  anything  to
             help the LTTE.  If he did work on boats involved in  some  way
             with the LTTE it was a very low level  which  would  not  have
             attracted the interest of the authorities, let alone in  2015.
             It is simply not credible.


         35.  Nevertheless, while there are inconsistencies revealed in  the
             account given by the Appellant to Dr. Hayward in  his  Medico-
             Legal  Report  as  compared  to  the  accounts  given  in  his
             interview, his witness statement,  and  in  cross-examination,
             Dr.  Hayward  expresses  the  professional  opinion  that  the
             Appellant has been ill-treated and tortured.  He diagnoses his
             mental health problems as attributable to  the  effects  being
             kept in solitary confinement for a prolonged period as claimed
             by the Appellant.  Dr. Hayward states that  the  Appellant  is
             severely depressed and has significant PTSD.  He says that his
             current  psychiatric  conditions  are  likely  to  affect  his
             ability to be coherent.  Furthermore, in  paragraph  125,  Dr.
             Hayward states that, 'There is no  physical  or  psychological
             evidence to support any possibility of a false  allegation  of
             torture'.


         36.  In paragraph 107 of his Report Dr.  Hayward  opines  that  the
             Appellant's mental health reflects the  effects  of  prolonged
             solitary  confinement,  and  in  paragraph  108   says   that,
             'Solitary    confinement    often    leads    to    confusion,
             disorientation, and memory loss, as well as to depression'.


         37.  It is clear to me that while the Appellant's accounts  do  not
             always hang comfortably together,  Dr.  Hayward  is  persuaded
             that his injuries and mental state are highly likely to be the
             result of torture, and solitary confinement over  a  prolonged
             period.   That  being  the  case,  then  there  is   a   ready
             explanation for the incoherence of  the  Appellant's  accounts
             and his failure to remember crucial events  at  various  times
             during his Asylum Interview, cross-examination, etc.


         38.  I noted the Appellant's demeanour during his time in court  to
             be that of a person who was wary and highly suspicious of  his
             surroundings and the people  in  court.   He  looked  severely
             depressed, and did not make eye contact with anyone, as far as
             I could see.  He looked distinctly uncomfortable.


         39.  Therefore while I have to admit that his various accounts  led
             me to decide that  I  found  his  accounts  incredible,  I  am
             persuaded by the Doctor's medical evidence  that  he  probably
             has been tortured and  kept  in  solitary  confinement  for  a
             prolonged period and that this could account for his  loss  of
             memory, and the consequent inconsistencies and contradictions.
              I find, on the lower standard of proof, that it is reasonably
             likely that he was tortured as he claims, and  that  therefore
             there is a real risk that he could be tortured on return.


         40.  Therefore, taking all the evidence in the  round,  although  I
             find that the Appellant's account of his involvement with  the
             LTTE is  not  credible  in  itself,  I  am  persuaded  by  Dr.
             Hayward's evidence that the Appellant has been tortured as  he
             claims.  This is pure speculation, but it may be that  he  was
             not of much importance in the LTTE, but was associated in some
             way, and in the insanity of wars and their aftermath, came  to
             the attention of the authorities in some way, who  then  over-
             estimated his importance, or even just  sought  some  sort  of
             revenge on a Tamil.  In any event, because I am persuaded that
             be was tortured, then I find that his claim to asylum is well-
             founded and grant this appeal accordingly.


         41.  Dealing with his claim to Humanitarian Protection  under  Rule
             339C of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and  Article
             15(c) of the EU Qualification  Directive,  the  Appellant  has
             demonstrated a real risk of  persecution,  death  unlawful  or
             inhuman or degrading treatment if returned to Sri  Lanka,  for
             the reasons given above, therefore UK would be  in  breach  of
             its obligations, and therefore the Appellant does qualify  for
             Humanitarian Protection under Rule  339C  of  the  Immigration
             Rules


         43.  While the Appellant would  not  appear,  prima  facie,  to  be
             comprised in any of the  categories  listed,  he  clearly  was
             considered to be a threat to the  state  in  some  way,  which
             resulted in his arrest and torture.  I  therefore  find  that,
             irrespective of the categories adumbrated, he is  at  risk  on
             return.


         44.  Taking all  the  evidence  in  the  round,  I  find  that  the
             Appellant was tortured by the authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  and
             therefore has a genuine  fear  of  persecution,  degrading  or
             inhuman treatment  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  and  therefore
             satisfies the  requirements  of  the  Refugee  Convention.   I
             therefore find that he has persuaded me that he  has  a  well-
             founded fear, and that he is at risk on return, and grant this
             appeal accordingly."


         45.  For all the reasons given above, I grant this appeal on asylum
             grounds because the Appellant has persuaded  me  that  he  was
             tortured as he claims.  I grant his  appeal  for  Humanitarian
             Protection for the same reasons.  I also grant this appeal  on
             Human Rights grounds  under  Articles  2  &  3  for  the  same
             reasons.  He will clearly be at risk on return because of  his
             previous treatment."


7.   Mr Tarlow submitted that the judge at paragraph 34  did  not  find  the
    applicant credible.  He added that the judge then went on to deal  with
    the medical evidence in isolation.  The judge did not consider the case
    of Mibanga.  Mr Tarlow relied on paragraph 21 of HH (medical  evidence;
    effect of Mibanga) Ethiopia  [2005]  UKAIT  00164  where  the  Tribunal
    considered that there was a danger of Mibanga being misunderstood.  The
    Tribunal held that the judgments in that  case  were  not  intended  to
    place judicial fact-finders in a form of forensic  straightjacket.   In
    particular, the Court of Appeal was not to be regarded as  laying  down
    any rule of law as to the order in which judicial fact-finders were  to
    approach the evidential materials before them.   "To  take  Wilson  J's
    "cake" analogy, all its ingredients cannot be thrown together into  the
    ball simultaneously.  One has to start somewhere.   There  was  nothing
    illogical about the process by  which  the  Immigration  Judge  in  the
    present case  chose  to  approach  his  analytical  task."   Mr  Tarlow
    submitted that Mibanga reinforced what the Court of Appeal said in HH.

8.   Ms Jegarajah started off by looking at the  grounds  submitted  by  the
    Secretary of State.  In her first ground, the Secretary of  State  said
    that the judge did not consider the Istanbul Protocol  in  relation  to
    the medical report nor did he  apply  the  relevant  case  law,  KV  in
    relation to scarring.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that Mr  Tarlow  has  not
    made any submissions on either of these issues.  Mr Tarlow in  response
    submitted that this ground was not their strongest  point  but  in  any
    event he was relying on it.

9.   Ms Jegarajah then went on to look at paragraph 3 of  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds.  This said that the judge allowed the  appeal  on  the
    basis of the medical report and evidence by Dr Hayward [40].   However,
    the report itself  was  not  consistent  with  the  Istanbul  Protocol.
    Neither has the judge considered any case law relevant to  the  alleged
    burning and torture [29, 30] with case law Mibanga v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367 not  being  considered.  It  was  argued  that  the  judge  has
    considered the medical evidence in isolation and not in the round.

10.  Ms Jegarajah went through Dr Hayward's medico-legal report.   She  said
    that the report is from a leading medical charity which  the  Secretary
    of  State  treats  with  great  care.   She  cited  numerous  instances
    throughout the  report  where  Dr  Hayward  referred  to  the  Istanbul
    Protocol.  She submitted that the errors of law raised by the Secretary
    of State were wrong in fact.

11.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that the Secretary of State referred  to  KV  in
    her grounds but did not identify which KV she was relying on.  She said
    that in KV (Sri Lanka)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  119,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    disavowed the entirety of the Upper Tribunal's findings. The  Court  of
    Appeal held that where scarring is diagnostic, there have to be  strong
    reasons to dislodge the obvious inference that  the  torture  claim  is
    true.

12.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that all the judge has  done  is  to  conduct  a
    fair balancing exercise.  He gave excessive deference to the  Secretary
    of State.  From paragraphs 19 to 21 the judge summarised the  Secretary
    of State's Reasons for Refusal Letter.  From paragraphs 23  to  32  the
    judge summarised at length the cross-examination.  At paragraph  32  he
    identified the inconsistencies between the applicant's  claim  and  the
    medical report.  At paragraph 34 he found that  the  appellant's  claim
    lacked credibility.  Throughout those paragraphs the  judge  considered
    the respondent's case.

13.  Ms  Jegarajah  said  that  at  paragraph  35  the  judge  reviewed  the
    credibility of the applicant's claim in  the  context  of  the  medical
    report.   This  was  consistent  with  Mibanga.   The  judge   attached
    considerable weight to Dr Hayward's medical analysis.  At paragraph 37,
    being fair to the Secretary of State, the judge applied the benefit  of
    the  doubt.   He  took  account  of  the  presidential  guidance  on  a
    vulnerable witness.  At paragraph 38 the judge formed his own  view  of
    the applicant's evidence.  He found that it  was  consistent  with  the
    clinical opinion.  At paragraph 39  he  resolved  the  tension  in  the
    evidence.

14.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that the medical  report  was  compelling.   The
    Secretary of State has not made out her case that the judge's  decision
    was irrational.

15.  She submitted that the Secretary of State has not made out  her  second
    ground which is that even if the torture claim is accepted,  the  judge
    was wrong to find that the applicant met  the  risk  categories  in  GJ
    (post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

16.  In reply Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds and repeated  that  the  judge
    dealt  separately  with  the  credibility  findings  and  the   medical
    evidence.

17.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that the effect of the judge's decision is  that
    the appellant's claim is based on a perceived political opinion by  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka.

18.  Following consideration of the  submissions  made  by  the  parties,  I
    found that the judge did not err in law for the  reasons  given  by  Ms
    Jegarajah.

19.  Mr Tarlow abandoned the  argument  that  the  medical  report  was  not
    consistent with the Istanbul Protocol.  He acknowledged that it was not
    their strongest point.

20.  I do not accept the argument that  the  judge  considered  the  medical
    evidence in isolation and not in the round. It was  apparent  from  the
    decision that the judge did not find the applicant's account  credible.
    Nevertheless, the judge considered the credibility of the applicant  in
    the context of Dr Hayward's medico-legal report and whilst finding that
    there were inconsistencies in the accounts, went on to  find  that  the
    applicant had been tortured as concluded by Dr Hayward.  It was not the
    judge's own opinion that the applicant had been tortured.  The  judge's
    decision was based solely on Dr Hayward's medico-legal report which the
    judge found to be very compelling.  I find that  the  judge's  decision
    cannot be said to be irrational.

21.  As also identified by Ms Jegarajah, the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    argued that even if the torture claim is not accepted,  the  judge  was
    wrong to find that the applicant met the risk categories in GJ.

22.  Accordingly, I find that the judge's  decision  does  not  disclose  an
    error of  law.   The  judge's  decision  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
    applicant shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 10 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

