
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01969/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 September 2017                  |On 27 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     HV
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Vokes, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr. K. Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Dhaliwal, promulgated on 14 October 2016,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to grant asylum.


  2. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "The grounds argue with merit that the judge  materially  erred  in
         law in his assessment of risk on return to Iran for the  appellant,
         whom he had accepted was a Christian convert."

The hearing


  4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  Mr. Hibbs accepted at  the  outset
     of the hearing that the decision involved  the  making  of  a  material
     error of law.  He accepted that the decision should be set  aside,  and
     remade, allowing the Appellant's appeal.  He  said  that  he  had  only
     received the file late on Friday and, had he had more  time,  he  would
     have contacted the Appellant's representatives in advance.


Error of law decision


  5. There has been no cross appeal to the findings  of  fact  made  by  the
     judge.  The judge found  the  Appellant  to  be  a  Christian  convert.
     However he found, despite this, that the Appellant would not be at risk
     on return to Iran.


  6. Mr. Hibbs referred me to the Country Information  and  Guidance,  Iran:
     Christians and Christian Converts, December 2015, found at E13  of  the
     Appellant's appeal bundle which was before the First-tier Tribunal.  In
     particular he referred to paragraph 3.1.4 (E18).  This states:


         "The right of Muslims to change their religion  is  not  recognised
         under Sharia law.  The religious conversion of Muslims  is  illegal
         in Iran.  Christians who have converted from Islam are at real risk
         of persecution in Iran, and a grant  of  asylum  is  likely  to  be
         appropriate."


  7. This paragraph reflects the guidance set out at paragraph 2.2.2 (E16).


  8. Mr. Hibbs conceded therefore that, having found that the Appellant  was
     a Christian convert, which finding  had  not  been  challenged  by  the
     Respondent, the judge should have found that he would  be  at  risk  on
     return.


  9. I find, adopting the unchallenged findings of the First-tier  Tribunal,
     that  the  Appellant  is  a  Christian  convert.   I  find   that   the
     Respondent's  guidance,  which  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
     indicates that there  is  a  risk  on  return  to  Iran  for  Christian
     converts.  I therefore find that the decision involves the making of  a
     material error of law for failure to take into  account  this  material
     evidence.

Notice of Decision

10. The appeal is allowed.  The decision involves the making of a  material
    error of law and I set the decision aside.

11. I remake  the  decision  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 25 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and so there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 25 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
