
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/01216/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 April 2018                        |On 11 May 2018                     |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    [F B]
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:         Mr David Clarke, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:        Ms Soraya Pascoe, Counsel instructed by Good
Advice UK

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Anonymity order

I have made  an  anonymity  order  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court
directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  or  any   form   of
publication thereof shall identify the original appellant, whether  directly
or indirectly. This order applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
   decision on 23 January 2017 to refuse her international protection  under
   the Refugee Convention or humanitarian protection grounds,  or  leave  to
   remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.  The claimant is  a
   67-year old woman and a Lebanese citizen.

2. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  order.   I  consider
   that it is appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to do so, by reason of  the
   involvement of two children in these proceedings, the  claimant's  grand-
   daughters.

1. The following preserved findings have been agreed  between  the  parties.
   The claimant is a Lebanese citizen born in  1950,  married  in  1971  and
   lived in Beirut until she came to the United Kingdom  when  her  marriage
   failed in 2006.  She has three children, two sons in Lebanon, one married
   and one divorced, both with  children.   Her  husband  is  estranged  and
   remains in Lebanon.  It seems that they are not formally divorced.

2. The claimant came to the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor  in  March  2006,
   returned to Lebanon, came again in June  2006  and  has  been  here  ever
   since.  Her daughter, son-in-law, and two grand-daughters are all British
   citizens and it is accepted that it would be unreasonable to  expect  the
   children to relocate to Lebanon.  The elder grand-daughter was born  with
   liver problems and has had three liver transplants so far, the latest  in
   June 2016, and needs a high level of monitoring.  She is  now  almost  an
   adult but has special needs.

3. The claimant's appeal  was  allowed  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
   Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended),  on  the
   basis of her age, her lack of links in Lebanon, but  in  particular,  the
   assistance she gives her daughter with her grand-daughters, who  are  now
   17 and 10 years old. The elder grand-daughter is said to require  a  high
   level of monitoring, careful diet, female-specific personal care,  and  a
   lot of support to avoid rejection  of  the  third  liver  transplant,  as
   occurred with the previous two transplants.

Background

4. The claimant was married in Lebanon in 1971 and lived  with  her  husband
   in Beirut.  She has been a housewife all her  life  and  has  never  been
   employed. The claimant's only daughter lives in the United  Kingdom:  the
   daughter and her husband, and both the  claimant's  grand-daughters,  are
   all British citizens.  The claimant's husband, sons, and two brothers all
   live in the Lebanon.  One son is married  with  children,  the  other  is
   divorced. The claimant says they are all estranged from her.

5. It is the claimant's case that her marriage was an abusive one, that  her
   sons do not wish to have anything to do with  her,  because  their  wives
   dislike her, and that she has not had contact with her own  brothers  for
   over 30 years, because after her marriage, her husband forbade her to  do
   so.  She says that she does not know where they are now, or if  they  are
   alive or dead.

6. In early 2006, her husband  rejected  the  claimant  and  left  her.   In
   February 2006,  the  claimant  telephoned  her  daughter  in  the  United
   Kingdom, crying hysterically due to her ongoing anguish in Lebanon  as  a
   separated woman.  Her daughter suggested a visit:  the  claimant  applied
   for entry clearance to visit her daughter and grand-daughters and did  so
   in March 2006.  She stayed here for about a  month,  then  went  home  to
   Lebanon.

7. The claimant came back to the United Kingdom for a further visit in  June
   2006: her leave was due to expire on 23 August 2006.  Before it  expired,
   a civil war broke out in Lebanon in July 2006 and the claimant called the
   Home Office, asking what to do.  She was advised to complete form FLR(O),
   and did so.  In August 2006, the application was returned as  incomplete.
   The application was resubmitted on  5  September  2006,  at  which  time,
   public sources confirm that UNIFIL was intervening  in  Lebanon  and  the
   Lebanese army was deployed in Southern Lebanon.  Israeli troops continued
   to occupy Lebanon until October 2006.  On 24 November  2006,  the  asylum
   application was  acknowledged  and  the  fee  returned,  as  no  fee  was
   required.

8. The Secretary of State did not make a decision on the  claimant's  asylum
   claim for seven years, despite efforts by the claimant's daughter to find
   out the outcome of the claim.  The claimant continued to  live  with  her
   daughter and the daughter's family.  Her daughter chased the Home  Office
   in 2006,  2008,  2009  and  2010,  and  finally  through  her  Member  of
   Parliament, Glenda Jackson MP.  In 2010, the Home  Office  wrote  to  say
   that the claim was in the backlog of older asylum applications which  the
   UKBA was in the process of concluding.

9. In 2013,  responding  to  Glenda  Jackson  MP,  the  Secretary  of  State
   asserted that she had written to  the  claimant  in  2006  returning  the
   application and telling the claimant to  claim  asylum  in  person.   The
   claimant was informed by that letter that she had no basis of stay in the
   United Kingdom.  The claimant disputes that she was sent  a  letter  from
   the Secretary of State in 2006:  that assertion was inconsistent with the
   2010 letter which she did receive, saying that her asylum  claim  was  in
   the backlog and still pending.

10. On 27 July 2016 the claimant made an  asylum  claim,  with  advice  from
   Good Advice UK, who continue to represent her.   She  says  she  was  not
   adequately advised that she should  do  so  when  she  made  her  initial
   enquiries in 2006.   Her  asylum  claim  has  failed  and  she  does  not
   challenge the dismissal of her appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
   refusal to grant asylum, humanitarian protection or leave to remain under
   Article 3 ECHR.

11. The claimant relies on her private and family life rights under  Article
   8 ECHR.   She has been living with her  daughter  and  grandchildren  for
   almost 12 years.  The daughter has returned to  work,  and  the  claimant
   helps with her grand-daughters, getting them  to  and  from  school,  and
   organising food and  personal  care  for  the  elder  grand-daughter,  in
   particular.  The claimant's daughter takes over childcare when  she  gets
   home from work.

First-tier Tribunal decision

12. On 20 August 2017, the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that it  was
   likely that there was some degree of  exaggeration  in  relation  to  the
   breakdown of the relationship  between  the  claimant  and  her  sons  in
   Lebanon, but that those relationships were of much less significance than
   her relationships in the United Kingdom.  The First-tier  Tribunal  found
   that Kugathas dependency existed between the claimant  and  her  daughter
   and grand-daughters. The Judge took into account the claimant's living in
   the household of her daughter and son-in-law and  her  closeness  to  her
   grand-daughters, and  he  held  that  the  claimant  had  a  genuine  and
   subsisting parental relationship with her grandchildren, such that family
   life existed between them.

13. The Tribunal applied part VA of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
   Act 2002 (as amended),  noting  that  the  claimant's  grandchildren  are
   British citizens  and  that  therefore,  they  could  not  reasonably  be
   expected to go and live  in  Lebanon  with  the  claimant,  if  she  were
   returned.  Her removal would end her family life with  her  daughter  and
   grandchildren. Applying section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act,  the  Judge
   considered that the  public  interest  did  not  require  the  claimant's
   deportation.

14. The Judge accepted that the claimant could not meet the requirements  of
   the Immigration Rules (paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM)  but  considered
   that there were sufficient exceptional circumstances to make her  removal
   disproportionate.  He allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR outside the
   Immigration Rules.

15. All other grounds of appeal were dismissed.  The claimant did not cross-
   appeal  against  the  refusal  of  refugee  protection  or   humanitarian
   protection and accordingly, this appeal turns exclusively  on  Article  8
   ECHR outside the Rules.   The Secretary of State appealed.

Secretary of State's appeal

16. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal argued that,  applying  R  on
   the application of RK v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   (s.117B(6): 'parental relationship') IJR [2016]  UKUT  00031  (IAC),  the
   First-tier Tribunal had misdirected itself in law, as  the  claimant  had
   not 'stepped into the shoes' of  her  grandchildren's  parents  and  that
   section 117B(6) was not relevant to this appeal.  The claimant  lived  in
   the household of her daughter and son-in-law: her  role  was  that  of  a
   voluntary carer for her grandchildren.

Permission to appeal

17. On 20 December 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  granted  permission  to
   appeal in the following terms:

         "In applying section 117(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 (as amended), it is arguable that the  Judge  erred
         in law in finding that the [claimant] had a genuine and  subsisting
         'parental relationship' with her  grandchildren,  given  that  they
         lived in the household of the children's parents and  so  it  could
         not be said that she had 'stepped into the shoes' of a parent  (see
         R (RK) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]  UKUT
         00031 (IAC)."

18. The claimant did not serve a Rule 24 Reply to the grant  of  permission.
   That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.





Error of law hearing

19. At the error of law hearing, Ms Pascoe agreed that there  was  a  patent
   error of law in the conflation  of  parent/grandparent  and  the  section
   117B(6) exception.  The hearing was adjourned  for  the  decision  to  be
   remade in the Upper Tribunal.

Remaking the decision

20. At the resumed hearing, the claimant and  her  daughter  gave  evidence,
   with the assistance of a Lebanese Arabic interpreter. There  was  also  a
   bundle of additional documents.

Documentary evidence

21. The claimant's bundle contains a letter translated on 21 December  2016,
   written from the claimant's husband to her daughter.  It is undated, both
   in the original and in translation.  It says this:

         "Dear Daughter,

         I would like that your mother [the claimant] stays with you because
         I cannot fulfil all my requirements as my  financial  situation  is
         totally ruined and I even cannot afford the  rent  of  a  house  in
         order to live together, after I  was  forced  to  leave  our  house
         located in the southern suburb of Beirut, and after all  our  house
         items were stolen.  This made us go to my father's house in  Beirut
         and this caused a dispute between the siblings and  aggravated  the
         dispute with your mother and caused our separation.

         You know that your brother H was shot as a  result  of  an  assault
         from  Hezbollah,  who  controls  the  State,  and  the   government
         authorities could not do anything to protect him or deter them.  He
         now moves with great care as  a  result  of  control  of  Amal  and
         Hezbollah on the country.   Excuse  me  for  this  move  because  I
         cannot bear any more.

         Best regards, your father [name supplied]."

22. There is a lease for what was presumably the family home in  Lebanon;  a
   letter from Middle East Airlines confirming  the  daughter's  employment;
   and a quantity of medical documents about the  claimant's  grand-daughter
   L, beginning in 2014 before her third transplant.  A letter  of  11  June
   2014 confirmed that L's menses began when she was  11.   From  2013/2014,
   she  suffered  menorrhagia  (abnormally  heavy  uterine  bleeding  during
   menstrual periods), and very  irregular  menses.  She  was  also  getting
   nosebleeds every 2-3 days, though that was  improving,  and  in  December
   2013 she had blood in her stools.  Insertion of an endometrial  coil  had
   been unsuccessful, and the coil had been removed.  Other  treatments  for
   heavy bleeding had been tried, after the claimant's elder  grand-daughter
   lost consciousness and was  hospitalised  with  anaemia.  The  claimant's
   elder grand-daughter had low  energy  levels  and  was  often  tired  and
   sleepy.  Her appetite varied; sometimes she was unwilling to  eat,  while
   at other times, she ate every 2 hours, and became  bloated  and  vomited.
   Stopping dairy foods had helped with a constipation problem.

23. At an assessment meeting at Kings College Hospital  in  September  2014,
   during the pre-transplant assessment for the third transplant, there  was
   a description of the child's complex learning  difficulties:  information
   needed to be presented in small chunks  and  time  given  to  process  it
   before a response was required.  Her mother reported that it was becoming
   increasingly difficult to enable the child to retain a good understanding
   of her medical conditions.  Sometimes she became distressed and it  could
   take an hour to persuade her to  take  her  medication.   The  child  had
   missed a lot of  schooling  due  to  being  unwell.   With  the  help  of
   individual psychological work and a personalised book to enable the child
   to retain  understanding  of  her  medical  and  nutritional  needs,  her
   resistance to medication had been reduced to 15 minutes.

24. A speech and language report in November 2014 noted that the  claimant's
   elder  grand-daughter  has  microcephaly  (small  head)  and  a  moderate
   learning disability, including difficulties with  her  understanding  and
   use of language and  some  auditory  memory  difficulties.   English  and
   Arabic were spoken at home and  she  had  been  attending  Swiss  Cottage
   School, a school for special needs, since 2011.   She  needed  simplified
   spoken instruction and information, supported by cue cards with  pictures
   and symbols, or  written  instructions.   She  had  difficulty  answering
   complex questions. Her communication difficulties were assessed as likely
   to  impact  on  her  ability  to  access  all  aspects  of  the  National
   Curriculum, including literacy development, and she continued to  need  a
   classroom environment adapted to support her learning needs.

25. A further report in 2015 from the Thomas Cook Children's  Critical  Care
   Paediatric High Dependency Unit at King's College  Hospital  (the  Thomas
   Cook Unit) recorded that the child continued  to  have  episodes  of  big
   upper gastrointestinal bleeds.  She was found to have a  large  haematoma
   in the lumen of the stomach and had been bleeding persistently,  although
   it was becoming less severe.  She had developed unprovoked  tonic  clonic
   seizures and  was  in  poor  general  condition,  with  recurrent  fever,
   leucocytosis and basal  consolidation  (a  lung  condition  which  causes
   patients to feel short of breath or  fatigued).  In  September  2015  the
   child was admitted to hospital again with blood in her  stools;  she  was
   treated and eventually stabilised.  In March 2016 she was seen again  and
   was much better, though still having very heavy periods.   On  5  October
   2016, her periods were reported as getting worse. On 31 January 2017, she
   had been experiencing a prolonged period for  3  weeks.   The  child  was
   still taking anticoagulant therapy because of her  liver  transplant,  to
   reduce the risk of rejection.

26. On 12 July 2017, a letter  from  Anne-Marie  Sworak,  a  family  liaison
   nurse at the Thomas Cook Unit, summarised  the  claimant's  elder  grand-
   daughter's history as follows:

         "[This child] was recently admitted to children's intensive care on
         28 May [2016] and was in intensive care until  October  2016.   She
         was incredibly sick and  critical  throughout  most  of  her  stay.
         Although [she] is stable at  present,  she  has  the  potential  to
         become ill quite  quickly  and  need  intensive  care  again.   The
         grandmother, [the claimant] has been the  primary  carer  for  [her
         younger sister] all this time, making sure that she  has  the  care
         that she needs, from food to education, and making  sure  that  she
         keeps that strong bond going through the family.

         Although most of the time [the claimant's daughter] cared for [this
         child] when she was in hospital and stayed by her bedside  all  day
         and all night, sometimes [the claimant] would take  over  and  look
         after [her grand-daughter] whilst [the daughter] took a break.  The
         bond between [the child] and her grandmother  is  very  obvious  as
         [the child] refuses to have anyone apart from  her  mother  or  her
         grandmother do her personal cares when she is  in  hospital.   [The
         claimant] always cooked for the whole family and brought  the  food
         to the hospital which encouraged [her grand-daughter]  to  eat,  as
         she only ate [the claimant's] home cooked food and this helped  her
         recovery.   Emotionally,  [the  claimant]  was  the  one  who  kept
         everyone's spirits up, especially  when  [her  grand-daughter]  was
         very critical and the family had to be separated for  months  at  a
         time.  [The child's father] was working and trying to  support  the
         family financially.  It was also nice  for  him  to  come  home  to
         prepared meals but more importantly, the  real  updates  about  his
         daughter which he got from [the claimant].

         As I mentioned previously, [the child] is currently well, she still
         has numerous appointments to attend in the hospital, and she has to
         take her essential medications in order not to  reject  the  liver,
         and eat particular foods, to encourage recuperation.  She also goes
         to school, which is a different school from [her  younger  sister],
         and needs extra support as her learning at the crucial time of  her
         GCSEs was affected by long periods in hospital.

         The support that [the claimant] has given in the past  has  ensured
         that [the  daughter]  is  able  to  concentrate  on  [the  child's]
         recovery, and she has kept the family going.  The support that [the
         claimant] is currently giving the family is in my opinion the  only
         way that this family unit will repair itself and come back together
         as a stable family to  ensure  the  best  recuperation  and  stable
         family unit.  She is an incredible mother and grandmother and in my
         opinion she is a vital member of the  family  here  in  the  United
         Kingdom."

27. There is a letter from the elder  grand-daughter  dated  14  July  2017,
   confirming the strong bond she has with the claimant, and  one  from  the
   younger grand-daughter, saying that the claimant 'cooks me  yummy  foods'
   and that she cannot go to sleep without the claimant telling her a  fairy
   tale, and that 'my grandma is the best'.

28. As  recently  as  January  2018,  the  elder  grand-daughter  was  still
   reported as having poor appetite and  feeding  difficulties,  and  on  18
   February 2018, King's College  Hospital  noted  that  the  heavy  periods
   continued, despite various treatments to reduce them.



Claimant's evidence

29. The claimant had prepared a witness statement dated  16  April  2018  as
   her evidence in chief.  In answer to a question  from  me,  the  claimant
   said that her daughter had read and translated the witness  statement  to
   her and she was happy to adopt it as true and correct.

30. The claimant's statement said that she was  born  in  Tripoli,  Lebanon,
   and was a Sunni Muslim, as were all her family members.   The  claimant's
   husband was also a Lebanese citizen and was now 88 years old and retired.
    Before his retirement, he worked as a wholesaler,  buying  used  clothes
   from factory outlets and selling them on to smaller shops.   Despite  the
   length of their marriage (since 1971), there had always been problems  in
   the relationship. The claimant was very unhappy in the marriage  and  her
   husband and she had drifted far apart.  The  claimant  spent  many  years
   trying to keep the family together and to let  her  children  live  their
   lives.  Her husband had abandoned the claimant in 2006: she had not heard
   from him directly since then.  The claimant accepted  that  her  marriage
   had irretrievably broken down.

31. The claimant's two sons were grown up and had married and moved to  live
   with their wives in Beirut. The elder son married a woman who  hated  the
   claimant's presence and would not allow her  to  stay  with  them.   That
   couple had two sons, but the marriage had ended.   Despite  his  divorce,
   her elder son maintained his distance from the claimant and had  made  no
   attempt to contact or stay in touch with her. The younger son  was  still
   happily married, with one son.  He worked in  a  Hajj  and  Umrah  travel
   agency, but the couple did not wish the claimant  to  be  part  of  their
   lives.  The claimant said that before she left Lebanon, her  relationship
   with her sons was  close  to  breakdown  due  to  the  daughters-in-law's
   dislike of her.  She never saw her grandchildren in Beirut, due to  their
   parents' dislike of her.

32. The claimant found the situation heart-breaking. In  her  old  age,  she
   felt very vulnerable living alone in Lebanon, in an  unsafe  area,  where
   the community looked down on her  as  her  husband  had  left  her.   The
   claimant felt as though she had wasted her life on  people  (her  husband
   and two sons) who had never really loved her and, as soon as she could do
   nothing further for them, left her to 'rot on my own' because she  was  a
   liability. While in Lebanon, the claimant had made many attempts over the
   years to reach out to her sons, but without success.  She considered that
   her sons must be happy to have finally got rid of  her:  certainly,  they
   had made no efforts to see how she was since she had come to  the  United
   Kingdom, and she did not expect to be able to rely on them  if  she  were
   returned to Lebanon.

33. The claimant's daughter is a British citizen  and  the  relationship  is
   good between them.   The  claimant  now  regards  her  daughter  and  the
   daughter's family as her only family.  The daughter  has  'two  beautiful
   daughters who are the light of [the claimant's] life'.

34. The claimant's elder grand-daughter  required  constant  care  following
   her three liver transplants, the most recent in 2016.  Even  at  17,  she
   needed all the love and support she could get from family  members.   Her
   condition had yet to improve, despite  the  liver  transplants,  and  she
   still required constant care and  attention.   The  elder  grand-daughter
   preferred the claimant's cooking, which was healthy:  she  was  reluctant
   even to eat her mother's cooking.  It would mentally and  emotionally  be
   very difficult for this child to accept that the claimant would no longer
   be part of her life.

35. The claimant was happy to lighten her daughter's load  by  helping  with
   her grandchildren, and the elder grand-daughter in particular.   She  had
   been helping with the elder grand-daughter since the child  was  6  years
   old, and with the younger grand-daughter since her birth.   The  claimant
   ensured that her elder grand-daughter took her medications on time during
   the day, while her daughter was at work.  She also helped  to  bathe  the
   child, and made sure she ate properly and drank lots of fluids.

36. In cross-examination, the claimant was asked about the letter which  her
   husband wrote to her daughter in approximately 2010, which was  mentioned
   in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The claimant understood that
   the letter said her husband wanted no more to do  with  her  and  was  no
   longer prepared to take responsibility for the claimant.  She  could  not
   remember when the letter arrived. The claimant  denied  that  the  letter
   from her husband was fabricated to support her claim.  The  claimant  and
   her husband had been having marital  problems  for  a  long  while.   Her
   husband was a hard man  who  cut  her  off  from  her  family.   She  had
   suffered. She had supported her husband for a long time, just to bring up
   the children, and she felt upset that they had rejected her.

37. The claimant confirmed her evidence  about  her  estrangement  from  her
   sons and their families. Her elder son was divorced: his  wife  took  the
   children.  She could not remember when, but it was after she came to  the
   United Kingdom.  The claimant could not explain  why  he  was  still  not
   contacting her, even though his marriage was over.  It was the claimant's
   daughter who told her about her son's divorce:  they still had people who
   worked at the airport who knew him. As she was not in  contact  with  her
   sons, she simply had no idea why they were not speaking to her.

38. The claimant explained that during the marriage, her husband  restricted
   her contact with her brothers.  She felt that they had grown to hate  her
   and taken their own way in life.  She did not know where  they  were,  or
   even if they were still alive.  The claimant did not know if her daughter
   was in contact with her uncles: her daughter would not wish to  hurt  the
   claimant.  The claimant said it was not unusual for families  to  be  cut
   off in this way in Lebanon: it could be caused by economic circumstances,
   the war, or other reasons.

39. After her husband rejected her, the claimant had lost her home  and  had
   gone to live with a cousin, in her uncle and aunt's home.  Her  sons  had
   not been willing to help her then and she had no  reason  to  think  that
   they would be willing now.   Her uncle and aunt had died since  she  came
   to the United Kingdom, but she did not know when.

40. Her family now was her daughter and  the  daughter's  husband,  and  her
   grand-daughters.  She had no other relatives in the United  Kingdom,  nor
   did her son-in-law.  Her son-in-law was born outside the United  Kingdom,
   probably in Lebanon: he had brothers and sisters there, but  his  parents
   had died.

41. Her son-in-law had a job, but she was unsure what it was.  Sometimes  he
   was home, sometimes he went  out.  His  work  appeared  to  be  flexible,
   depending on when he got jobs. She did not interact much with him in case
   anything went wrong between them.  Her daughter worked  for  an  airline,
   and together the couple supported the claimant financially.  Her daughter
   did  everything  for  the  claimant,  supporting  her   financially   and
   emotionally, shopping for her, whatever she wanted.  The claimant did not
   know the couple's income: she did not ask.  They used to send  her  small
   amounts of money even before she came to the United Kingdom, when she was
   living in Lebanon.  She did not know if they would do so  again,  if  she
   were returned there.

42. Regarding her relationship with her grand-daughters, the  claimant  said
   that the elder child had already had two liver surgeries before she  came
   to the United Kingdom.  Her daughter had not been able to  work,  because
   the child was very ill.  Since the claimant came to the  United  Kingdom,
   her daughter had been able to return to work.  Her grand-daughter went to
   a special school, which the claimant's daughter had chosen,  because  she
   was having special education.   The claimant had no input into the choice
   of doctor: that was dealt with by the hospital.  The  claimant  took  her
   grand-daughters to and from their schools, but did not interact with  the
   teachers, because she did not know how to talk  in  English.   She  would
   drop off both children, but if they needed to talk to teachers, they  did
   it themselves.  Her elder grand-daughter did not  like  interacting  with
   others, or mixing socially, because of her condition.  The child did  not
   have friends.

43. In the morning, the claimant would help her elder grand-daughter  choose
   what to wear and then help her to dress.  Sometimes she helped the  child
   shower, if her mother was at work.  In the morning and the afternoon, the
   claimant would prepare the child's medicine and give  it  to  her.    Her
   elder grand-daughter had to drink 3 litres a day  because  of  her  liver
   problems, and the claimant made sure she did  so.   The  claimant  cooked
   healthy  food  for  her  grandchildren,  particularly  her  elder  grand-
   daughter, with no spices and lots of water to  drink:  the  claimant  was
   very careful about the child's diet.  The claimant also  fed  the  child,
   during the day, before her mother got home.  Once the claimant's daughter
   was home, it was she who looked after the  children,  not  the  claimant.
   Her daughter got home late, and usually did not cook, unless she was  off
   work.  The claimant's daughter bought the few  clothes  the  elder  child
   needed, mainly trousers and t-shirts.

44. Even when her elder grand-daughter was in hospital, the  claimant  would
   bring food in from home, because the child would not eat  hospital  food,
   saying that it did not taste like her grandmother's  food.  The  claimant
   said that her elder grand-daughter loved her very much, and she felt  the
   same.  She had taught both her grand-daughters the Arabic  language,  and
   read them  stories.   Sometimes,  her  elder  grand-daughter  would  say,
   'Grandma, I'd like you to live a long time, you won't die because I  need
   you in my life'.

45. Mr Clarke asked the claimant whether the real reason for her  coming  to
   the United Kingdom was to help with the  day-to-day  care  of  her  elder
   grand-daughter so that her daughter could return to work.   The  claimant
   explained the sequence of events, and how war had broken out  during  her
   second visit in July 2006.  She had not worked, while  in  Lebanon.   The
   claimant said she had not  investigated  accommodation  in  Lebanon:  she
   wanted to stay in the United Kingdom so that she would not lose the  love
   of her United Kingdom family members.

46. There was no re-examination.

Evidence of claimant's daughter

47. The claimant's daughter had also prepared  a  witness  statement,  which
   she adopted.  In answer to a question from me,  the  claimant's  daughter
   confirmed that she had written her statement herself and that it was true
   and correct.  She wished the statement to stand as her evidence in chief.



48. The claimant's daughter said she worked  8.5  hours  a  day  for  Middle
   Eastern Airlines as a ticketing and reservations  officer.   Her  husband
   was a self-employed driver, working an 8-hour shift each  day.   Both  of
   them worked hard to support the family,  especially  to  accommodate  the
   elder child's medical condition.  She said that  the  claimant  had  been
   through a lot, over the years, and that it was rather unfortunate that in
   her old age, she lacked the support of her husband and sons.  Her  father
   had abandoned the claimant and had not been in touch with  her  for  more
   than 10  years.   The  claimant's  daughter  was  disappointed  that  her
   brothers thought they were entitled to enjoy their  family  lives,  while
   excluding the claimant, and to leave the claimant to fend for herself.

49. The claimant's daughter said that  her  mother  had  a  total  breakdown
   while in Lebanon after her husband's desertion:  life alone was  far  too
   difficult for her and with all the conflicts going  on  in  Lebanon,  the
   daughter had been really worried. It was entirely unjust and unreasonable
   to return an elderly woman to a war zone, where there would be nobody  to
   support and look after her, and Hezbollah would be able  to  target  her,
   due to her Sunni Muslim background.  If the claimant were to be  returned
   to Lebanon, and then became ill, her daughter would be unable  to  travel
   to Lebanon and stay to look after her mother, as she would  wish  to  do,
   because of the complexity of her elder daughter's needs.

50. The claimant had all the moral and financial support  she  needed,  here
   in the United Kingdom, and her grandchildren shared  a  close  bond  with
   her.   The claimant's daughter was aware that she was now all her  mother
   had.  It was both her duty and her desire to provide the  best  care  she
   could for her mother, and to repay the  claimant  for  the  struggle  she
   endured and the  sacrifices  she  made  to  provide  for  and  raise  her
   daughter.

51. The claimant's daughter confirmed that  her  elder  child  had  suffered
   liver failure from birth: her first liver transplant was  in  2001,  when
   she was a year old, and the most recent in 2015.  It was  a  day  to  day
   struggle for the child to maintain  stable  health.   She  suffered  from
   multiple side effects, including severe  bleeding  from  her  womb,  much
   heavier than a normal period, which lasted for days on  end.   The  child
   had learning difficulties and still required constant  supervision.   The
   absence of the claimant would detrimentally affect  her  grand-daughter's
   health and wellbeing.

52. The claimant's daughter said she did  not  know  how  she  would  manage
   without the claimant.  The younger child started school each day at  0900
   hours, and the elder child's school began at 0930, on days when  she  was
   well enough to attend. Most of the time,  the  elder  child  stayed  home
   because she was  not  well  enough  for  school.   Her  elder  daughter's
   medication had to be administered 11 times a day, at 30-minute  intervals
   between 0800 and 0930, then at 11 am, 3 p.m., 6  p.m.,  and  half  hourly
   between 2000  and  2130.   The  claimant  also  gave  both  physical  and
   emotional support to her grand-daughters:  caring  for  the  elder  child
   could be overwhelming, and at times of crisis  when  that  child  was  in
   hospital, the family's life would turn upside down and  they  would  need
   someone to look after the younger child. Her support was essential to the
   younger daughter's emotional wellbeing too.

53. In cross-examination, the daughter said that she  earned  �20/21000  per
   annum,  considerably  less  than  the  �24000  she  told  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  She said her income varied up and down, dependant on sickness,
   or the circumstances of the company where she worked at different  times.
   She said that she was not lying about the reduction in her pay, and could
   produce payroll information if required. The  daughter's  husband  worked
   part time as a driver for a family, and then they would give  him  money.
   She never asked him how much he earned.

54. The daughter's husband would accompany his elder  daughter  to  hospital
   appointments but not stay home all day with her.  He  said  that  he  had
   done his job and left it to the daughter and the claimant to care for his
   children.  There was no witness statement from the husband, as nobody had
   ever suggested to the daughter that it would be  useful  or  appropriate,
   nor had they asked what he did for  a  living.  The  daughter's  had  two
   sisters, and she thought, one brother who were still in Beirut.

55. Mr Clarke asked whether the United  Kingdom  family  and  the  husband's
   family in Beirut could not  jointly  support  the  claimant  if  she  was
   returned to Lebanon.  The daughter explained that it did  not  work  like
   that: the claimant was not related to her husband's family and  they  had
   no responsibility for her.  They would have their own lives and problems.



56. The daughter said that it had been very hard for her mother  to  believe
   that her husband just did not want her any more.  She  thought  that  was
   why the letter had been sent.  Her parents had a lot of problems when she
   was growing up in Lebanon, they were always arguing, from  when  she  was
   small, but getting worse and worse over time.

57. Mr Clarke asked about the letter from the claimant's father,  which  was
   recorded in the First-tier Tribunal decision as  dating  from  2010.   On
   reflection, the daughter thought that the letter was 2008 or earlier. She
   said she was not very good with exact dates, but  knew  that  the  letter
   came after the war in Lebanon. The daughter had a disagreement  with  her
   father on the telephone about the claimant's situation, arguing that  now
   the war was over, her mother could return home.   She  asked  her  father
   repeatedly not to desert her mother, but he refused to change his mind.

58. After that conversation, her father had sent the letter by hand  to  his
   daughter, through a family friend, to make it clear that he expected  the
   daughter to have the claimant live with her.  The letter  confirmed  that
   her father did not  need  his  wife  any  more,  and  did  not  want  the
   responsibility of her now.  When the letter  arrived,  the  daughter  was
   very angry with her father and very disappointed in him.  Her father then
   stopped talking to the daughter and her family, and she  no  longer  knew
   either his telephone number or where he was.

59. The daughter was not in touch with her brothers  in  Lebanon.   She  was
   very cross with her brothers: the claimant cared about everyone  and  had
   sacrificed for everybody in the family.  The  family  did  not  know  the
   younger one's wife at all, as she never got in touch with  them  and  put
   pressure on him not to do so  either.  The  elder  of  her  brothers  was
   divorced, a long time ago.  She had  heard  that  he  left  his  wife  in
   2007/2008 but could not remember exactly.   Dates  were  not  her  strong
   point.  Although he was now free of his marriage, her elder  brother  was
   still not prepared to be involved with the claimant.

60. The claimant thought that the problems were caused by the  sons'  wives,
   but her daughter was not so sure.  The claimant did not want  to  believe
   the problem was her sons, but the  daughter  thought  it  was.   If  they
   wanted to be in touch, the brothers could and would  be,  but  they  were
   not.  She was sure there was a reason, but did  not  understand  what  it
   was: perhaps the sons had taken their  father's  side,  and  maybe  their
   father had put ideas in  their  head.   The  daughter  denied  vigorously
   saying that the family had no contact with family members in Lebanon just
   so that her mother could stay; God was watching her and she  was  telling
   the truth.

61. The daughter said that she was on the claimant's  side:  she  would  die
   for the claimant if necessary. The claimant had nobody to look after her,
   so how could the daughter throw her on the street. The daughter  observed
   that she had been very surprised by the social, medical  and  educational
   support in the United Kingdom. If her elder daughter  had  been  born  in
   Lebanon, she would not be alive now.  She did not want to lose her mother
   either.

62. In re-examination, the daughter said that the division of care  for  the
   elder daughter was that her husband did the  hospital  appointments,  the
   daughter worked all day and cared for the child in the evenings, and that
   the claimant covered the  daytime.  The  child  could  hardly  walk,  and
   sometimes she did not have enough energy  to  go  to  the  lavatory;  the
   claimant  cooked  her  healthy  food,  helped  her  bathe   (particularly
   important in view of the recurrent heavy bleeding) and ensured  that  she
   ate, took fluid, and received appropriate medication at the  right  time.
   The physical care for their daughter was not her husband's responsibility
   culturally: when asked, he said 'I am not a woman, to do this job'.   The
   claimant was her mother, and her life: the daughter could not survive and
   face all of these problems without her.


Submissions

63. In submissions for the  respondent,  Mr  Clarke  reminded  me  that  the
   claimant cannot meet the provisions of the Immigration Rules.  He  argued
   that nevertheless, Article 8  outside  the  Rules  should  be  considered
   through the prism of the Rules: there was a very high  threshold  in  the
   Rules for adult dependant relatives. Mr Clarke acknowledged the existence
   of family life between the claimant and her daughter and grand-daughters,
   but reminded me that there was evidence that the  daughter  also  cooked,
   but no corroboration of the daughter's assertion that  the  husband  said
   that helping out with his daughters was not his responsibility as a man.

64. Mr Clarke relied on RK at [42]-[44] and  observed  that  the  claimant's
   relationship with her grandchildren was not parental.   She  helped  out,
   but the grand-daughters had parents and she was not stepping  into  their
   shoes.  He suggested that the real situation was that  the  claimant  had
   come to the United Kingdom to provide care  for  her  grand-daughters  so
   that her daughter could return to work.  The claimant  spoke  no  English
   and was not self-supporting, so all of the family life  relied  upon  was
   precarious and should be given little weight. The claimant  had  made  no
   enquiry regarding accommodation in the Lebanon and  it  was  not  in  the
   public interest to allow the family to present the Tribunal with  a  fait
   accompli without making the proper application  for  leave  to  enter  or
   remain and meeting the requirements of the Rules.

65. Mr Clarke invited me to  disbelieve  the  claimant  and  her  daughter's
   evidence of the circumstances in Lebanon and the lack of  family  support
   there for the claimant. In particular, he asked me to put weight  on  the
   differences in the date given by the claimant's daughter for her father's
   letter (2010 in the First-tier Tribunal and 2008 or before in  the  Upper
   Tribunal); to reject her explanation why the letter had been written  and
   treat it as a fabrication in support of the present claim; to  disbelieve
   the account of the  family  rift  with  the  sons  and  their  wives;  to
   disbelieve the daughter's explanation why her husband's family would  not
   be required to assist; to disbelieve the daughter's account that she  did
   not know how much her husband earned; and to draw  an  adverse  inference
   from the lack of any witness statement or oral evidence from the husband.
     In addition, Mr Clarke asked me to place no weight on the  evidence  of
   the nurse, Ms Slowak, who had only observed the family  while  the  elder
   grand-daughter was in hospital.

66. Mr Clarke asked me to substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.

67. For the claimant, Ms Pascoe relied on her skeleton argument, and on  the
   schedule of preserved findings agreed between the parties.  Her  skeleton
   argument sets out the evidence from the claimant and  her  daughter,  and
   the medical evidence about her elder grand-daughter. Ms Pascoe  contended
   that the elder child's needs and dependency on her  grandmother  must  be
   taken into account when considering Article 8 ECHR; 'whilst the  claimant
   is not [her grand-daughter's] parent, her role in caring for [the  child]
   has been significant'.   Ms Pascoe's further contended that in respect of
   Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules, the proposed interference would  engage
   Article 8 ECHR and be  disproportionate.   The  claimant  is  financially
   dependent on her daughter and son-in-law in the United Kingdom,  and  her
   presence her obviates the need to spend public funds on a carer.

68. In her oral submissions, Ms Pascoe submitted that the  evidence  of  the
   witnesses  should  be   treated   as   credible,   despite   some   minor
   inconsistencies, and also to place weight on the evidence of  Ms  Sworak,
   who had worked with the family over a long period.

69. In particular, although the claimant blamed  her  sons'  wives  for  the
   breakdown  of  the  mother-son  relationship  with  them,  her   daughter
   considered that the issue might be  more  related  to  loyalty  to  their
   father.  There was evidence of a dispute between  the  daughter  and  her
   father.  It was right that there was no evidence from the son-in-law, but
   the Tribunal should accept the daughter's evidence that she had not asked
   him: the family were  not  legal  experts  and  it  was  unreasonable  to
   speculate what his evidence might have been.

70. The claimant was now of retirement age, a woman  who  had  never  worked
   and who had nobody to turn to in Lebanon.  If she were sent back  to  re-
   establish herself there, she would have an uphill struggle and  it  would
   be extremely difficult.  Ms Pascoe suggested that reintegration  of  this
   claimant in Lebanon would be a practical impossibility.

71. On the other hand, the claimant had a unique  place  in  her  daughter's
   family in the United Kingdom, who were supportive of her, financially and
   emotionally.  She was very much needed by her elder  grand-daughter:  the
   child's needs could not easily be  managed  by  carers,  or  her  father,
   because of their intimacy. It would be extremely harsh, after  12  years,
   to expect her to leave, nor would it be in the child's best interest.  Ms
   Pascoe asked me to allow the appeal.

Discussion

72.  There  is  no  parental  relationship  between  the  claimant  and  her
   grandchildren.  The test in RK is not  met,  as  the  biological  parents
   continue to care for them.  The  only  question,  therefore,  is  whether
   there are here exceptional circumstances for which leave to remain  ought
   to be given outside the Rules.

73. As regards credibility, I note that the First-tier Tribunal treated  the
   claimant and her daughter as credible witnesses, and  that  this  is  not
   challenged in the grounds of appeal.  I have heard  and  seen  them  give
   evidence at the hearing, including  under  cross-examination,  and  I  am
   satisfied that they should be treated as witnesses of truth.  I also give
   weight to the evidence of Ms Sworak, who  is  a  bereavement  and  family
   liaison nurse specialist in paediatrics  at  the  Thomas  Cook  Unit.   I
   remind myself that the elder grand-daughter has spent many long months in
   hospital, and that Ms Sworak has had plenty of opportunity to observe the
   family interaction.

74. I therefore find that the claimant is a woman  of  retirement  age,  who
   has never worked, and who has no family support  in  Lebanon.   When  she
   tried to survive as a single woman after her  husband  abandoned  her  in
   2006, a time when she was significantly younger than she is now, she  had
   no home and did not cope at all well.  I note that she came to the United
   Kingdom as a visitor in March and July 2006,  and  that  the  reason  she
   tried to remain was the outbreak of war in  Lebanon  that  summer,  which
   would have made her  difficult  circumstances  even  worse.    I  do  not
   approach this as a case  where  the  claimant  lacked  the  intention  to
   return, on the second such visit.

75. I have regard to the best interests of the  claimant's  grand-daughters,
   the elder one, who although she will shortly be  legally  an  adult,  has
   microcephaly, can hardly walk, needs  constant  dietary  supervision,  11
   doses of medication a day  which  she  is  unwilling  to  take,  and  has
   intimate bleeding  problems  which  require  trusted  female  care.   The
   child's liver problems may recur: the third transplant has not solved her
   health issues.  There is also the  question  of  the  support  which  the
   claimant gives to the younger child, at times when her elder sister is in
   hospital.

76. Taking all of the facts together, and having  regard  in  particular  to
   the length of time (12 years)  the  claimant  has  spent  in  the  United
   Kingdom, including 7 years when she was waiting for  an  asylum  decision
   from the respondent, her age and lack of social support in  Lebanon,  her
   daughter's financial and emotional support  for  the  claimant,  and  the
   exceptional needs of her elder grand-daughter,  I am satisfied  that  the
   claimant has discharged the burden of showing  that  in  this  particular
   case, there are exceptional circumstances for which leave to remain ought
   to be granted outside the Rules.

77. I therefore substitute a  decision  allowing  this  appeal  pursuant  to
   Article 8 ECHR.

DECISION

78. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  dismissing
   the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and Article 3 ECHR  grounds
   but allowing the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.


Date:     1 June 2018               Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson
                                        Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
