
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01558/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th July, 2017                             |On 11th July, 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    [J K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Lee, Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Albania born  on  [  ]  1990.   She  has
    obtained leave  to  appeal  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J Bartlett promulgated on 18th  April,  2017  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

2.   The challenge to the judge's determination centres on what she said  at
    paragraph 34.  For completeness I set out that paragraph below:-

         "I have considered section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009.  I find that it is in the  appellant's  son's
         best interest to remain with the appellant whether that be  in  the
         United Kingdom or Albania.  I find that the appellant has  a  close
         and loving relationship with her son  as  was  evidenced  by  their
         behaviour at the oral hearing.  I  find  that  British  society  no
         longer attaches stigma to single mothers but that the appellant and
         her son will face discrimination and some stigma in  Albania  as  a
         result of the appellant's unmarried status.  I  consider  that  the
         objective evidence recognises  that  unmarried  mothers  and  their
         children are discriminated by  the  patriarchal  Albanian  society.
         Only when these wider societal  attitudes  are  considered  do  the
         appellant's son's best interests tip towards staying in the  United
         Kingdom."

3.   Earlier in the determination, the judge had noted  that  the  appellant
    had given birth to a child out of wedlock.  She started a  relationship
    with a man at the beginning of July 2015  and  saw  him  secretly  once
    every two weeks.  In September 2015,  the  appellant's  maternal  uncle
    contacted the appellant's father to arrange a marriage of the appellant
    with [R].  It was in February 2006, that the  appellant  realised  that
    she was pregnant.  The appellant believed that were she  to  remain  in
    Albania she would have been at risk from her family who would  wish  to
    kill her.

4.   The judge  made  numerous  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the
    appellant.  She noted a number of inconsistencies.  The first was  that
    when she discussed with the father of her child the fact that  she  was
    pregnant, she claimed that he asked her to have  an  abortion  and  she
    refused and as a result they both had to leave Albania.  That  is  what
    she said in her witness statement, but at the hearing  when  the  judge
    asked the appellant when [G] had first  talked  about  terminating  her
    pregnancy the appellant stated that it was when she was in  Italy,  not
    when she was in Albania.  The judge noted other  inconsistencies  about
    the fact that [G] took her passport from her, when in fact she  claimed
    that  she  never  had  a  passport.   She  believed  that  there   were
    inconsistencies in relation to the claimed arranged  marriage  and  did
    not accept that the appellant was going to be at risk from  her  family
    were she to be returned to Albania.  She found  that  claims  that  the
    appellant had not had contact with her sister when  she  was  in  Italy
    were fabricated and at paragraph 25 was satisfied that as a mother of a
    child out of wedlock she would face some discrimination and stigma from
    Albanian society, but she did not accept that her family would harm her
    or that they would disown her.  She accepted that  she  was  likely  to
    face some discrimination from other members of the town or village from
    where she came, and that whilst this would be distressing, it would not
    amount to persecution at the hands of  her  family  or  of  society  in
    general.

5.   Permission was given on the basis that the judge's findings as  to  the
    best interests of the appellant's child  were  confused  and  that  the
    findings at paragraph 34 of her decision were conflicting.  Mr Singh on
    behalf of the Secretary of State accepted that there was an error where
    the judge referred to the fact that it  is  only  when  wider  societal
    attitudes are considered that  the  appellant's  son's  best  interests
    tipped towards staying in the United Kingdom.   That,  Mr  Singh  said,
    suggests that the judge has made conflicting findings and amounts to an
    error of law.  Mr Lee submitted that there should be a full  assessment
    of the child's best interests and the Presenting Officer agreed.

6.   I reserved my decision.

7.   I did not necessarily believe on reading  the  determination  that  the
    judge had erred.  It seemed to me that all the  judge  was  saying  was
    that the only thing in favour of the  appellant  and  her  child  being
    permitted to remain in the United Kingdom were the  societal  attitudes
    of Albanians.  However, I  agree  that  it  is  not  clear  and  I  was
    persuaded by Mr Singh that the judge had erred.  What the judge said at
    paragraph 34 has led to some confusion and is not entirely clear.

8.   The appellant is entitled to a  clear  determination  and  I  therefore
    considered Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009 myself.  I agree with the findings of the judge.  It  must  be  in
    the appellant's son's best  interest  to  remain  with  the  appellant,
    whether that be in the United Kingdom or in Albania.

9.   I have considered the appellant's bundle  of  evidence,  including  her
    witness statement.  In her witness statement, the appellant  of  course
    expresses the fear that she will be at risk from her family members  in
    Albania.  At paragraph 38 she says that she has a future fear  for  her
    life from her father, because she dishonoured him by not accepting  the
    marriage he arranged with her uncle and because she bought shame on him
    and the family.  She also fears from [R] and  his  family  because  she
    broke the promise that her uncle and father gave to him that she  would
    marry him.  Importantly, she does not talk about societal attitudes  or
    fearing harm from any other source.

10.  The objective material, of  which  there  is  a  large  amount  in  the
    appellant's  bundle,  but  particularly   the   Home   Office   Country
    Information  and  Guidance  paper  entitled  "Albania:  Women   fearing
    domestic violence  Version  1.0  April  2016",  dealing  with  societal
    attitudes to women generally and those who face domestic violence.  The
    whole of section 6 of that report supports the conclusion of the  judge
    that it is likely that the appellant will face some discrimination  and
    stigma as a result of her unmarried status.  Inevitably, just as  would
    have  been  the  case  in  the  United  Kingdom  some  years  ago,  the
    appellant's son is likely to face some stigma also.  Section 7  of  the
    report details services available to victims of violence.   The  report
    by Armela Xhaho, "Honor Crimes of Women in Albanian  Society:  Boundary
    Discourses on Violent  Culture  and  Traditions"  speaks  about  honour
    crimes  and  community  pressure.   It  also  speaks   about   cultural
    attitudes, beliefs, patriarchal claims and norms  of  society,  but  of
    course there is no question  here  that  this  appellant  will  be  the
    subject of an honour crime.  She can go back to live in  the  bosom  of
    her family, given the findings of  the  judge.   She  will  have  their
    support and  love,  as  will  her  son.   Indeed,  should  they  suffer
    discrimination her family will protect them and support them.

11.  The appellant's son is entitled to be brought up  in  his  own  culture
    amongst his own family members, speaking his  own  language  and  being
    taught Albanian history. Having considered  all  the  evidence  in  the
    round I believe that the best interests of the appellant's son  are  to
    remain with his mother and I  do  not  believe  that  were  she  to  be
    returned to Albania there is any reason for believing that he could not
    return also.

12.  The judge went on to consider  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  concluded
    that there were no significant obstacles to the appellant's integration
    into Albania.  I have seen no evidence to suggest that there  might  be
    any obstacles at all, bearing in mind that the appellant has been found
    not to have been disowned by her family. I agree that she is likely  to
    face negative attitudes from ignorant sections of society  in  Albania,
    but I also agree with the First-tier Judge that she  will  be  able  to
    return and live with her family who would be in a position to offer her
    practical support with the rest of her life and caring for her child.

Notice of Decision

13.  I find that the judge did materially err in  her  decision  and  I  set
    aside Paragraph 34 of her decision.  I remake the decision myself.  For
    the reasons I have given the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

14.  No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley   Date: 11th July 2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley       Date: 11th July 2017
