
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01845/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 22nd July 2019 On 28th August 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MS K F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms K Wass, Counsel, instructed by David Benson,
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria born in July 1981. She is from
      the Aruba tribe and is a Muslim. She is educated to degree level.

   2. She came to the United Kingdom on a number of occasions from 2007. She
      was arrested in October 2017 for using a French passport so that she
      could work. She was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment on 2 November
      2017 .

   3. She made a claim for protection on the 24th November 2017. The claim
      was she fears that her family and former partner will subject her to
      FGM against her will and that he will be forced to marry.

   4. She gave an account of how she and her twin sister were taken by their
      uncle in September 2007 to his village and FGM was performed on her
      sister. The appellant said she was detained for several months. She
      managed to avoid FGM happening to her. She subsequently came to the
      United Kingdom, joining her then partner. She returned to Nigeria on a
      number of occasions since. Her claim was refused on 29th January
      2019.The respondent did not accept the claim was true.

The First tier Tribunal

   5. Her appeal was heard before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Reid at
      Taylor House on 27 March 2019.In a decision promulgated on 10 April
      2019 it was dismissed. The judge said that on the chronology the
      appellant and her twin sister were 26 years of age when taken by their
      uncle. This was considerably older than the norm for FGM according to
      the country information. The judge noted the high rate of FGM amongst
      her tribe albeit it was more widespread amongst the Christian
      community. The judge did not find it plausible that at the age of 37
      the appellant would now be at risk of FGM. The appellant had said this
      occurred with all the members of her family including her aunt who now
      lived in London. This was irrespective of age. The judge commented
      that her aunt did not attend the hearing nor was there a statement
      from her.

   6. The judge questioned why FGM was performed on her sister and not her.
      There were discrepancies in the timelines given an as to whether or
      not she was detained by her family before or after the procedure was
      proposed.

   7. The judge pointed out the appellant was able to apply for a visit Visa
      in 2008 but did not leave Nigeria immediately. She also returned to
      Nigeria in 2009 for a visit.

   8. In support of her claim she produced a death certificate attached to
      an email eight days before the appeal. The certificate said that her
      sister died as a result of FGM; having been unwell as a consequence
      for 12 years. The judge was critical of the absence of confirmation
      from the hospital as to the cause of death, bearing in mind the
      principles of Tanveer Ahmed IAT 2002.

   9. The judge referred to the timing of the claim, pointing out it was
      made over 12 years after the claimed events which she said made her
      leave Nigeria and which she claimed to still fear. The claim was made
      only after she was arrested and convicted for using the French
      passport.

  10. The judge also rejected her claim of being forced into marriage. She
      said the relationship had ended in 2011 and her then partner had not
      been in direct touch with the appellant since. At the time of hearing
      she had been in a relationship with another Nigerian since 2015.

The Upper Tribunal

  11. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge had taken the appellant's delay in claiming protection as the
      starting point in the assessment of her credibility. It was also
      arguable the judge erred in the consideration of events in September
      2007 and in the assessment of the death certificate produced.

  12. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal. It
      was contended that the judge was entitled to find the appellant's
      credibility damaged by the circumstances of her claim: being made only
      after her arrest in 2017. In any event this was not the only adverse
      credibility points taken. The appellant's credibility was in issue and
      the assessment of this was a matter for the judge.

  13. Ms Wass at hearing said the main thrust of the appeal related to how
      the judge considered section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration
      (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004.The remaining grounds were not
      argued in detail.

  14. On the section 8 point the judge began with a heading `Findings' at
      paragraph 25 and in the following paragraph referred to the
      appellant's delay in claiming under the heading `Timing and
      circumstances of the appellant's application for asylum'. She
      submitted that the judge had therefore taken this delay as a starting
      point in the assessment of credibility. I was referred to JT
      (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA
      Civ 878 where the Court of Appeal considered the application of
      section 8.

  15. The First tier Tribunal in that appeal considered the question of
      credibility in considerable detail. The section headed "Findings of
      fact" began with a reference to Section 8 and went on to state that
      very serious damage has been sustained to the appellant's credibility
      by virtue of its operation. The Court of Appeal acknowledged that the
      First-tier Tribunal had conducted a very detailed assessment of
      matters relevant to credibility, other than section 8 matters, and the
      Tribunal did state that it was looking at the evidence in the round.
      The positioning of the section 8 reference in the determination was
      not considered fatal. However, the court concluded that there was a
      real risk that section 8 matters were given a status of their own
      rather than being taken into account, as they shall have been, as part
      of a global assessment of credibility.

  16. The Court of Appeal went on to consider the prescriptive nature of
      section 8. The court said that the sovereignty of Parliament had to be
      respected even in the context of the Convention. Section 8 could be
      construed in a way which did not offend against constitutional
      principles. It is not to be read as a direction on how the fact-
      finding should be conducted. Nor is it to be applied at the expense of
      an overall assessment. Section 8 factors are to be taken into account
      in assessing credibility and are capable of damaging it but the
      section does not dictate that relevant damage to credibility
      inevitably result. Section 8 is no more than a reminder to fact-
      finding tribunals that conduct coming within the categories stated in
      section 8 shall be taken into account in assessing credibility.

  17. Ms Cunha continued to oppose the appeal. In preparing the decision the
      judge had placed the section 8 factors at the forefront of the
      decision. This related to how the decision was structured. However,
      the judge dealt with the substantive claim in detail. The judge had
      regard to the country information about FGM. The judge pointed to the
      typical age when this occurs and the fact the appellant was a Muslim
      amongst whom the practice was not so prevalent. The judge gave reasons
      for rejecting her claim about her uncle's actions. She submitted that
      the judge took into account all of the evidence and looked at matters
      in the round. The judge did not emphasise her delay in claiming.

  18. In response, Ms Wass argued that the judge erred by starting
      consideration of the claim with the section 8 features instead of
      considering the overall claim.

Consideration

  19. Central to the appeal was the appellant's credibility. At paragraph 3
      the judge sets out in detail the points taken in the refusal letter.
      This included reference to background information about FGM and the
      appellant's circumstances. Inconsistencies about the claimed threat
      from her former partner were referred to. There was the issue of her
      delay in making claim. The judge sets out the evidence at the hearing
      and the submissions from the representatives, including comment about
      the late production of a death certificate said to relate to her
      sister and the appellant's unawareness of her illness.

  20. The judge sets out the conclusions from paragraph 26 onwards. The
      first point made relates to the delay and circumstances of the claim.
      I do not see any material error of law in the fact that this is at the
      forefront of the decision. In preparing the decision the judge has to
      start somewhere and this was the most obvious point. If the decision
      is read as a whole this was only one factor taken by the judge in the
      overall assessment. The judge progresses to consider the account that
      she and her sister were taken by their uncle for FGM. This was a key
      episode in the claim. The judge considers this in detail.

  21. The judge starts by considering the appellant's age when she claimed
      she and her sister were taken. The judge refers to the country
      information and noted that she was considerably older than the norm
      for FGM but that did not make her claim in plausible. The judge also
      had regard to her tribal and religious origins, alluding to the
      country information. The judge made the point however that the older
      the appellant was then the less plausible was her claim. This is a
      logical point bearing in mind the underlying reasons advanced for FGM.

  22. The appellant had made the point that in her family FGM did occur at
      ages outside the norm. In support of this she referred to her aunt.
      The judge then made the point that her aunt was living in London and
      not been called as a witness to confirm this point.

  23. The judge then refers to the claim of being taken away with her
      sister. There was a factual inconsistency in the account in relation
      to how long she was for and when FGM took place on her sister.

  24. The judge then referred to her delay in leaving Nigeria even though
      she had a visit Visa obtained with the help of her then partner. The
      judge then commented on the fact that notwithstanding her claim of
      events in Nigeria she returned there. The judge then dealt with the
      claim that she continued to receive threats from family members after
      she came to the United Kingdom through her aunt. The judge then deals
      in detail with her claim about her sister's death. This is set out in
      paragraph 44 onwards. The judge then deals in detail with her account
      about her partner in the United Kingdom. The judge turns to her
      current situation and the prospect of return to Nigeria.

  25. It is clear from the decision that the judge has carefully analysed
      the issues arising. Before reaching a conclusion the judge has had
      regard to a multiplicity of factors. The judge has not been blinkered
      by the sole fact of delay but has given numerous reasons justifying
      the finding that the appellant was not credible and her removal was
      justified. The judge did not specifically emphasise section 8 albeit
      the circumstances and delay were significant factors.

  26. The other points raised in the application for permission were not
      argued at hearing. In any event, I find no substance in them. I find
      the judge dealt directly with the evidence in relation to the
      appellant sister. My conclusion is that no material error of law has
      been demonstrated.

Decision

I find no material error of law established in the decision of Judge of the
First-tier Tribunal Reid. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appeal
shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.   Date: 27 August 2019

