
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: PA/01438/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th May 2017                              |On 6th June 2017              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                                     ss
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Lewis of Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Keefe promulgated on 27th March 2017  in  which  Judge
    O'Keefe dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated 30th January 2017 to refuse his asylum claim.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was  born  on  2nd  January
    1990.  The Appellant has now appealed against  the  decision  of  Judge
    O'Keefe.  It is argued within the Grounds of Appeal, inter  alia,  that
    when rejecting the Appellant's claim  for  asylum  in  respect  of  his
    credibility, that the Judge misunderstood what the Appellant  had  said
    in interview regarding the reasons for his  arrest  in  2011  and  that
    therefore it is said that although the  Judge  found  that  there  were
    inconsistencies in the evidence given by the  Appellant  regarding  the
    reasons for his interview by the authorities  in  2011,  it  is  argued
    within  the  Grounds  of  Appeal   that   there   were   in   fact   no
    inconsistencies. The Appellant relies upon the answer to question 35 of
    the substantive interview in that regard and the answer  given  thereto
    which was recorded within the decision of Judge O'Keefe with regards to
    what was 'their reason for  arresting  him  in  2011'.   The  Appellant
    replied in answer to that question in interview:

         "I was working hard towards reforming the tiger group and  liaising
         with those parties outside of Sri Lanka who were trying to  do  the
         same thing.  And also that I have been a member of the tigers, that
         I have done so many things against the government."

 3. Judge O'Keefe in her decision at paragraph 20 went on to find that:

         "Later on in the interview the appellant  said  that  he  had  been
         arrested because the authorities said that he was  an  LTTE  member
         and he was trying to reorganise the group.  He said that he was not
         trying to reorganise the group and that a former LTTE colleague had
         informed on him to the police.  I find that the appellant has given
         inconsistent reasons as to why the GOSL would have been  interested
         in him in 2011.  On his own account, the appellant was a  reluctant
         supporter of the LTTE and his involvement with them was short lived
         and at a very low level of support."

 4. It was argued that  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  Judge  had
    misinterpreted that answer at question 35 as being inconsistent when it
    was not.

 5. Further within the Grounds of Appeal it is said that the Appellant  had
    relied upon the medical  report  from  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  who  found
    numerous scars upon the Appellant's body which overall was  typical  of
    injuries caused by torture, but in the grounds it is  argued  that  the
    Judge gave little weight to that because it is said that the doctor had
    not been made aware of the fact the Appellant had been hit by a car  in
    2007 and had not considered that that might be a possible cause for the
    scars found, and further that the GP records of the Appellant said that
    he had injured his knee whilst a child and that was a traumatic injury,
    rather than being an injury  related  to  torture  as  claimed  by  the
    Appellant.  It is argued within the Grounds of Appeal  that  the  Judge
    should have given the Appellant  the  opportunity  of  explaining  that
    evidence for himself, or providing a  further  witness  statements,  or
    indeed asking further questions of Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  to  deal  with
    those matters.  It is argued the Judge applied too high a  standard  of
    proof in respect of the medical evidence and  was  wrong  therefore  to
    reject that evidence in support of the Appellant's case.

 6. Permission to appeal in  this  case  has  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Landes  who  found  it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge
    misunderstood what the Appellant said at paragraph 35 of his  interview
    and that may have affected her consideration of the credibility of  the
    Appellant's claim, as set out at paragraphs 6 to 8 of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  Judge Landes said it was not clear to  her  that  the  reasons
    were inconsistent and it is arguable that the  Judge  may  indeed  have
    meant as averred by the Appellant, that his answer to question  35  was
    inconsistent with his being reluctant in support of the LTTE.  She said
    that that did not appear to be a real inconsistency  and  although  the
    Judge she found gave other reasons for rejecting the Appellant's claim,
    the Judge's repetition of the finding of  inconsistency  meant  it  was
    arguable that the Appellant inconsistency was central to a finding that
    the Appellant had not given a  credible  account  of  his  reasons  for
    leaving Sri Lanka.

 7. Although Judge Landes did  not  restrict  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and
    granted permission to appeal on all grounds, she did not consider  that
    the Judge should have acted as argued within the skeleton  argument  in
    terms of seeking further clarification regarding the  expert  evidence.
    She found that the Judge had to  bear  in  mind  the  totality  of  the
    evidence before her and whether or not there were other possible causes
    to the  trauma  and  therefore  she  was  not  bound  to  make  further
    enquiries.

 8. In this case that the Appellant himself did not actually give evidence.
     The Learned First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with that at  paragraph  3
    of her decision where she noted there is a psychiatric report from a Dr
    Saleh Dhumad, Consultant Psychiatrist dated 7th March  2017  who  found
    that in his opinion the Appellant was unfit to attend the  hearing  and
    give oral evidence.

 9. I have fully taken account of the Grounds of Appeal and also all of  in
    the case in the round, including the Rule 24 notice and the submissions
    made by both legal representatives this morning.

10. Within the Respondent's Rule 24 notice which is dated 4th May  2017  it
    is said that the Respondent opposes  the  Appellant's  appeal  and  the
    Judge inter alia has directed herself appropriately.  It is argued that
    when read as a whole, the determination came to sustainable conclusions
    concerning the Appellant's involvement with the LTTE and  at  paragraph
    17 the Judge gave reasons why the Appellant initially refused to assist
    the LTTE and made findings at paragraph 18 that were open to her.   The
    Appellant had only bought medication for the LTTE and ceased to  do  so
    after 2008.  It was said at paragraph 19 the Appellant was said to have
    given a different gloss in terms of an answer that he  was  working  on
    reforming the Tigers and that the Judge's conclusion  at  paragraph  20
    that the answer was an inconsistent one the Judge was entitled to  come
    to, as was a conclusion that the Appellant's involvement with the  LTTE
    was short lived and was a very  low  level  of  support  and  that  the
    evidence in that regard  was  inconsistent.   It  is  argued  that  the
    grounds amount to no more than disagreement with the  findings  of  the
    Judge.

11. I have also heard and fully taken account of the  submissions  made  by
    both the representatives this morning which are fully  recorded  within
    my Record of Proceedings. In summary it is argued by Mr Lewis on behalf
    of the Appellant that  the  Judge  has  misinterpreted  the  answer  to
    question 35 in the interview, which he argues is a  material  error  of
    law.  He says that this is a finding  of  fact,  when  considering  the
    evidence as a whole, which was not actually open to the Judge in  terms
    of there being an inconsistency and that the Appellant was not  talking
    about his own activities at question 35 but was clearly  talking  about
    what the authorities perceived were his activities  and  that  had  the
    Judge looked at all of the evidence in the  interview  in  that  regard
    that is the conclusion she should have come to.  He argued, in fact the
    Appellant's own evidence was that he was simply a reluctant person  who
    was forced into working for  the  LTTE  and  had  simply  sourced  some
    medicines and sorted out of accommodation.  Mr Lewis  argues  that  the
    Judge repeated that error on five occasions which  he  says  does  mean
    that it is actually material to the core findings that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge made.

12. On his case this is an error of fact which is  said  to  amount  to  an
    error of law. Mr Lewis refers me to the guidance and criteria  set  out
    by the Court of Appeal in the case of E & R [2004] EWCA Civ 49 in terms
    of whether or not a mistake of fact gives rise to unfairness  that  can
    be an integral challenge in an appeal on a point of law, but  in  order
    for it to be found that there is unfairness resulting from an error  of
    fact such as amounts to an error of law various  criteria  need  to  be
    met. Firstly, there has to be a mistake as to existing facts  including
    a mistake as to the availability of evidence of a particular fact.   He
    said that this is clearly an existing fact, based upon the contents  of
    the  interview.   Second,  the  evidence  must  be  uncontentious   and
    objectively verifiable; third that the Appellant  must  not  have  been
    responsible for the mistake or his advisors must not be responsible for
    the mistake and, fourth, the mistake must have had  a  material  though
    not necessarily decisive part in the Judge's reasoning.  He  says  that
    in this case the mistake  looking  at  the  interview  as  a  whole  is
    uncontentious and  is  objectively  verifiable.  He  said  it  was  not
    actually the appellant's fault, based upon the way  that  the  question
    was posed to him in interview.   He  gave  an  answer  based  upon  the
    question he  was  asked  in  terms  of  the  authorities'  reasons  for
    arresting him, rather than his own reasoning and he says that this  did
    play a material even if not necessarily decisive part  in  the  Judge's
    reasoning.  He said that although this error of fact does amount  to  a
    material error of law in the circumstances of this case.

13. In his submissions, Mr Armstrong on behalf of the Home Office seeks  to
    say that in fact there is no material error of law in  this  case.   He
    relies upon the Rule 24 notice which I have fully considered. He argues
    in particular that the evidence given at  question  35  was  simply  an
    inconsistent answer given by the Appellant, as to the  reasons  why  he
    was arrested and that did contradict with the other  evidence  he  says
    given by the Appellant in interview in terms of him being  a  reluctant
    helper for the LTTE and that he had been asked to join them,  but  then
    forced to go to training  and  that  he  simply  purchased  medication,
    sorting out accommodation in Colombo.  In any event Mr Armstrong argues
    that even if it was an error it was not a material error and he submits
    that  the  Judge  gave  numerous  other  reasons  for   rejecting   the
    Appellant's credibility including  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
    waited four and a half years before  claiming  asylum  after  initially
    arriving in the UK and also in terms of the Judge's  rejection  of  the
    medical evidence regarding the scarring and the reasons given  for  not
    placing weight upon that medical evidence.  He submits that even on the
    Appellant's case he was a low level member  of  the  LTTE  who  on  the
    Respondent's case was said not to be of  interest  to  the  authorities
    now.  The Respondent did not accept he had been arrested  and  tortured
    in 2011 as claimed and said that basically he had been only a low level
    member for a short period of  time  and  was  of  no  interest  to  the
    authorities.  It is argued by the Respondent that  there  would  be  no
    reason now as to why he would be seen to be a threat to  the  unity  of
    the state of Sri Lanka and therefore no reason why he would fall within
    the risk categories set out within the country guidance case of GJ (Sri
    Lanka) [2013] UKUT 00319.  It is argued by the Respondent that he would
    not be on any stop list as mentioned within the country guidance case.

My Findings on Error of Law Materiality

14. In considering this appeal I have considered all of the submissions and
    all of the evidence in the round before making any findings.  When  one
    gives close consideration to the findings of Judge O'Keefe it is  clear
    that Judge O'Keefe  at  paragraphs  19  and  20  did  find  there  were
    inconsistent reasons as to why the Government of Sri Lanka  would  have
    been interested in him in 2011.  At paragraph 19 she stated that he was
    asked in interview at question 35 what was the reason  for  his  arrest
    and torture in 2011.  He replied:

         "I was working hard towards reforming the tiger group and  liaising
         with those parties outside of Sri Lanka who were trying to  do  the
         same thing.  And also I have been a member of the  tigers,  that  I
         have done so many things against the government."

At paragraph 20 she then went on to say:

         "Later on in the interview the Appellant  said  that  he  had  been
         arrested because the authorities said that he was  an  LTTE  member
         and he was trying to reorganise the group.  He said that he was not
         trying to reorganise the group and that a former LTTE colleague had
         informed on him to the police.  I find that the Appellant has given
         inconsistent reasons as to why the Government of  Sri  Lanka  would
         have been interested in him in  2011.   On  his  own  account,  the
         Appellant was a reluctant supporter of the LTTE and his involvement
         with them was short lived and at a very low level of support."

15. However looking at the evidence given by the Appellant  himself  as  to
    the reasons for his arrest both in  terms  of  the  original  screening
    interview and also in the substantive interview the  picture  does  not
    appear to be that as understood by Judge O'Keefe.  Within the screening
    interview when the Appellant was asked briefly as to the reasons why he
    could not return to his home country at question 4.1 the answer he  had
    given at that stage was that "If I go back  to  Sri  Lanka  I  will  be
    arrested by the TID because I was  arrested  before  and  tortured  and
    accused of re-establishing the LTTE and helping them."

16. As correctly stated by Mr Lewis of Counsel the actual question asked at
    question 35of the substantive interview was, "what was their reason for
    arresting you and torturing you in 2011?".  The  questions  he  rightly
    points out was not what was the reason for arresting you and  torturing
    you in 2011, or what did you do  to  lead  to  you  being  arrested  or
    tortured in 2011.  The question that  was  asked  by  the  Interviewing
    Officer at that stage was "what was their reason" as  in  what  is  the
    authorities' reason for arresting you and torturing you in  2011?   The
    Appellant's answer was as stated above:

         "I was working hard towards reforming the tiger group and  liaising
         with those parties outside of Sri Lanka who were trying to  do  the
         same thing.  And also that I have been a member of the tigers, that
         I have done so many things against the government".

17. Further on in interview though when actually giving evidence about  his
    own involvement with the LTTE at question 69 when initially asked about
    his joining the Tigers he said that they asked him to join them and  he
    refused.  They explained to him because he was Tamil  they  needed  his
    participation, but he refused and told them that he was studying.  They
    told him to do the training to safeguard himself for his  own  benefit.
    Even then he refused and they started to get forceful and told  him  to
    think about it.  He goes on in interview to describe how he was  forced
    to go on the training and simply  purchased  medication  for  them  and
    helped sort out some accommodation in Colombo.   His  evidence  was  as
    stated by Judge O'Keefe to  the  effect  that  basically  later  on  in
    interview that his involvement was short lived and at a very low level.



18. However later on in the interview when asked specifically as  to  again
    in question 189 "what was their reason for  arresting  you?"  he  said,
    "saying I was an LTTE member and I was trying to reorganise the group".



    Again at question 206, "what questions did they ask you?":

         "They asked me if I was LTTE and whether I helped them.  They asked
         if I was trying to re-establish the LTTE.  Are you collecting money
         for the LTTE?  Are you in touch with the same organisations  abroad
         and trying  to  do  something  against  the  government?   Are  you
         thinking of going and joining them?"

    At question 207, "what was your response?"  "I said no to everything".

19. When one looked at  the  entirety  of  the  interview  and  not  simply
    question 35 in isolation question 35  was  clearly  understood  by  the
    Appellant to be asking what the authorities' reasons were for arresting
    him were.  When asked that same question "what  was  their  reason  for
    arresting you at question 189" he gave a clear answer  "saying  that  I
    was an LTTE member and I was trying to reorganise the group".   He  was
    not seeking to give evidence as to what his own involvement was, he was
    seeking to say what the  perception  of  his  involvement  was  by  the
    authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  at  question  35.   Clearly  questions  in
    interview cannot simply be taken in isolation.

20. I therefore do not accept that in fact there was  an  inconsistency  in
    the Appellant's answers given in interview at question 35  compared  to
    the rest of the answers given in interview.  When  looking  at  all  of
    those answers properly in the round the Appellant's case  in  terms  of
    his own involvement is quite clearly different from his case  regarding
    the  view  that  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  took  regarding  his
    involvement.  In that regard I  do  find  that  regrettably  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Keefe has made an error when talking about the answers
    given at question 35  and  in  terms  of  whether  or  not  there  were
    inconsistencies when dealing with that issue at paragraphs 19 and 20 of
    her Judgement.  It is clear to me that in that regard it is  a  mistake
    of fact rather than a  legal  proposition  but  I  bear  in  mind  that
    following the Court of Appeal case of E & R [2014] EWCA Civ 49  that  a
    mistake of fact can give rise to  unfairness  as  a  separate  head  of
    challenge in an appeal on a point of law such that the mistake of  fact
    can be so unfair as to amount to an error in law and indeed a  material
    error of law, if appropriate.

21. The Court of Appeal set out the ordinary requirements for  findings  of
    unfairness to be that there must be a  mistake  of  an  existing  fact,
    including a mistake as to availability  of  evidence  on  a  particular
    fact.  I find that it is clearly a mistake as to existing fact in terms
    of whether or not the answer to question 35 was an answer given by  the
    Appellant as to his own activities or the authorities' belief as to his
    activities.

22. Secondly, the fact I find has been established in the sense that it  is
    objectively verifiable from the  interview.   When  one  looks  at  the
    interview in its entirety I find that in fact it is  uncontentious  and
    the Appellant was asked what their reasons  for  arresting  him  rather
    than what the reasons for arresting him were at question 35.

23. Thirdly, I do find that neither the Appellant  nor  his  advisors  have
    been responsible for the mistake.  The question asked in terms of  what
    were 'their reasons' does seem to indicate that it was the reasons  the
    authorities  thought  he  should  be  arrested  rather  than  his   own
    activities that he was asked about.  The Judge in that regard seems  to
    have then sadly mistaken that as being an  inconsistency  when  it  was
    not.

24. In terms of whether the mistake played a material though  not  decisive
    part in the Judge's reasoning the Judge has given other reasons  as  to
    finding against the Appellant.in terms of credibility and gave  reasons
    for finding that she could not place weight upon the  medical  evidence
    regarding scarring and took account of the Section 8 credibility issues
    in terms of the four and a half years had passed before  the  Appellant
    had actually initially claimed asylum,  together  with  his  low  level
    participation within the LTTE. However, Judge O'Keefe referred  to  the
    purported inconsistency not just within paragraphs 19 and 20.  She also
    again referred to the purported inconsistency at paragraph 23 and  then
    again at paragraph 34  of  her  judgment  and  states  specifically  at
    paragraph 34 that:

         "He gave an inconsistent account in interview as to his reasons why
         the Government of Sri Lanka would be interested in him some 2 years
         after the ending of the civil war.   The  appellant  has  given  no
         plausible reason as to why the Government of  Sri  Lanka  would  be
         interested in him in 2011 given the very minor role that he  played
         in LTTE activities.  The appellant's account of his arrest in  2011
         is inconsistent with the background material referred to in GJ  and
         the conclusion that the Government of Sri  Lanka  operates  on  the
         basis of sophisticated intelligence."

    In paragraph 37 Judge O'Keefe went on to find that

         "The appellant does not have  or  would  be  perceived  to  have  a
         significant role in the post-conflict Tamil separatism or a renewal
         of hostilities  within  Sri  Lanka.   I  do  not  accept  that  the
         appellant's name is on a 'watch' list or a 'stop' list or  that  he
         has any profile within the Sri Lankan authorities."




25.  It is therefore clear  that  Judge  O'Keefe  had  placed  considerable
    weight upon what she considered was an inconsistency between the answer
    at question 35 and  the  balance  of  the  evidence  given  by  him  in
    interview.  That was clearly a material factor taken  into  account  by
    the Judge when considering the question of credibility.  I therefore do
    find that that error of fact did give rise to  unfairness  as  to  mean
    that it does amount to a material error of law in the circumstances  of
    this case.

26. In terms of the other Grounds of Appeal which regarded  assertion  that
    the Judge was wrong to reject the medical evidence.  I  find  that  the
    Judge actually has given clear reasons for finding that she  could  not
    attach weight to  the  evidence  of  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  despite  his
    finding that those scars were typical of someone who has been subjected
    to torture and at paragraph 25 set out that within the  GP  records  it
    was said that there was an injury to the knee as a child which  the  GP
    had not taken account of and further at 26 there is  reference  to  the
    Appellant being hit by a car in 2007 that  the  doctor  had  not  taken
    account of that in coming to the conclusions regarding the causation of
    then scarring.  The Judge in that regard was entitled to  consider  the
    medical evidence from Dr Izquierdo-Martin as consider what weight could
    be attached to it when considering that evidence  in  the  round.   The
    Judge did not then have to  adjourn  the  case  in  order  for  further
    questions to be put to Dr Martin and in the circumstances of  the  case
    when the Appellant was not well enough to give evidence  he  could  not
    have been asked.  The judge was entitled to consider the report  of  Dr
    Izquierdo-Martin and the Judge has given clear, adequate and sufficient
    reasons for not being able to place weight upon it.  I do not  consider
    that the Judge has attached too high a standard of proof in respect  of
    either that evidence or in respect of the case as a whole.

27. But for the reasons set out above I do find that the Judge has  made  a
    material error of law in terms of  the  findings  with  regard  to  the
    purported inconsistency within the evidence in interview regarding  the
    reasons for arrest and torture in 2011 and therefore I do set aside the
    entirety of the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Keefe.   The
    parties agree that as the error found  does  go  to  the  core  of  the
    credibility findings that the case should be remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a rehearing de novo.

Notice of Decision

28. I set aside the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Keefe  as
    containing a material error of law.

29. I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  rehearing  de
    novo  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Keefe.

Anonymity Direction

30. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keefe did make an  anonymity  direction  in
    this case. It is appropriate for that anonymity order to  continue.   I
    therefore do direct that the Appellant is  entitled  to  anonymity  and
    that no report or other provocation of these proceedings or any part of
    this decision shall name him  either  directly  or  indirectly  or  any
    member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and
    to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
    contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 5th June 2017

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty





