
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01338/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 8th April 2019 On 15th May 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR S T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by AASK
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is an Indian national, born in January 1985. He said his
      mother is a Tamil from Sri Lanka.

   2. He came to the United Kingdom on his own passport on 10 September 2008
      on a flight from India to Heathrow. He entered with a student Visa,
      valid from August 2008 until December 2011.

   3. On 6 July 2017 he made a claim for protection. This was based upon his
      political opinion. His account was that he was sympathetic towards the
      LTTE because of his mother. Whilst in India he was involved with an
      Indian political group, Viduthalai Chiruthaigal Katchi (VCK)who would
      have been sympathetic towards the LTTE. He claims he travelled to Sri
      Lanka in March 2006 and met members of the LTTE. He received training
      in arms before returning to India in April 2006. After he returned he
      encouraged others to engage in protests about the treatment of Tamils.

   4. He claims that in December 2007 he was arrested and detained for a
      week during which time he was abused. His father paid bribes for his
      release. His father then set about arranging a student Visa so he was
      able to leave by September. Since coming to the United Kingdom he has
      been engaged in activities in support of the Tamils. He claimed the
      Indian authorities have visited his father on numerous occasions
      asking about him.

   5. His claim was rejected on 12 January 2018. He had submitted various
      documents including a copy membership card for the VCK, a letter from
      a lawyer in Sri Lanka confirming his involvement and his arrest, a
      statement from his father confirming his arrest and a report from a GP
      here. The respondent felt little reliance could be placed upon the
      documents. The membership card was a copy. The GP was relaying what
      the appellant told him.

   6. His account was not accepted. His delay in seeking protection damaged
      his credibility and reliance was placed upon section 8 of the Asylum
      and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004. Furthermore, his
      leave expired on 31 December 2011 and he continued to overstay without
      contacting the respondent.

   7. The respondent referred to the appellant's statement that he suffered
      from depression. However, this was not seen as a basis for granting
      discretionary leave given the high threshold for medical cases.

The First tier Tribunal

   8. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mace at Hatton Cross
      on 4 January 2019.In a decision promulgated on 16 January 2019 the
      appeal was dismissed. The judge did not find the underlying claim
      established.

   9. There was a medical report suggesting the appellant suffered from post-
      traumatic stress disorder and moderately severe depression. The
      appellant's sister attended and gave evidence. She has lived in the
      United Kingdom since 2003.She gave evidence about his threatened self-
      harming. The judge accepted the appellant was suffering from
      depression as detailed in the medical report and had made attempts to
      harm himself. The judge did not see a basis for granting relief on
      medical grounds. The appellant had family in India who could care for
      him. There were medical facilities and the judge saw no difficulties
      with his reintegration.


The Upper Tribunal

  10. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge had not given adequate reasons or appreciated the risk from
      Indian intelligence services given the claim and the accepted facts.

  11. Ms Jegarajah at the outset submitted 3 documents which she said were
      handed up on the day of the First-tier Tribunal hearing. They show the
      Indian police intelligence service acting to counter LTTE activities.
      One of these, marked J, is from a newspaper in India, the Daily Mail,
      dated 8 April 2019. The article reports LTTE supporters were sentenced
      to up to 10 years imprisonment in Tamil Nadu for procuring weapons and
      trying to smuggle them to Sri Lanka.There is an extract from a
      publication `The Hindu' dated 18 September 2018 referring to Q Branch
      police questioning an LTTE member. The individual was part of a group
      of supporters who procured cyanide capsules and equipment in 2015.He
      then absconded until his apprehension. The final article is from The
      Times of India and is dated 20 December 2012.It is a report of the Q
      Branch police arresting Sri Lankan Tamils who had been attempting to
      revive the organisation.

  12. She referred me to paragraph 38 of the decision where the judge
      accepted the appellant had supported the VCK and the cause of the
      Tamils. The judge accepted he may have attended rallies and
      demonstrations. The judge further accepted that he collected clothes,
      medicines and so forth to bring to Sri Lanka. However, the judge did
      not accept that he travelled to Sri Lanka and received arms training.
      The judge also accepted that at some point the appellant was detained
      and suffered ill treatment because of his involvement with the VC K
      and support for the Tamils by protesting and collecting supplies.

  13. Ms Jegarajah argued that the judge did not follow these findings
      through to their conclusion. Having accepted his arrest; his
      detention; and torture, she argued it was incumbent on the judge to
      look at the reasons behind the arrest and the nature of the
      interrogation. The appellant was engaged in these activities not just
      for humanitarian reasons but also because of his political views. This
      in turn was relevant to the risk he faced.

  14. At paragraph 39 the judge did not accept there was a continuing
      interest in the appellant's whereabouts. The judge went on to say that
      he may have joined Tamil Elam but there was nothing to suggest this
      would come to the attention of the authorities either in India or Sri
      Lanka. She said it was also evident that the appellant had been active
      on YouTube.

  15. I was referred to the appellant's interview record and I was referred
      to question 37 where he was asked what he was doing with a prescribed
      organisation. His reply was that they were sending goods to the area,
      dry goods and medicines and sometimes batteries. At question 49 the
      appellant identified contact with a person known as Kiran who was in
      direct contact with the LTTE. He said he was in charge of sending
      things. He also mentioned someone called Solan who was in charge of
      collecting information in India to pass on to the LTTE.He said he
      would have disclosed what the VCK were doing and the sending of goods
      to Sri Lanka.

  16. I was referred to his witness statement at paragraph 6 where he said a
      college friend asked him to support the LTTE.At paragraph 7 he refers
      to being asked to collect dry goods and medicines to be handed over to
      Kiran. At paragraph 8 he said he continued to support the LTTE by
      collecting goods. He said that he was arrested for supporting the
      LTTE.At paragraph 15 he referred to being taken into custody and
      tortured. He was asked to name LTTE members and where they were.

  17. I was referred to paragraph 38 of the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Mace. Ms Jegarajah argued that the judge failed to recognise the
      fact the appellant was involved in the smuggling of embargoed goods.
      She submitted that the authorities suspected he was involved with the
      LTTE. She submitted the judge erred in not making a finding as to
      whether there would be a record held by Q branch of their suspicions
      that he was an LTTE member operating in Tamil Nadu. She submitted that
      the background information shows that such activities are closely
      monitored.

  18. I was then referred to paragraph 39 of the decision where the judge
      said that there was nothing to suggest any of his activities would
      come to the attention of the authorities in either India or Sri Lanka.
      However, at paragraph 33 of the appellant statement he said he
      volunteered in the black-tie Remembrance Day and his picture was
      published on YouTube. She submitted the judge failed to consider that
      there would be a link between this YouTube entry and the perception
      that he was an LTTE member.

  19. Mr Jarvis submitted that what Ms Jegarajah said was a repetition of
      the details of the appellant's claim and the judge had understood
      this. I was referred to paragraph 17, 18, 38 and paragraph 39. He
      submitted there was no challenge in the judge's findings at paragraph
      39 that his involvement was at the lowest level. The appellant had not
      told the truth about being perceived to be a spy. At paragraph 39
      rejected the claim of visits to the family home after his departure.
      The judge had accepted ill-treatment in 2007. Therefore he submitted
      the judge indicated an understanding of the nature of the claim and
      had referred to Kiran as an intermediary.

  20. Mr Jarvis said there was nothing to suggest the 3 documents submitted
      by Ms Jegarajah where before the judge. Ms Jegarajah had not appeared
      in the First-tier. In any event, even if the documents were before the
      tribunal there is nothing to suggest from them that Q branch has such
      a sophisticated intelligence system that there would be a record of
      the appellant or that he would be of any interest to them now. He
      pointed out there was no expert report submitted on behalf of the
      appellant about how intelligence services operated in India. One of
      the articles was dated 2012 and dealt with people who had been
      detained for suspected activities in attempting to rebuild the LTTE.
      The 2 other articles are dated April and September 2018 related to
      people he came from the northern part of Sri Lanka who obtained
      cyanide pills. He submitted that those articles related to individuals
      with high profiles. He submitted there was no evidence to suggest the
      Indian authorities would have an interest in the low-level activities
      the appellant was engaged in nor his activities in the United Kingdom.
      Consequently, the absence of any detailed assessment on this point was
      not material.

  21. In response, Ms Jegarajah that the issue was one of perception of
      involvement with the LTTE, particularly in a training camp in Tamil
      Nadu. She pointed out that the LTTE is a prescribed organisation in
      India and were responsible for the killing of Pres. Rajiv Ghandi. She
      submitted that there was no reflection by the judge that he would be
      seen as a high-level member of the LTTE. She said that the video on
      YouTube was clearly an LTTE event. His family came from the north of
      Sri Lanka and had problems with the authorities there and one of the
      family members was an LTTE member.

Consideration

  22. I have considered what the appellant said at screening; in his
      substantive interview, and in his statement. I have also had regard to
      the summary set out in the reasons for refusal. I find that First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Mace accurately sets out the claim made and the view of
      the respondent at paragraph 2 through to 6. Based upon the medical
      evidence the judge treated the appellant as a vulnerable witness. He
      referred to the psychiatric report which contained a history taken
      from the appellant which was largely consistent with that given
      elsewhere. The judge set out further details of the claim at paragraph
      17 to 19. The judge referred to the country information, including the
      Home Office country report in relation to India and prison conditions.
      There was a report on the Tamil Nadu police and the Q branch. The
      judge then analysed the details of the claim.

  23. At paragraph 20 the judge referred to the documents produced in
      support of the claim and found that the misspelling referred to
      detracted from the weight to be attached to the letter. The judge
      paragraph 22 and 24 indicates the assessment made of the evidence and
      emphasise the need to consider the claim in the round.

  24. The judge deals with the suggestion the appellant has been spying and
      found the appellant was not consistent (paragraph 25). The judge said
      it was inconsistent that the LTTE would engage a low-level supporter
      as claimed. The judge found the appellant would not have been in a
      position to obtain the intelligence he claimed.

  25. At paragraph 28 the judge records the appellant's claim that the Q
      branch would still have a record on him. He was unable to say why they
      continued to call to his house as he claimed. The judge said this was
      not consistent with earlier answers where he said his arrest was not
      lawful and therefore there would not be a record. Also, he said at
      hearing his father had relocated the judge did not find it credible
      that the authorities would seek to pursue him to the extent claimed in
      relation to events over a decade ago. The judge goes into further
      detail at paragraph 29.

  26. The judge goes on to deal with the appellant's claimed activities in
      the United Kingdom. The judge referred to his delay in claiming
      paragraph 35 onwards.

  27. At paragraph 38 the judge refers to looking at the evidence as a whole
      including the documentary evidence. The judge has treated the
      appellant as a vulnerable witness. The judge accepts that he supported
      the VCK and the cause of the Tamils. The judge accepted he may have
      attended rallies and demonstrations and collected clothing and so
      forth. However, the judge did not accept the claim that he travelled
      to Sri Lanka for arms training. The judge concluded there would be no
      continuing interest in him by the Indian authorities.

  28. Much of the points made by Ms Jegarajah have, as Mr Jarvis observed,
      repeated details of the claim and suggested that the appellant would
      be of continuing interest in the intelligence services. I find the
      judge evaluated this and reached conclusions that were open. The judge
      sets out details at paragraph 39 and takes the view that the
      appellant's activities where low level. I do not see any material
      error of law in this conclusion.

  29. There was no evidence to suggest why the appellant would be ongoing
      interest to the authorities. Much of the evidence was by its nature
      self-serving. For instance, the claim of the authorities continuing to
      visit his father.

  30. Ultimately, I find no material error of law established. I find this
      to be a carefully prepared decision in which the judge has correctly
      set out the issues arising and considered the claim made and the
      evidence put forward. The judge reach conclusions which I find
      rational and open to the judge. It is for the appellant to make his
      case. The judge cannot state what intelligence the Indian authorities
      may have, particularly in the absence of an expert report. The judge
      had regard to the level of activity claimed and found it to be as a
      low-level. Therefore, the judge did not see why there would be ongoing
      interest in him. The judge concluded there was no risk. Ms Jegarajah
      in highlighting details of the claim is really disagreeing with the
      judge's conclusions. However, I find nothing to suggest those
      conclusions were not open to the judge or that there was any material
      error in the consideration of the claim.

Decision.

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Mace. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appeal
shall stand


                                                        Deputy Upper
Tribunal Judge Farrelly.


























