


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/01907/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2019              |On 4th February 2019          |
|Prepared on 25 January 2019       |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    H. M.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, Halliday Reeves & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  illegally,  and  on  7
           November  2016  made  a  protection  claim.  He  claimed  to  be
           ethnically Kurdish and a citizen of Iran, who had  fled  because
           he  believed  that  he  had  been  identified  by  the   Iranian
           authorities as a smuggler.
        2. This claim was refused  on  29  January  2018.  The  Appellant's
           appeal against the refusal of her protection claim was heard and
           dismissed by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hands  in  a  decision
           promulgated on 14 August 2018.
        3. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted
           by Designated Tribunal Judge Shaerf on 5 September 2018.
        4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      The challenge
        5. As identified in  the  grant  of  permission,  the  grounds  are
           generic because  they  do  not  engage  with  the  text  of  the
           decision. Instead they take  the  form  of  a  lengthy  skeleton
           argument, rather than identifying the errors of  law  complained
           of, and thus fall into the trap identified in Nixon  (Permission
           to appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT 368. Nevertheless DJ Shaerf felt
           able to identify two challenges; namely a failure to  adequately
           consider the risk upon return as one who would be  perceived  to
           be a failed asylum seeker, and, as one who would be perceived to
           be a Kurd.
        6. Before me Ms Cleghorn, who had drafted the grounds and  appeared
           below, accepted that DJ Shaerf  had  accurately  identified  the
           challenges to the decision the grounds  sought  to  advance.  As
           such she accepted that there was no  challenge  offered  by  the
           Appellant to the comprehensive adverse credibility findings that
           the Judge had made.
        7. The Judge had rejected the entirety of the  Appellant's  account
           as  a  fabrication  [D30-31].  She  had   concluded   that   the
           Appellant's father was in truth alive, that  the  Appellant  was
           not a smuggler as claimed, and that the Appellant had never come
           to the adverse attention  of  the  Iranian  authorities.  Whilst
           there was no express finding that the Appellant  had  failed  to
           establish that he had left Iran illegally - on a fair reading of
           the decision such a finding is in my judgement implicit  in  the
           Judge's wholescale rejection of the Appellant's evidence. Absent
           the claim to be a smuggler on the run from the  authorities  the
           Appellant had offered no reason for his needing  to  leave  Iran
           illegally. I can identify no reason why it should be inferred in
           his favour that he had done so, or, that he had told  the  truth
           when he had denied ever having been issued with a passport.
        8. At its highest, the Appellant's  case  therefore  needed  to  be
           considered by the Judge on the basis that he  had  done  nothing
           whilst living in Iran, or since, that would have  drawn  him  to
           adverse attention of  the  Iranian  authorities.  He  had  never
           claimed to have visited, or lived, in Iraq. Absent his  rejected
           claim to be a smuggler he had never claimed to  have  undertaken
           any political activity, or any activity that could rationally be
           perceived as such.
        9. The application to those circumstances  of  the  recent  country
           guidance decision of  HB  (Kurds)  Iran  (illegal  exit:  failed
           asylum seeker) CG [2018] UKUT 430 means that the  Appellant  has
           failed to establish a real risk of harm upon return. As  a  Kurd
           he might face  discrimination  in  Iran,  although  he  had  not
           advanced his claim on that basis, and such discrimination  would
           not in general be of a level that would amount  to  persecution.
           Merely being a Kurd, whether or not he was prepared to produce a
           valid passport and exit visa, was not of  itself  sufficient  to
           create a real risk of persecution or  Article  3  ill  treatment
           upon return.
       10. Accordingly the grounds fail to disclose any material  error  of
           law in the approach taken  by  the  Judge  to  the  appeal  that
           requires her decision to be set aside and remade.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 14
   August 2018 contained no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  to
   dismiss the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision  to  be  set
   aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 25 January 2018
