
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01103/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |Notice Sent                          |
|On 25 August 2017                      |On 13 September 2017                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
herein is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's
family.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of
court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Semega-Janneh, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer



                            NOTICE OF ABANDONMENT

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of  Somalia  born  in  January  1997.   She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("Fett") against a decision of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department refusing her protection  and
    human rights claims.  The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Alis and allowed on Article 3 and Humanitarian Protection  grounds  but
    dismissed on Refugee Convention grounds, in  a  decision  of  15  March
    2017.

 2. On 29 March 2017, the appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal in relation to the decision made by the Ft.  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds.  On that same date, the Secretary of State  granted
    the appellant Humanitarian Protection until 28 March 2022.   Notice  to
    this effect was sent to the appellant by the Secretary of State  on  30
    March 2017.  The next relevant event is the refusal  of  permission  to
    appeal by ft. Judge Easterman, sent to the  parties  on  or  around  10
    April 2017.

 3. On 26 April 2017, the appellant renewed her application for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The  notice  of  application  did  not
    identify the fact that the appellant had been granted leave to remain.

 4. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede in a decision  of
    9 May 2017.

    Legal Framework

 5. By section 104(4A) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    an appeal under section 82(1) (which this is) brought by a person while
    in the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if that  person  is
    granted leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom,  subject  to
    section 104(4B).  Section 104(4B) identifies that section 104(4A)  does
    not apply  to  an  appeal  insofar  as  it  is  brought  on  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection grounds where the  appellant,  "...  (b)  gives
    notice in accordance with the Tribunal Procedure Rules that  he  wishes
    to pursue the appeal insofar as it is brought on that ground."

 6. Turning to the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, by  rule
    17A:

         "(2) Where an appeal is treated as abandoned  pursuant  to  Section
             104(4) or (4A) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
             2002 ... the Upper Tribunal must send  the  parties  a  notice
             informing them that the appeal is being treated  as  abandoned
             or finally determined.

         (3)  Where  an  appeal  would  otherwise  fall  to  be  treated  as
             abandoned pursuant to  Section  104(4A)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, but the appellant  wishes  to
             pursue their appeal, the appellant  must  send  or  deliver  a
             notice,  which  must  comply  with   any   relevant   practice
             directions, to the Upper Tribunal and the respondent  so  that
             it is received within thirty days of the  date  on  which  the
             notice of the grant of leave to enter or remain in the  United
             Kingdom was sent to the appellant.

         ...

         (5)  Notwithstanding rule 5(3)(a) (case management powers) and rule
             7(2) (failure to  comply  with  the  rules  etc.),  the  Upper
             Tribunal must not extend the time limits in paragraphs (3) and
             (4)."

    (Emphasis added).

 7. The "Practice Direction, Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the  First-
    tier Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal"  as  amended  by  the  Senior
    President of the Tribunals on 13  November  2014  materially  reads  as
    follows:



         "5    Pursuing appeal after grant of leave


         5.1   This Practice Direction applies where:


             (a)  an appeal would otherwise fall to be treated as abandoned
                  pursuant to section 104(4A) of the 2002  Act  because  the
                  appellant  is  granted  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom; but
             (b)  the appellant wishes, in pursuance of section 104(4B)  or
                  (4C), to pursue the appeal, insofar as it  is  brought  on
                  asylum grounds or on grounds of unlawful discrimination.


         5.2   Where this Practice Direction  applies,  the  appellant  must
         comply with the following  requirements  (which  are  the  relevant
         practice directions for the purposes of UT rule 17A(3)).


         5.3   Where section  104(4B)  of  the  2002  Act  (asylum  grounds)
         applies, the notice required by  UT  rule  17A(3)  to  be  sent  or
         delivered to the Upper Tribunal must state:


             (a)  the appellant's full name and date of birth;
             (b)  the Tribunal's reference number;
             (c)  the Home Office reference number, if applicable;
             (d)  the Foreign and Commonwealth Office reference number,  if
                  applicable;
             (e)  the date on which the  appellant  was  granted  leave  to
                  enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  period
                  exceeding 12 months; and
             (f)  that the appellant wishes to pursue the appeal in so  far
                  as it is  brought  on  the  ground  specified  in  section
                  84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act  which  relates  to  the  Refugee
                  Convention. ...


         5.5   Where an appellant has sent or delivered a  notice  under  UT
         rule 17A(3), the Upper Tribunal will notify the  appellant  of  the
         date on which it received the notice."

    Decision and Reasons

 8. At the outset of the hearing I  invited  Mr  Semega-Janneh  to  specify
    whether the appellant had  sent  a  document  in  compliance  with  the
    abovementioned procedure rule  and  practice  direction  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and respondent - there being no such document contained within
    the Tribunal's file.

 9. Initially Mr Semega-Janneh asserted that the Tribunal should treat  the
    application for permission to appeal as a document complying  with  the
    requirements of rule  17A  of  the  2008  Rules;  however,  as  already
    identified, this application did not,  inter  alia,  notify  the  Upper
    Tribunal of the grant of leave to remain made  to  the  appellant,  and
    neither did  the  appellant  send  a  copy  of  such  'notice'  to  the
    respondent within the required timeframe - or at  all.   It  does  not,
    therefore, meet the requirements of rule 17A.

10.  Over  the  space  of  the  following  hour  Mr  Semega-Janneh   sought
    instructions on this issue, which resulted ultimately in an  acceptance
    that the appellant had not sent, either to the Upper Tribunal or to the
    respondent, a  document  (or  a  combination  of  documents)  with  the
    features required by rule  17A  and  the  Practice  Direction,  whether
    within or  outwith  the  specified  thirty-day  time  frame.  Had  this
    concession not been made I would have inevitably have come to the  same
    conclusion, given the absence of any  documentation  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal complying with the relevant rule and practice direction.

11. Whilst accepting that the  requirements  identified  in  rule  17A  are
    mandatory  Mr  Semega-Jannah,   nevertheless,   submitted   that   such
    requirements should be relaxed in the instant case in the interests  of
    justice. I reject this submission.  The Tribunal has no  discretion  to
    depart from the requirements set out in section 104(4A) of the 2002 Act
    and rule 17A of the Tribunal Procedure Rules and, even if it did, there
    are no features of the instant case that would lead me to exercise such
    discretion in the appellant's favour.

    Conclusion

12. The appellant not having served notice as required by  section  104(4B)
    of the 2002 Act, I treat his appeal as abandoned  pursuant  to  Section
    104(4A) thereof. This is notice of such abandonment, given pursuant  to
    rule 17A(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Signed:
[pic]

    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor










