
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01329/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd September 2019                |On 12th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    G R N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Eaton, instructed by Ata & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his protection claim  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 8 May 2019.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that  the  judge  failed
    to identify a Convention reason and failed to specify what part of  the
    Appellant's case was made out in relation to his protection claim.  The
    reasons for allowing the appeal were unclear.

3.   At the hearing before me, it was agreed by the parties that  the  judge
    had made errors of law. I find that the judge made  errors  of  law  as
    identified  in  the  grant  of  permission  dated  25  July  2019.   In
    particular, the judge failed to give adequate reasons for allowing  the
    appeal on any basis.

4.   Accordingly, I have decided in accordance with  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statements of 25 September 2012 that the  decision  should  be
    set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  None  of
    the judge's findings are preserved.



Notice of decision

Appeal allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



DIRECTIONS

(i)  The Tribunal is directed pursuant to section 12(3)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal at  a  hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Andrew.

(ii) The parties to serve all further documentary  material  on  which  they
    intend to rely not later than 7 days before the date of hearing.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 2 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



