
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01773/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 July 2019                      |On 9 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                   mr L K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jones of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania.  He was born on 22  April  2000.
    He appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse asylum dated 13
    February 2019.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 10 May 2019,  Judge  Wilding  (the  judge)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The credibility of  the  appellant's
    claim had been accepted by the respondent, however, the judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant was at risk on return to his  home  area  but
    that in any event, relocation to Tirana would not be unreasonable.

 3. There were three grounds, erroneous treatment of  documentary  evidence
    in assessing risk, failure to address  relevant  matters  in  the  risk
    assessment and erroneous approach to past persecution.  I will  address
    them in turn:

    Erroneous treatment of documentary evidence in assessing risk.

    Credibility had been accepted.  The only issues were  risk  on  return,
    sufficiency  of  protection  and   the   reasonableness   of   internal
    relocation.  Nevertheless, the  judge  had  "significant  difficulties"
    with the appellant's  evidence.   The  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    evidence in dispute in the context  of  the  rest  of  the  appellant's
    accepted account.  The judge made no reference to Tanveer Ahmed  [2002]
    UKIAT 00439.  He failed to apply the guidance in  Tanveer  Ahmed  which
    directed judges to assess all evidence including documents "as a  whole
    or in the round".  That obliged the judge to assess  the  documentation
    with the rest of the appellant's account which had been found credible,
    in particular in respect of what  the  appellant  had  said  about  his
    traffickers' interest in him  which  included  the  following  material
    aspects:

      i) Evidence that the traffickers had demonstrated an interest  in  him
         after he was released from the police by threatening him and making
         threats to kill  him  if  he  did  not  agree  to  meet  them  (see
         appellant's statement at [6]).

     ii) At interview, it was the appellant's understanding that he had been
         accused of having spied on the traffickers.  See Q119.

    iii) The appellant's evidence was that he had spoken to his father  (see
         his statement at [18]) who had told him  about  the  pressures  the
         family were facing; in light of the acceptance of the appellant  as
         credible (see [25] of the  judge's  decision).  Good  reasons  were
         needed to refuse that evidence.

 4.  By  focussing  on  the  notarised  content  of  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's father (see [20] of the decision) without an analysis of it
    in the context of the accepted aspects of the  appellant's  claim,  the
    judge's assessment fell short of  the  standards  set  out  in  Tanveer
    Ahmed.

 5. Further, the judge adopted an unfair approach to the father's  evidence
    by rejecting it inter alia on the  basis  that  no  original  had  been
    produced and that he had  not  been  shown  the  e-mail  to  which  the
    documents were originally attached.  See  [23]  of  the  decision.   If
    those concerns were so central to the judge's assessment of credibility
    then it was incumbent upon the judge to provide an opportunity for  the
    appellant to provide  the  documents,  even  if  that  necessitated  an
    adjournment.  Failure to  do  so  amounted  to  procedural  unfairness,
    especially since the appellant had been accepted as credible.

    Failure to address relevant matters in the risk assessment.

 6. The judge concluded that

      i) the appellant would not be of interest from his former  traffickers
         and

     ii) that he  could  reasonably  relocate  within  Albania.   The  judge
         reached the second conclusion on the basis that the  appellant  had
         not established that the  traffickers  had  influence  outside  the
         local area but in reaching those conclusions, the judge  failed  to
         consider material aspects of the evidence.

 7. At [27] the  judge  said  that  there  was  little  evidence  that  the
    traffickers were looking for the appellant to re-exploit him again.  He
    concluded that the gang would have no interest in  the  appellant  now.
    That was an error in the context of the appellant's evidence which  had
    been accepted.  The appellant had explained that  the  traffickers  had
    demonstrated an interest  in  him  after  he  was  released.   See  his
    statement at [6].  At interview he said that he  had  been  accused  of
    having spied on the traffickers.  See Q119.  The judge was  obliged  to
    take those matters into account.

 8. At [36] of his decision in respect of the traffickers likely reach, the
    judge said there was no reason to think that the gang  would  know  the
    appellant was back in Albania or had the desire to try to find him.  In
    reaching that  finding  the  judge  omitted  material  aspects  of  the
    account.  The traffickers were able to operate in  multiple  locations.
    See the appellant's statement at [4].  The judge's finding at [37] that
    there was no reason to think the gang  had  any  connections  with  the
    national police ignored the  appellant's  accepted  account  about  the
    traffickers' connections.  At Q141, the appellant  said  that  Lul  was
    well-known and had contacts all over Albania.  At Q144 he said Lul  was
    moving around anywhere and knew people from the state.  At Q117 he said
    the  police  allowed  Lul  to  operate  with  impunity.   The   judge's
    assessment of risk failed to address that evidence.

    Erroneous approach to past persecution.

 9. Given the  appellant's  past  ill-treatment  was  not  in  dispute  the
    principles set out at paragraph 339K applied.  The fact that  a  person
    had already been subject to persecution or serious harm etc.  would  be
    regarded as a serious indication of a well-founded fear of  persecution
    etc. unless there were good reasons to consider that  such  persecution
    would not be repeated.

10. At [25] the judge "diluted  the  strength  of  the  principles  in  the
    qualification directive" by finding that the appellant was credible and
    had shown he had been a  victim  of  modern  slavery  and  persecution.
    Further that past persecution was an indication of future risk in  many
    cases but not all and each case required careful analysis.  The judge's
    statement of principle fell significantly short of  the  provisions  of
    the directive.  There was no  recognition  that  past  persecution  was
    normally a serious indication of risk of harm and good  reasons  needed
    to be shown to find otherwise.

11. Judge Kelly granted permission on 10 June 2019.  He said inter alia:

         "2.  It is arguable that the Tribunal's approach to the appellant's
             documentary  evidence  was  inconsistent  with  the   accepted
             credibility  of  the  appellant's  account  as  a  victim   of
             trafficking and/or that that or that that approach resulted in
             procedural unfairness.  The other grounds have less force  but
             are nevertheless arguable."

Submission on Error of Law

12. Ms Jones submitted that the judge's assessment of risk on return and as
    a consequence, internal relocation, was flawed in a number of  material
    respects:

    Ground 1.  Erroneous treatment of  documentary  evidence  in  assessing
    risk.

    Ground 2.  Failure to address relevant matters in the risk assessment.

    Ground 3.  Erroneous approach to past persecution.

13. I will address them in turn:

    Ground 1.  Erroneous treatment of  documentary  evidence  in  assessing
    risk.

    Ms Jones submitted that because the appellant was found  to  be  partly
    credible, he should also be found to be credible regarding the evidence
    he provided on the day of the hearing including a  notarised  statement
    from his father confirming  that  the  family  had  been  placed  under
    pressure from people who had been asking  about  the  appellant.   That
    evidence was significant because it  showed  ongoing  interest  in  the
    appellant from those who had previously trafficked him.

    The grounds claim the judge failed to consider that new evidence in the
    context  of  the  rest  of  the  appellant's  accepted   account.    In
    particular, that he made no reference to  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439 and failed to apply its guidance.

    Further, that the judge adopted an unfair approach to  the  appellant's
    father's evidence by rejecting it inter  alia  on  the  basis  that  no
    original had been produced and that he had not been shown the e-mail to
    which  the  documents  were  originally  attached.   See  [23]  of  the
    decision.  The grounds claim that  if  the  judge's  concerns  were  so
    central to his assessment of credibility then it was incumbent upon the
    judge to provide  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to  supply  original
    documents even if that necessitated an adjournment.

14. Ground 2.  Failure to address relevant matters in the risk assessment.

    The grounds claim that the judge erred because he  failed  to  consider
    material aspects of the evidence in concluding that the appellant would
    not be of  interest  to  his  former  traffickers  and  that  he  could
    reasonably relocate within Albania.  In particular, that the  appellant
    had said at [6] of  his  statement  that  when  he  was  released,  the
    traffickers had made threats to kill him if he did not  agree  to  meet
    them and at Q119 at interview, he said he had been  accused  of  having
    spied on the traffickers.

    As to the traffickers likely reach, the  judge  omitted  to  take  into
    account the appellant's evidence that at interview, he  said  that  Lul
    had contacts all over Albania and was well-known.  Further, at Q144  he
    said that Lul "... knew people from the state and he was moving  around
    everywhere".  At Q117 the appellant said that the police allowed Lul to
    operate with impunity.

15. Ground 3.  Erroneous approach to past persecution.

    The grounds claim that the judge failed to take  comprehensive  account
    of paragraph 339K.   In  particular  that  past  persecution  would  be
    regarded as a "serious indication" of future risk.

16. Mr Tarlow submitted that the grounds amounted to nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings and decision which had been more
    than adequately reasoned.

Conclusion on Error of Law

17. The judge carried out a careful, comprehensive  and  nuanced  analysis.
    Merely because it  had  been  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    trafficked, did not mean that such  acceptance  should  extend  to  the
    whole of the appellant's case.  The  judge  said  he  had  "significant
    difficulties" with the evidence provided by the appellant on the day of
    the hearing for all of the reasons he set out at [15]  -  [44]  of  his
    decision.

18. The judge recited the documentation that had been handed up to  him  at
    the hearing including a statement from the appellant's father that  the
    family had been under pressure and had "serious interventions" and  for
    that reason their lives were in danger from unidentified people who had
    asked about the whereabouts of the appellant.  The appellant said  that
    he had spoken to his father on 18 April 2019 on the telephone who  told
    him that it was not safe to return home.

19. The judge said that notwithstanding the acceptance of  the  appellant's
    claim to date, he had significant difficulties with the  new  evidence.
    He set out those difficulties at [19]  -  [24]  of  his  decision.   To
    summarise:

         It had been submitted late in the day.

         No previous mention had been made that the appellant was in contact
         with his  family  and  that  there  was  ongoing  interest  in  his
         whereabouts.

20. The document itself was vague and lacking in any significant detail  as
    to what was claimed to be happening.  The appellant's father failed  to
    explain what "serious pressure" they had  been  subjected  to  or  what
    amounted to "serious interventions" they had had and from whom.

21. The document referred to "family problems" with no reference to any  of
    the reasons the appellant said caused him to leave the country.

22. The judge was entitled to say  that  such  an  absence  of  unexplained
    detail reduced the weight which he could attach to  the  documentation.
    There was no English  translation  of  the  documents  which  had  been
    produced by the notary rather than an independent  source,  which  also
    affected the weight the judge was prepared to place  upon  it;  he  was
    entitled to reach that decision.

23. The judge said he did not find it credible that  given  Albania  was  a
    society with a long-standing problem with extrajudicial revenge, if the
    gang were intent on revenge against the family,  they  would  not  have
    taken such revenge.  Nothing had happened since 2016.  See [22].

24. The judge said he only had a copy of the document, the  original  being
    still in Albania.  The judge had not been provided with a copy of the e-
    mail which attached the document so he had no context as to how it came
    into the appellant's possession or evidence of the method.   The  judge
    said that he did not know if it was sent from Albania or from somewhere
    else and from what e-mail address it was sent or  if  any  message  was
    attached with it.

25. These were all issues which the judge was entitled to take into account
    in reaching his findings.  The judge did not adopt an  unfair  approach
    to the evidence.  Nor did he do so in particular on the basis  that  no
    original of the documents had been produced.  The grounds claimed  that
    if those  concerns  were  so  central  to  the  judge's  assessment  of
    credibility then  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  provide  an
    opportunity for the appellant to provide the documents.  The production
    of the original document and the accompanying e-mail was not central to
    the judge's assessment of credibility.  On the contrary, it came at the
    end of a  list  of  concerns  and  was  as  the  judge  said,  a  final
    observation as to why he placed little weight on  the  documents.   The
    judge did not err in adopting such an approach.  He was not required to
    refer to Tanveer Ahmed in terms.  What the judge did was to decide what
    reliance could be placed upon the documentation.  The  judge  did  just
    that, considering the situation in the round and finding that he  could
    place little weight on the same.  That was a  decision  the  judge  was
    entitled to come to on the evidence before him.

26. Although the judge did not in terms refer  to  the  evidence  at  Q117,
    Q141 and Q144 (see [8] above) I do not accept that he materially  erred
    as a result. It is clear  from  what  he  said  at  [36]-[39]  that  he
    rejected any suggestion of the claim to Lul's influence and reach.

27. The judge considered all material aspects of the evidence  in  deciding
    that the appellant would not be at future risk  from  his  traffickers.
    The appellant's documentary evidence handed up at the hearing  was  not
    accepted by the judge for the reasons he set out.    See what the judge
    had to say in that regard at [27].

28. What the  judge  said  was  that  the  appellant  had  established  the
    narrative  of  his  case  and  had  shown  he  had  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  He then went on to  consider  the  likelihood  of  future
    risk.  I accept that the judge did  not  refer  to  the  term  "serious
    indication" but I do not find as a result that he adopted a higher than
    applicable standard.  What he said was as follows:

         "I therefore turn to determining the issues.  Firstly, whether  the
         appellant is at risk from exploitation and modern  slavery  in  his
         home area.  The appellant has  established  the  narrative  of  his
         case.  He is credible and has therefore shown he has been a  victim
         of modern slavery and persecution already.  Past persecution is  an
         indication of future risk in many cases, however not all, and  each
         case requires careful analysis".

    There is nothing to suggest that the judge ignored  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 339K in not referring to "serious indication".  The judge set
    out in detail the appellant's case.  He found the appellant  would  not
    be  at  risk  from  random  traffickers  and   given   the   particular
    circumstances of his trafficking, he would not put himself  in  such  a
    vulnerable position again.  He was 16 when he was exploited.  He  would
    be returning as a 19 year old wanting to avoiding experiencing the same
    again and would not be at risk in his home area.  The judge  considered
    what the appellant had to say at Q119 but found that the extent of  the
    appellant's involvement with the  traffickers  was  that  he  had  once
    worked for them.   They  would  have  no  interest  in  him  now.   The
    appellant had given no credible explanation as to why there would be an
    ongoing interest in him.  It was unclear whether they were even in  the
    same area as he said that the police had shut down the farm.

29. The reason for the appellant's previous exploitation was due to his age
    and inexperience.  He wanted to make money.  He  was  not  forced  into
    work, nor was he taken  against  his  will  at  the  outset.   In  such
    circumstances,  the  judge  did  not  err  in  finding  it  "incredibly
    unlikely" that the appellant  would  find  himself  in  that  situation
    again.

30. Accordingly, the judge was satisfied that the appellant was not at risk
    in his home area but went on to consider nevertheless whether he  could
    reasonably relocate, having found that the Albanian  authorities  would
    be unlikely to offer sufficiency of protection.  The judge  found  that
    the appellant would not  be  at  risk  on  relocation.   There  was  no
    evidence to suggest that the gang would know he was back in the country
    let alone have the desire to try to find him.  There was no  reason  to
    think the gang had any connections with  national  police.   The  judge
    found the gang did not have the reach the appellant claimed  such  that
    he was not in fear of registration.  See in particular [37] - [41].

31. I do not accept that the judge in some way diluted or failed to  follow
    the spirit of the Qualification Directive.  What the judge did  was  to
    carry out a forensic and nuanced analysis finding for  the  reasons  he
    was entitled to, that the appellant was not at risk on return.

32. The grounds establish no error of law.  The judge's decision stands.



Anonymity Direction continued


Signed                              Date 26 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
