
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/01432/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 22 November 2016          |On 23 November 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    L L H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Joshi of A. Bajwa & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarling, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  Although this is  a
protection claim, the grounds of appeal to this Tribunal  do  not  challenge
the Judge's dismissal of the appeal on that  ground.   However,  the  appeal
involves a child and it  is  therefore  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge N M  K  Lawrence  promulgated  on  23  September  2016  ("the
         Decision"). By the Decision the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
         appeal against the Respondent's decision dated  21  September  2015
         refusing her protection and human  rights  claims.   The  Appellant
         challenges the Decision in relation to the dismissal of the  appeal
         on human rights grounds, in particular Article 8 ECHR.

      2. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Osborne on 21 October 2016 on the basis that it  is  arguable  that
         the Judge failed to adequately  consider  the  Appellant's  child's
         best interests and that  the  proportionality  of  the  Appellant's
         removal to Myanmar may therefore not have been properly considered.
           The appeal comes before me to determine whether there is an error
         of law in the Decision and if so to either re-make the decision  or
         remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

      3. I can deal with the factual background to this case quite  shortly.
         The Appellant arrived  in  the  UK  in  February  2006  with  entry
         clearance as a student.  Her leave was extended  in  that  category
         until June 2013.  Thereafter, she sought to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
         migrant but that application failed.   She then claimed  asylum  in
         August  2015.   It  is  that  claim  which  was  refused   by   the
         Respondent's decision under appeal.

      4. The basis of the Appellant's asylum and human rights claims is  her
         relationship with an Egyptian national who is a Muslim  (Mr  A  E).
         The Appellant is a Buddhist.  According to the  evidence  given  to
         the Judge at the appeal hearing, she has no intention of converting
         to her partner's religion ([17] of the Decision).  The  couple  met
         in October 2012.  Mr A E has no status in the UK either.  They have
         a son born on 21 September 2015.  The  Appellant's  family  do  not
         accept her relationship with Mr A E because of his religion.   They
         are, for the same  reason,  unwilling  to  accept  the  Appellant's
         child.

      5. The Appellant says that she would be at risk in Myanmar because  of
         her relationship with Mr A E and her son would similarly be at risk
         by extension.  The Judge did not  accept  that  claim  for  reasons
         given at [11] to [15] of the Decision.   Based  on  the  background
         evidence, the Judge did not accept that the  evidence  showed  that
         Muslims (other than the Rohingya) were at risk  of  persecution  in
         Myanmar.  The Appellant would be returning  to  her  home  area  of
         Yangon.  That is not in the Rohingya area.  The Appellant  has  not
         challenged those findings or the Judge's dismissal of her appeal on
         protection grounds.

    The grounds, submissions and evidence

      6. The  focus  of  the  appeal  before  me  is  the  position  of  the
         Appellant's child, particularly in light of what is alleged  to  be
         an inability for the Appellant and Mr A E to marry in  Myanmar  and
         an inability for the  Appellant's  child  to  be  registered  as  a
         citizen of Myanmar.

      7. Ms Joshi's skeleton argument before me focussed  in  particular  on
         the latter point.  Appended to her skeleton argument is a  document
         from  "The  International  Observatory  on   Statelessness"   which
         purports to set out the position in relation to registration  of  a
         child in Myanmar.  Ms Joshi candidly accepted  that  this  document
         was not before the Judge.

      8. I sought to ascertain from Ms Joshi what evidence was  relied  upon
         before the Judge as showing that the Appellant's child could not be
         registered as a citizen of Myanmar and indeed  whether  this  point
         had actually been brought to the attention of the Judge as part  of
         the Appellant's claim in any event.  It is mentioned in the grounds
         of appeal.  However, there  did  not  appear  to  be  any  evidence
         relating to this point and no indication that the point  was  taken
         before the Judge (although in fairness the submissions are not  set
         out in full).  Ms  Joshi  drew  my  attention  to  the  Appellant's
         witness statement and that of Mr A E.  Those  read  as  follows  in
         relation to this point:-

             Appellant's statement

             "[7] The law in Burma does not allow us to get married because
                  of our difference in religion and also the Burmese embassy
                  has not allowed our child to be registered  as  a  Burmese
                  national."

             Mr A E's statement

             "[8] We also cannot live as a family in Egypt, because we  are
                  not married and [L] is not Muslim, she is a Buddhist.   We
                  are not allowed to have a family  life  according  to  the
                  Egyptian laws and live together  there  permanently.   The
                  Egyptian embassy even refused to register the child as  an
                  Egyptian because there is no  marriage  and  the  Egyptian
                  laws would not allow us to  get  married  because  of  the
                  difference in our religion.  [L] also  tried  to  register
                  the child with the Burmese Embassy but  they  too  refused
                  her based on the same reason"

      9. I pointed out to Ms Joshi that those assertions were not  based  on
         any evidence from the Burmese Embassy. She asserted that  this  was
         because the Embassy would not confirm the position in  writing.   I
         pointed out that this was not in evidence.  She also submitted that
         it was a natural extension of the fact that the Myanmar authorities
         would not allow the Appellant to  marry  Mr  A  E  because  of  the
         difference in religion.  That submission led to a discussion  about
         whether that was in fact  the  position.   That  is  of  particular
         relevance given what Mr A E says about the reasons why the  Burmese
         Embassy would not register the child being the same as those  given
         by the Egyptian Embassy (that the couple would not  be  allowed  to
         marry and the child  could  not  be  registered  unless  they  were
         married).   The Appellant  herself  provides  no  reasons  why  the
         Embassy said that the child could not be registered.

     10. Ms Joshi directed my attention to a document at [AB/121]  which  is
         described as a "Notarial Certification".  In light  of  the  weight
         which Ms Joshi sought to place on this document in relation to  the
         issue of whether the couple could marry in  Myanmar  and  that  the
         document is not expressly mentioned in the Decision, I set out  the
         content of this document in full:-

             "I [name and address of notary/advocate in Myanmar]  do hereby
             certify that [ L L T] daughter of [father and  mother's  names
             and address in  Myanmar]  born  on  6th  day  of  April  1978,
             residing at [address in Myanmar] has already attained the  age
             of legal majority and she is unmarried  person  (single).   As
             she being a Citizen of the Union of Myanmar,  she  has  lawful
             right to enter into legal marriage with  anyone  of  the  same
             Religion, according to the  existing  laws  of  the  Union  of
             Myanmar, under the following conditions:-

               1) Who has completed (21) years of age.

               2) Must be  single,  free,  unmarried  and  a  bachelor  (or)
                  spinster, and

               3) Must obtain the consent or [of?] both parties"

     11. Ms Joshi also sought to make submissions about whether Mr A E could
         join the Appellant in  Myanmar  in  order  for  a  marriage  to  be
         conducted there.   She submitted that Mr A E has been told that  he
         could only get a very short term visa  from  Egypt  (which  is  his
         country of return).  As I pointed out to her, though, there  is  no
         evidence from Mr A E about this.  She  was  constrained  to  accept
         that this was the case.

     12. I asked Ms Joshi what factors were relied upon as being relevant in
         the consideration of the Appellant's child's best  interests  other
         than the registration point and where the evidence was  before  the
         Judge in relation to those best  interests.   She  pointed  to  the
         Appellant's son's birth certificate which shows he was born in  the
         UK in September 2015 (and was at the time of the hearing before the
         Judge therefore aged under one year).   She  also  pointed  to  the
         Appellant's evidence that her family had disowned her and the child
         and that it would not be safe for her, Mr A E and the child to live
         in Myanmar together.

     13. In response, Mr Tarlow submitted that there is no material error in
         the Decision.  The Judge has dealt with the  evidence  before  him.
         He has noted the evidence in relation to the  couple's  ability  to
         marry at [8] of the Decision and  found  at  [9]  that  they  could
         lawfully settle together in Myanmar.  The only error in relation to
         which  permission  was  granted  is  the  brevity  of  the  Judge's
         consideration  of  the  child's  best  interests  at  [19]  of  the
         Decision.  However, read in the context of the Decision as a  whole
         and the findings made elsewhere,  together  with  the  evidence  on
         which Ms Joshi relied in her submissions before  me,  he  submitted
         that either there was no error or any  error  would  be  immaterial
         given the lack of evidence of the matters relied upon.

     14. Mr Tarlow pointed out that the child is aged just  over  one  year.
         He is not in education.  His best interests at that age are  to  be
         with his parents.  Mr Tarlow accepted that  the  Judge  could  have
         said more about the best interests.  However, the evidence that the
         Burmese Embassy would not register the  child  was  based  on  bare
         assertion with no material in support.   He repeated his submission
         therefore that the error, if there is one, is not material.

     15. In reply, Ms Joshi submitted that even if the  only  evidence  that
         the child could not be registered as Burmese is assertion,  it  was
         still incumbent on the  Judge  to  deal  with  that  evidence.   He
         clearly had the witness statements before him.  She also  submitted
         that the error is material because the child's best  interests  are
         compromised by the Judge's failure to deal with them properly.

     16. At the end of the hearing, I indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
         decision as to whether there is a material  error  of  law  in  the
         Decision and give that decision in writing with reasons which I now
         turn to do.   Both  representatives  agreed  that,  if  I  found  a
         material error of law, the appeal could remain in this Tribunal for
         re-making.  However, Ms Joshi indicated that  the  Appellant  would
         wish to submit further evidence particularly  in  relation  to  the
         registration point.

    Discussion and conclusions

     17. The Judge deals with the Appellant's son's best interests expressly
         at [19] of the Decision in the following terms:-

             "On the evidence before me, I find there is no  evidence  that
             there  are  very  significant  difficulties  in  this   family
             settling in Myanmar.  The son was born on the  21st  September
             2015.   There  is  no  evidence  before  me  that  the   son's
             development, 'best interests', in  Myanmar  is  likely  to  be
             prejudiced should he be returned there with his parents."

     18. Although this  passage  appears  after  the  consideration  of  the
         Appellant's family and private life and  the  Article  8  claim  is
         assessed only within the Rules, it  appears  from  what  the  Judge
         there says that he has found that the child's best interests at his
         young age are served with settling with his parents  wherever  they
         are based.  The issue is whether  the  evidence  before  the  Judge
         required any closer consideration of other factors.  As I noted  at
         [12] above, the additional factors relied upon before me  were  the
         inability to register the child as a Burmese citizen, the inability
         of the Appellant and Mr A E to marry and continue their life  as  a
         family in Myanmar, the safety of the child by extension of Mr A E's
         position  as  a  non-national  Muslim  and  the  rejection  of  the
         relationship and child by the Appellant's family.

     19. I start by considering the position in relation to registration  of
         the child.   I accept that the assertions in the witness statements
         which I have set out at [8] above are not expressly referred to  by
         the  Judge.   It  is  important  though  to  consider  what   those
         statements  actually  say.   As  I  have  noted,  the   Appellant's
         statement is silent about the reasons why she says that the Burmese
         Embassy would not register the child.  Mr A  E's  statement  though
         suggests that the reasons are the same as  given  by  the  Egyptian
         Embassy namely that the couple are not married.

     20. That leads me on to consider whether there is any error in relation
         to the Judge's findings about whether the couple would be permitted
         to marry in Myanmar.  As set  out  at  [10]  above,  the  Appellant
         relied in this regard on the Notarial  Certificate.   Although  the
         Appellant's name is spelt differently and she did not at  the  date
         of the document (29th June 2016) live in Myanmar, I am prepared  to
         accept this document as referring to the Appellant.

     21. However, I am quite unable to accept the  interpretation  which  Ms
         Joshi sought to place on this  document  concerning  the  right  to
         marry a person of a different religion.  She submitted that because
         it is said that the Appellant has the right to marry someone of the
         same religion, it is implicit from this  that  the  document  shows
         that she does not have  the  right  to  marry  someone  of  another
         religion.  I cannot accept that interpretation.   The  document  is
         silent on the point.  In particular, the conditions set out in  the
         document make no further reference to the other party having to  be
         of the same religion.

     22. Furthermore, it is not clear what is the expertise  of  the  Notary
         who wrote this document nor for what purpose it  was  written.   It
         post-dates the  Respondent's  refusal  letter  which  sets  out  in
         considerable detail the laws of Myanmar passed in 2015 which permit
         a marriage between a Buddhist woman and  a  non-Buddhist  man  (see
         pages 8 to 9 of the Respondent's decision).  If  the  intention  of
         the Notarial Certificate was  to  answer  that  evidence,  I  would
         expect the document to state in terms that it is not possible for a
         Buddhist woman and a non-Buddhist man  to  marry  and  why  not  by
         reference to the law enacted in 2015.

     23. I accept that the Judge has failed to  make  express  reference  to
         this document when dealing with the Appellant's ability to marry Mr
         A E in Myanmar and to live with him there at [8] of  the  Decision.
         However, that is likely to be because the relevance of the document
         was not explained.  Even if that is an error, it  could  not  be  a
         material one given the extent  of  the  evidence  produced  by  the
         Respondent on this issue and the ambiguity (put at its highest)  of
         the position as set out in the  document  on  which  the  Appellant
         seeks to rely.

     24. As I noted at [7] above, Ms Joshi also sought to rely on background
         evidence appended to her  skeleton  argument  in  relation  to  the
         asserted inability to register the Appellant's child as  a  Burmese
         national.  Although the document was not before the Judge and there
         can be no error based on his failure to refer to it, I  have  taken
         it into consideration because its content may go to the question of
         whether, if there is any error in relation to consideration of best
         interests, that error is material.

     25.  On  closer  scrutiny,  the  document  does  not   bear   out   the
         interpretation which Ms Joshi  seeks  to  place  on  it.   It  only
         summarises what the nationality law is in  Myanmar  for  particular
         categories of person.  It does not set out the nationality laws  of
         Myanmar in any detail.  The document starts by referring  to  three
         groups of what are said to be stateless persons in  Myanmar  -  the
         Rohingya, native born but non-indigenous people such as Indians and
         children born in Thailand of Burmese parents.  Ms Joshi  underlined
         the passage at the end of  the  document  which  states  that  "The
         Burmese government refuses to give  citizenship  to  children  born
         outside the country to Burmese parents who left illegally  or  fled
         persecution".  However, even  that  passage  does  not  assist  the
         Appellant's case.  She did not leave Myanmar illegally -  she  came
         with entry clearance as a student.  Although she has since made  an
         asylum claim, that is based on a situation which has  arisen  since
         she left Myanmar (her relationship).  She did not flee persecution.



     26. For the above reasons, I find that there is no error in the Judge's
         failure to expressly refer to the alleged inability to register the
         Appellant's child as Burmese.  That flows from the  fact  that  the
         evidence in the statements  is  unsatisfactory  and  lacks  detail.
         Such detail as is included in Mr A E's  statement  depends  on  the
         Judge's findings as to the  couple's  ability  to  marry  and  live
         together in  Myanmar.   Based  on  the  evidence  produced  by  the
         Respondent as to the laws relating to marriage in Myanmar  and  for
         the reasons I have given at [20] to [23] above for finding that the
         document relied upon by the Appellant does not assist her case, the
         Judge was entitled to reach the finding which he did at [9] of  the
         Decision that the family can lawfully settle together in Myanmar.

     27. Ms Joshi also relied on the Appellant's child's birth  certificate.
         Other than in relation to the child's age, it does not seem  to  me
         that this evidence has any relevance.   I  do  not  understand  the
         Appellant to  be  asserting  that  the  child  is  entitled  to  be
         registered as a British citizen because he  was  born  in  the  UK.
         That is clearly not the case.  Neither the Appellant nor Mr A E had
         settled status at the  date  of  the  child's  birth.   He  is  not
         therefore entitled to British citizenship at birth.  Even the grant
         of limited leave to either or both parent  would  not  change  that
         position.  He would not be entitled to be registered as  a  citizen
         until such time as one of his parents had at least  settled  status
         in the UK or he attains the age of ten years.

     28. The other factors relied upon by Ms Joshi  relate  to  the  child's
         safety and rejection of him by the Appellant's family.  In relation
         to safety,  the  Judge  found,  having  considered  the  background
         evidence at [11] to [15] of the Decision,  that  the  family  could
         settle without fear in  Myanmar.   The  Appellant's  home  area  of
         Yangon is not in the Rohingya areas.  The Appellant is  a  Buddhist
         and not Rohingya Muslim.  Mr A E is a Muslim but not a Rohingya and
         the Judge found based on the background evidence that ill treatment
         of Muslims is predominantly centred on the Rohingya areas.

     29. The Judge also noted at [16] of the Decision the Appellant's  claim
         to have been ostracised by her family based on her relationship and
         birth of her son. He found though that this did not  engage  either
         the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention without more.
          Although the Appellant says in her evidence that she  cannot  live
         with her family in Myanmar because of the rejection,  she  is  aged
         thirty-eight and does not live with her family here.  She has lived
         in the UK without her family for a number of years.   There  is  no
         error of law in the Judge's approach.

     30. I accept that the  Judge  has  not  dealt  with  the  child's  best
         interests until after his consideration  of  the  position  of  the
         Appellant and the question of whether the family meet the Rules.  I
         accept also that  the  Judge  has  not  gone  on  to  consider  the
         proportionality of removal outside  the  Rules  taking  account  of
         those best interests.  However, I  find  that  any  error  in  this
         regard is not material since, on the evidence, there  could  be  no
         different outcome for the following reasons.

     31. The child is aged just over one year.  The Judge has found that the
         family can settle together in Myanmar.  I have explained at [20] to
         [23] above why that finding was open to him  on  the  evidence.   I
         have also rejected the Appellant's case in relation to  ability  to
         register the child based on the evidence before the Judge and  that
         before me for the reasons set out at [20] to [26]  above.   I  also
         observe as noted at [27] above,  that  the  position  would  be  no
         different in relation to registration if the family were  permitted
         to remain in the UK at this stage.  The Appellant's child is not in
         education.  There is no evidence of any health difficulties.  There
         is no evidence that his best interests are other than  those  which
         would generally pertain in relation to a child of this  very  young
         age, namely to be with his parents.

     32. For those reasons, although the Appellant's child's best  interests
         are a primary consideration (albeit one which can be outweighed  by
         other factors), the child's best interests in this case  could  not
         render removal disproportionate provided the  child  is  to  remain
         with his parents (given his very young age).  The Judge  has  dealt
         with the family's private and family life as a  whole,  finding  at
         [17] of the Decision that the Appellant and Mr A  E  can  marry  in
         Myanmar and the family can enjoy their family life in Myanmar.  The
         Judge goes on to note at [18]  of  the  Decision  that  the  family
         cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  based  on  their
         relationship or the position of their child.  That  is  undoubtedly
         correct.  Although the  grounds  of  appeal  before  this  Tribunal
         assert that the Judge was obliged to  go  on  to  consider  whether
         removal would be proportionate applying the Razgar test, it is  not
         said what additional factors fell to be considered other  than  the
         child's best interests.  For the  reasons  I  give,  those  do  not
         militate against removal provided the child is to remain  with  his
         parents.

     33. For those reasons, I find that there is no  error  of  law  in  the
         Decision.  Even if there were an error, I uphold the  Decision  for
         the reasons I have given on the basis that, taking into account the
         evidence, any error is not material.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision
promulgated on 23 September 2016 with the consequence that  the  Appellant's
appeal is dismissed.

Signed   [pic]    Date 23 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
