







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/01401/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9th October 2017                      |  On 17th October 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     EE
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Imamovic of Counsel, instructed by Qualified
                    Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of  Judge  Abebrese  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 7th April 2017.

 2. The Appellant is  a  male  Albanian  citizen  who  arrived  in  the  UK
    illegally on 20th May 2016.  He claimed asylum on 3rd August 2016 after
    having been found working  illegally  and  being  served  with  removal
    directions.

 3. The asylum claim was based  upon  his  fear  of  a  police  officer  in
    Albania.  The Appellant's claim was that he had been in a  relationship
    with the police officer's sister and as a result had been attacked  and
    threatened.

 4. The application was refused on 31st January 2017.  The  Respondent  did
    not accept the Appellant had given a  credible  account.   It  was  not
    accepted that he had problems with his girlfriend's stepbrother who was
    a police officer.  The Appellant had claimed that he had been  arrested
    and detained by the police when seeking to make a complaint against his
    girlfriend's stepbrother and this was not accepted.

 5. The appeal was heard and dismissed on 10th March 2017.

 6. The Appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   The  grounds  are
    summarised below.  It was contended that the FtT at  paragraph  12  had
    recorded that the Appellant was not credible but  had  failed  to  give
    sufficient reasons for that finding.

 7. At paragraph 15 the FtT had found documents submitted by the  Appellant
    to be self-serving but had failed to properly  assess  these  documents
    and it was contended that the finding that  they  are  self-serving  is
    irrational.

 8. The FtT at paragraphs 13-15 had found that the authorities  in  Albania
    could provide effective protection, but had failed to take into account
    EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 348.

 9. The FtT had erred in finding that a reasonable  relocation  option  was
    available to the Appellant, as the FtT had failed to take into  account
    the persecutor was a police officer and the FtT had failed to  consider
    the Respondent's own guidance which indicated that the Appellant  would
    have to register if he relocated to a new area.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by Judge Brunnen of the FtT in the following terms;

         "2.  The grounds on which permission to  appeal  is  sought  submit
             that the judge erred  in  law  by  failing  to  give  adequate
             reasons for finding that the Appellant was not credible.  This
             is arguable.  The judge's reasoning relates almost entirely to
             whether the Appellant could obtain sufficient state protection
             or could relocate, rather than to whether he would be at risk.
               The  judge  characterised  the  police  evidence  that   the
             Appellant had been assaulted and the medical evidence  of  his
             injuries as self-serving  but  arguably  failed  to  give  any
             reason for  rejecting  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been
             assaulted.  The fact that this evidence has been  obtained  to
             bolster the Appellant's claim is arguably not a  valid  reason
             for rejecting it - the same could be said of all the evidence
             in every asylum claim.

         3.   The grounds submit that in finding that  the  Appellant  could
             obtain sufficient state protection  or  could  relocate  to  a
             place where he would not be found, the judge  failed  to  take
             account of the Appellant's  evidence  that  the  aggressor  he
             fears is a police officer.  This is also arguable."

10. Following  the  grant  of  permission  directions  were  issued  making
    provision for there to be  a  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error of law such  that
    it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Ms Imamovic relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal and  submitted  that  the  FtT  had  given  no
    adequate reasoning for the conclusions reached.

12. Mrs Aboni submitted that  the  FtT  had  given  adequate  reasons,  and
    directed itself appropriately.  Even if adequate reasoning had not been
    given, the FtT had considered the Appellant's claim at its highest, and
    found that a  sufficiency  of  protection  and  a  reasonable  internal
    relocation option existed.

13. By way of response Ms Imamovic submitted that the  FtT  had  failed  to
    look at the evidence in  the  round.   In  considering  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal relocation the FtT had failed to consider  that
    the persecutor was a police officer.

14. Ms Imamovic submitted that because the FtT  assessment  of  credibility
    was flawed, no findings should be preserved, and the  decision  of  the
    FtT should be set aside and remitted back to the FtT to be made afresh.



My Conclusions and Reasons

15. The first challenge to the FtT decision is  that  insufficient  reasons
    were given for finding the Appellant not to be credible.  The  guidance
    on the duty to give reasons is  set  out  in  Budhathoki  (reasons  for
    decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC), the head note of which is  set  out
    below;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportioned approach to deciding cases.  It is, however, necessary
         for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence
         and explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,  so  that  the
         parties can understand why they have won or lost.

16. The FtT at paragraph 12 records that the Appellant has not  been  found
    to be credible but does not give adequate reasons for such  a  finding.
    No reasons are given in that paragraph or in the following  paragraphs,
    for finding the Appellant's account to be incredible.  It is  therefore
    unclear from reading the FtT decision, why the Appellant is found to be
    incredible.  Credibility is a central issue.  There may be many reasons
    for finding the Appellant incredible.  The Respondent  pointed  in  the
    refusal to a failure to claim asylum in Italy or France, a  failure  to
    claim asylum having arrived in the UK,  and  thereafter  the  Appellant
    only claiming asylum after being  arrested  and  detained  for  working
    illegally and after being served with removal directions.  However  the
    FtT does not make any reference to those issues.

17. There are therefore no  satisfactory  reasons  given  for  finding  the
    Appellant's account to be incredible and  that  is  an  error  of  law.



18. The FtT makes reference to documentation  supplied  by  the  Appellant,
    which relates to attendances  at  hospital  and  a  police  station  in
    Albania.  If a document is produced by an  Appellant,  it  is  for  the
    Appellant to prove that the document can be  relied  upon,  unless  the
    Respondent makes a specific allegation of forgery, in  which  case  the
    Respondent  would  bear  the  burden  of  proof.   In  this  case   the
    documentation was not placed before the Respondent,  but  was  produced
    after the Respondent's decision to refuse the  Appellant's  asylum  and
    human rights claim.  Therefore it was for the Appellant to prove to the
    FtT that the documents could be relied upon, and the FtT must  consider
    the evidence in the round.

19. The FtT  finds  the  documentation  to  be  self-serving  and  produced
    primarily to bolster the asylum claim.  No adequate reasons  are  given
    for concluding that the documentation cannot be relied upon.

20. The FtT has not made a finding upon  the  Appellant's  claim  that  his
    persecutor in Albania is a police officer.  Making a finding upon  this
    issue is central to the appeal.  The FtT must then go on to explain why
    the alleged persecutor would not have the power or influence to  locate
    the Appellant if he moved elsewhere in  Albania.   Failure  to  make  a
    finding as to whether the alleged persecutor is a  police  officer,  is
    relevant to consideration of sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
    relocation.

21. I am persuaded the grounds seeking permission to appeal, read  together
    with the grant of permission, do show the FtT materially erred in  law,
    and the decision is unsafe and must be set aside.

22. The decision therefore must be  remade.   I  have  taken  into  account
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice statements,  and  have
    decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to the FtT  to
    be decided afresh with no findings preserved.  Credibility is a central
    issue, and substantial judicial fact finding is required,  which  makes
    it more appropriate for this appeal to  be  heard  again  in  the  FtT,
    rather than the Upper Tribunal.

23. I should mention that I have been unable to locate  on  the  file,  the
    Appellant's witness  statement  which  was  before  the  FtT,  and  the
    Respondent's  bundle.   It  would  be  advisable  for  the  Appellant's
    representatives to serve again, the bundle  of  documents  relied  upon
    before the FtT, together  with  the  witness  statement,  and  for  the
    Respondent to serve again the Respondent's  bundle  of  documents  that
    were before the FtT as the documents on file appear to be incomplete.

24. The parties will be advised of the time and  date  of  hearing  in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Abebrese.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FtT did not make an anonymity direction, but in  the  circumstances,  as
this is a claim for international protection, I  considered  it  appropriate
to make such a direction.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.  This direction is made pursuant to  rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date 9th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  The issue  of  any  fee  award  will
need to be considered by the FtT.


Signed                              Date 9th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall










