
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01724/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th July 2021                     |On 29th July 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     S K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt, instructed by Irvine Thanvi Natas
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by  Microsoft  Teams  (V). A
face to face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all
issues could be determined  in  a  remote  hearing. The  documents that  I
was referred  to  are  in   the   bundles   on   the   court   file,   the
contents of which I have recorded. The order made is described at the end
of these reasons.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the  Appellant  or  any  member  of  the  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of India born in 1980. He appeals against
the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler, promulgated on 10 July
2020, dismissing his appeal against the decisions to refuse his protection
claim and deport him to India on asylum, humanitarian protection and human
rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane on 24
August 2021 on the grounds the judge arguably erred in his assessment of
internal flight within India for the reasons given in the grounds of
appeal.

3.   There are three grounds of appeal. In ground 1, the Appellant submits
the judge mischaracterised the background evidence in failing to take into
account evidence in the 'Open Doors' report dated December 2019 [OD report]
which demonstrated that there was still a risk of violence in the states
and cities with a high Christian population. The judge failed to take into
account the following matters:


         (i)  the number of reported incidents of violence against
             Christians was very high, but this was only the 'tip of the
             iceberg';
         (ii) these incidents of violence occurred all over India and the
             list of states cited was not exhaustive;
         (iii)    even in states which had not enacted the anti-conversion
             laws, police have arrested Christians for evangelism
             activities; and
         (iv) the rise of violence against Christians in states with tribal
             societies.

4.   In relation to ground 2, the judge failed to take into account
uncontested evidence of the prevailing regime of ethno-territoriality in
the majority of Christian hill states to which the judge found the
Appellant could internally relocate. Those who do not ethnically 'belong'
locally are subject to exclusion and do not enjoy rights to employment,
state resources and benefits. Due to institutionalised discrimination
against outsiders and those who do not have local ethnicity, it would be
unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate to the majority Christian north
eastern hill states [Christian hill states].

5.   In ground 3, the Appellant submits that grounds 1 and 2 materially
infected the assessment of very compelling circumstances under Article 8.
Further, the Appellant was socially and culturally integrated
notwithstanding his criminal convictions, for motoring offences and excess
alcohol, which took place over a limited period of time and from which the
Appellant had been rehabilitated following his conversion to Christianity.
The judge failed to consider the range of evidence of the Appellant's
private life in the UK.


Submissions

6.   Ms Moffatt submitted the judge's consideration of the OD report was
dispositive of the appeal. The judge preferred the OD report to the expert
evidence. However, the judge was not entitled to rely on a lack of evidence
of attacks on Christians in the three hill states to infer the Appellant
was not at risk. Further, the OD report contradicted the judge's findings.
The OD report stated the list of reported attacks was not exhaustive and
these attacks occurred all over India and were only 'the tip of the
iceberg'. The non-existence of anti-conversion laws was not conclusive of
risk because police still arrested Christian for evangelism activity in
those states where anti- conversion laws were not enacted. In addition, in
tribal societies, there was clan and ethnic antagonism towards the non-
indigenous population. The judge erred in law in drawing an inference which
was not open to him on the face of the report and then relying on that
inference to disregard evidence to the contrary.

7.   In answer to a question from me, Ms Moffatt stated the only evidence
of attacks on Christians in the hill states was in the OD report. The
expert evidence did not deal with this. Professor Aguilar addressed the
inability to evangelise not risk of attack.

8.   Ms Moffatt submitted the judge failed to take into account uncontested
evidence of a real risk of exclusion from employment when assessing the
reasonableness of relocation to the Christian hill states. The particular
tribal structure in the Christian hill states meant that non-locals would
be excluded from employment, state resources and benefits. The Respondent
did not challenge evidence of this in the OD report and the 'Oxford' report
(pages 38 to 41 of the Appellant's bundle attached to his further
submissions). Institutionalised discrimination was not limited to Nagaland.
The judge erred in law in failing to attach due weight to the expert
evidence of exclusion from rights which was highly relevant to the
reasonableness of internal relocation.

9.   Ms Moffatt submitted the judge should have taken into account the risk
of persecution and reasonableness of relocation in assessing Article 8.
Further, there was no detailed assessment of why the Appellant's criminal
convictions affected his social and cultural integration. The judge failed
to consider the circumstances of the offending and the Appellant's
rehabilitation. He failed to take into account the Appellant's
relationships in the UK and it could not be said these matters would not
make a difference.

10.  Mr Walker submitted the OD report stated there were attacks on
Christians all over India, but this was not material to the judge's
findings. The judge considered all the other evidence of discrimination in
India and was entitled to conclude the Appellant was not at risk in states
and cities with majority Christian populations. The judge's finding at [64]
was open to him on the evidence. The Appellant's offending behaviour was
serious and the judge's Article 8 findings were consistent with the
authorities relied on.



11.  Ms Moffatt submitted the judge ruled out Delhi as a viable option and
Article 8 did not entirely stand or fall with grounds 1 and 2. There were
very compelling circumstances in those grounds which the judge failed to
consider. Taken cumulatively, it could not be said the errors were not
material.


Conclusions and reasons

Ground 1

12.  The judge concluded the Appellant would be at risk in his home area at
[48] and then went on to consider internal relocation. He noted the
respondent had produced no evidence to support his position that the
Appellant could relocate to Delhi and certain named majority Christian
states. The judge acknowledged the Respondent's submissions criticising the
expert report of Professor Aguilar.

13.  The judge considered the expert evidence at [50] to [56]. He quoted
evidence from the OD report at [58]. He took into account that the attacks
on Christians occurred all over India and the arrest of Christians occurred
all over India. The OD report does not refer to specific attacks in the
Christian hill states. At [60], the judge found there was no evidence in
the report of attacks or arrests in the Christian hill states. Ms Moffatt
accepted there was no other evidence before the judge on this issue. The
judge gave adequate reasons at [61] for why he preferred the evidence in
the OD report to that in the expert report.

14.  The judge took into account all relevant matters in considering
internal relocation and his findings on the OD report were open to him on
the evidence before him. The evidence in the OD report, taken at its
highest, was insufficient to show the Appellant would be at risk of
persecution on relocation to the Christian hill states. Any discrimination
in relation to employment or access to state resources did not amount to
persecution.  There was no material error of law in relation to ground 1.

Ground 2

15.  The evidence in the OD report and the 'Oxford' report  of the
existence of a prevailing regime of institutionalised discrimination
against those who do not have local ethnicity was insufficient to render
internal relocation unduly harsh. The drivers of clan and ethnic antagonism
were largely Hindu tribal leaders and the majority of the 'Oxford' report
addressed the position of Bangladeshi immigrants. The evidence in the this
report at page 40 was insufficient to demonstrate that internal relocation
would be unduly harsh and any failure by the judge to refer to it was not
material.

Ground 3

16.  The Appellant has been convicted of numerous driving offences in 2014
and 2015. On 2 October 2015, he pleaded guilty to driving whilst
disqualified, using a vehicle while uninsured, dangerous driving and
driving with excess alcohol. He was sentenced to 14 months' imprisonment.
The sentencing judge acknowledged the Appellant's persistent appalling
driving over a considerable period of time and the police chase which was
so dangerous it had to be terminated. The Appellant had to be followed by
helicopter until he was finally arrested. The judge set out the Appellant's
history of offending at [16] to [20].

17.  The Appellant has lived in the UK illegally since August 2007 and it
was accepted he could not satisfy the exceptions to deportation in section
117C of the 2002 Act. The weight to be attached to the public interest is
significant. The Appellant's relationships in the UK and his rehabilitation
following his conversion to Christianity were not capable of enhancing his
private life to the extent that it could outweigh the public interest.
Taking the Appellant's case at its highest, his private life could not
outweigh the public interest in deportation.

18.  The judge properly directed himself in relation to Article 8 and his
findings were open to him on the evidence before him. There was no material
error of law as alleged in ground 3.

19.  Accordingly, I find there was no material error of law in the judge's
decision promulgated on 10 July 2020 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 16 July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal, I make no fee award.

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 16 July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email


