
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01958/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2020                      |On 10 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     ZR
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     In person, not represented
For the respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant  or
any member of his family.

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ali promulgated 23.9.19, dismissing his  appeal  on  all
    grounds against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  14.2.19
    to refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    7.11.19.

Error of Law

 3. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set  aside.  This  is  not  a  remaking  of  the
    decision; the Upper Tribunal can only intervene at this stage if it  is
    demonstrated that there is an error of law in the  decision  which  was
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

 4. The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd from Sulaymaniyah in  the  IKR.  It  was
    confirmed at the First-tier Tribunal that he has retained his CSID  and
    identity documents necessary to return  to  Iraq.  He  entered  the  UK
    clandestinely in September 2016, accompanied  by  his  wife  and  three
    children, whose ages at the date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal
    hearing were 5,  11,  and  13,  and  immediately  sought  international
    protection.

 5. The protection claim was based on both alleged Christian conversion  of
    both the appellant and his wife, and on the basis of a  threat  to  his
    life in Iraq. His factual claim was that he had been threatened by T, a
    member of ISIS, who kidnapped his nephew in order to extort money  from
    the appellant. T was caught and sentenced to hang, as a result of which
    it is claimed that the appellant was  put  under  pressure  to  have  T
    released. It is asserted that his father was threatened, his  own  life
    threatened, he was shot at, and there was  an  attempt  to  abduct  his
    children from school. In consequence, the appellant and his family fled
    Iraq in July 2015, making  their  way  though  Turkey  and  spending  a
    considerable period in Germany, where he claims to have been  converted
    to  Christianity  and  baptised.   They   entered   the   UK   together
    clandestinely in September 2016,  whereupon  he  claimed  international
    protection. It is claimed that his wife was converted  to  Christianity
    and baptised in the UK in December 2016.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected  the  appellant's  core  factual
    claim of events in Iraq, finding  the  account  not  credible  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision.  The  judge  also  found  the  claimed
    Christian conversions not credible and/or not genuine. At [57]  of  the
    decision the judge considered the best interests of the three children,
    taking into account school reports, but concluded their best  interests
    would be to return to Iraq  with  their  parents.  At  [58]  the  judge
    summarised the findings that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return to Iraq, that there was a sufficiency of protection, and that he
    could internally relocate within  the  IKR.  Obviously,  the  last  two
    findings were  in  the  alternative  as  the  protection  grounds  were
    rejected for the reasons set out in the decision between [37] and  [44]
    of the decision, and the claimed conversion rejected  for  the  reasons
    set out between [45] and [51]. The appeal was, therefore, dismissed  on
    all grounds.

 7. The grounds of application for permission to appeal submitted that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in (i) failing to give any  or  any  adequate
    consideration to the  human  rights  grounds  pleaded  in  the  grounds
    attached to the Notice of Appeal; and (ii) failed to give  any  or  any
    due regard to the court's  duty  under   Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of the children, and in particular to consider  the  impact  of
    removal on the appellant's school-aged children.

 8. In granting permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Judge  Keane
    considered  both  grounds  at  least  arguable.  The   judge   granting
    permission may have been under the misapprehension that  the  appellant
    would be returning to Iraq without his family.

 9. It should be noted that the appellant has not appealed the findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  rejecting  his  core  factual  claim,  or  the
    dismissal of the appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection  grounds.
    Neither is the decision challenged on articles 2 and  3  ECHR  grounds.
    Whilst humanitarian protection is referred to in the briefest terms  in
    the grounds of application for permission to appeal, that ground is not
    particularised or developed further. The sole ground relied on is  that
    of human rights.

10. The appeal was first listed before Upper Tribunal Judge  Hemmingway  at
    Bradford on 10.1.20. However, the  judge  was  surprised  to  find  the
    appellant unrepresented and in the absence of an interpreter considered
    that he was unable to represent himself. The matter was adjourned  with
    directions for the Tribunal to provide a Kurdish Sorani interpreter.

11. The matter was then listed for hearing on 8.4.20, a date which  had  to
    be vacated because of  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  The  matter  was  then
    considered by an Upper Tribunal Judge, who concluded that the case  was
    not  suitable  for  a  remote  (video)  hearing  as  the  unrepresented
    appellant would be unlikely to be able to  participate  effectively  in
    such a hearing. Thus the matter was listed before me for a face-to-face
    hearing at Bradford.

The Human Rights Grounds of Appeal

12. It is not entirely clear to what extent and on what human rights  basis
    the appellant's appeal was  pursued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    other than the best interests of  the  children.  In  regard  to  human
    rights generally, the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal were
    generic and unparticularised. However, it was asserted that the removal
    of the appellant to Iraq would be unlawful  under  Section  55  of  the
    Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  "as  it  would   be
    incompatible with the best interests of  his  children."  There  was  a
    passing reference suggesting that removal  of  the  appellant  to  Iraq
    would expose him to treatment that would breach articles 2 and 3  ECHR.
    However, that last issue was not pursued  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal hearing beyond the factual basis of the protection claim, and it
    has not been pursued in the onward appeal.

13. The First-tier Tribunal had the benefit  of  the  486-page  appellant's
    bundle, which comprised a few witness statements, a letter relating  to
    the appellant's wife's voluntary  service,  and  a  large  quantity  of
    objective  information  on  Iraq,  together  with  the  then-applicable
    Country Guidance case law. There was also a small supplementary bundle.
    In addition, it appears from my examination of the case file  that  the
    Tribunal was handed copies of letter detailing  the  school  attendance
    and progress relating to the three children, a 2013 article  from  'The
    Student Lawyer' entitled The 'Best Interests' of a child in Immigration
    Decisions', and a copy of the Upper Tribunal's decision in  MT  and  ET
    [2018] which dealt in part with the best interests of children. I  have
    considered all of these documents.

14. The  appellant  was  represented  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by
    counsel, Mr D Hewitt, whose skeleton argument dated 30.7.19 (the day of
    the hearing) was handed in. The skeleton argument was primarily focused
    on the protection claim. However, the best interests of the appellant's
    children was addressed, but only in limited terms as follows:  "Further
    or alternatively, the Tribunal could be  minded  to  allow  the  appeal
    based on Human Rights Grounds/based on what is in the best interests of
    A's three children (names and  ages given)."  Reliance  was  placed  on
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the
    need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who  are  in  the
    UK. EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  was  also  referred  to,
    including the factors to be considered in deciding what is in the  best
    interests of children.

15. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  typed  Record  of  Proceedings  (ROP)
    reveals that at the outset of the hearing the judge clarified with  the
    two representatives the issues to  be  resolved  in  the  appeal  were:
    "Credibility, Return to the HO, Sufficiency of Protection  and  IR,"the
    last being a reference to  Internal  Relocation.  Mr  Hewitt's  closing
    submissions  were  also  recorded  in  summary  form.  In  relation  to
    submissions on human rights the judge noted only this  of  Mr  Hewitt's
    submissions: "Best interests of 3 children not young children - settled
    and doing well at school." All  other  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant related to the protection claim.

16. At [57] of the decision the judge stated:

         "I turn to the issue of the Appellants (sic) children  and  I  have
         considered what is in their best interests. They have only been  in
         the UK for a small period of time  having  spent  the  majority  of
         their lives in Iraq a country and a place that  they  are  familiar
         with. They have family who continue to remain in Iraq both from the
         paternal and the maternal side. Although they are in school in  the
         UK and I have seen the reports which confirm this I find that  this
         is not enough to reach the conclusion that it  would  be  in  their
         best interests to remain in the UK.  It  would  be  in  their  best
         interests to be with their  parents  and  live  with  them  and  be
         brought up by them. Given that I have rejected the Appellants (sic)
         claim I do not consider it unreasonable for the children to  return
         with their parents and continue living their lives in Iraq."

Error of Law Submissions

17. I first remind myself that the according of weight  to  evidence  is  a
    matter for the judge. It is not an arguable error of law for a judge to
    give too little or too much weight to a  relevant  factor,  unless  the
    exercise is irrational. Nor is it an error of law for a judge  to  fail
    to deal with every factual  issue  of  argument.  Disagreement  with  a
    judge's  factual  conclusions,  the  appraisal  of  the   evidence   or
    assessment of credibility, or the evaluation of risk does not give rise
    to an error of law. Nor is it  necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative inference consistent with truthfulness because a judge  has
    concluded that the story proffered is untrue. However, if  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that may be
    a failure to take into account a material consideration.

Human Rights Generally

18. I have set out above the essence of  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. More specifically, it is submitted that whilst the
    decision made extensive findings regarding the  appellant's  protection
    claim, apart from the statement at [61] of the decision, "I dismiss the
    appeal on Human Rights Grounds", the decision did not engage  with  the
    issue of human rights at all. It is submitted in the premises  that  it
    is unclear whether the Tribunal recognised its  obligations  under  the
    Human Rights Act and what weight was given, if any, to the  appellant's
    private and family life, or how any balance  has  been  struck  between
    those rights and the public interest in immigration control.

19. I am satisfied that there is no merit in this unparticularised  ground,
    outside the issue of best interests of the children. In particular,  it
    does not appear that private or family life grounds were  relied  under
    article 8 ECHR at the First-tier Tribunal appeal; the only human rights
    issue advanced appears to have been that of the bests interests of  the
    children. Whilst it is complained that the  Tribunal  did  not  address
    private and family  life,  it  does  not  appear  that  article  8  was
    identified by either representative an issue, nor did it feature as  an
    issue in either evidence or submissions to the Tribunal. In distinction
    from  the  best  interests  argument,  as  drafted,  the   grounds   of
    application for  permission  remained  in  entirely  generic  terms  in
    relation to human rights. Save for the best  interests  issue,  it  was
    never specifically contended that the appeal could  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules relating to private and family life, or  outside  the
    Rules on article 8 grounds.

20. The judge can hardly be expected to address an issue  not  advanced  at
    the appeal hearing and the inclusion of this issue in  the  grounds  of
    application for permission  to  appeal  is  somewhat  surprising.  This
    ground appears to be no more than an opportunistic attempt to  identify
    a lacuna in the decision rather forming the basis  of  any  substantive
    error of law submission. In the premises, the ground is  without  merit
    and discloses no error of law.

21. Having regard to the way in which human rights was advance  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, in a very limited way restricted to best interests
    of the children,  I  find  no  error  of  law  in  the  omission  of  a
    consideration of article 8 private and family life  from  the  decision
    and its reasoning. A judge is not  obliged  to  address  an  issue  not
    pursued.

Best Interests of the Children

22. The second and only  substantive  ground  focuses  on  best  interests,
    referencing the obligation to expressly consider the impact of  removal
    on the children as addressed in various authorities, including  Zoumbas
    v SSHD [2013] 1  WLR  3690,  which  held,  inter  alia,  that  such  an
    assessment was integral to the article 8 proportionality assessment and
    that a child's best  interests  are  a  primary  though  not  paramount
    consideration so that "no other single consideration can be treated  as
    inherently more significant than the  child's  best  interests,  albeit
    that a number of other factors might outweigh them on balance."

23. The grounds of application for permission to appeal point out that both
    the appellant and his wife gave evidence and provided school reports to
    demonstrate the excellent progress of the children in the UK, that they
    all speak English and are at a pivotal point  in  their  education  and
    upbringing. The grounds submit: "Protection issues aside, it is clearly
    the case that returning these children to Iraq at this stage  of  their
    upbringing would not be in their best interests." It is submitted  that
    at [57] the judge gave no more than  "cursory  consideration"  to  best
    interests and such a consideration did not meet the threshold that  "no
    other  single  consideration  can  be  treated   as   inherently   more
    significant" than the welfare of these three children.

24. I first note that at the error of law hearing before me  the  appellant
    did not have any legal representative  but  was  assisted  by  a  Mr  J
    Warren, pastor. I endeavoured to explain to the appellant  through  the
    interpreter the narrow ambit of the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.  In
    particular, I pointed out that there has been  no  appeal  against  the
    dismissal of the claim for international protection, either  on  asylum
    or humanitarian protection grounds, either in relation to the rejection
    of the core factual account of events in Iraq  (the  threats),  or  the
    claimed Christian conversion of the appellant and his wife. I explained
    that these findings and conclusions must stand as  made  and  that  the
    only ambit of the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  of
    human rights, in relation to which the focus was on best  interests  of
    the children.

25. Although I explained that the Upper Tribunal can only intervene at this
    stage if there is a material error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, the appellant had some  difficulty  in  addressing  that
    issue himself. He told me that his three children were doing  well  and
    studying hard at school, coming top in their classes. He said  that  he
    wanted something special for their futures. In reply to my question, he
    agreed that both he and his wife still have family in  Iraq.  Later  in
    the hearing, the appellant's wife also asked to say  something  through
    the interpreter. She said that it will never be easy for them to return
    to Iraq. She said that she had been studying and working as  a  midwife
    and wanted to pursue that career in the UK. The children had adapted to
    conditions in the UK, she said, and told me that she  and  her  husband
    were going to college to learn English. She also announced that she was
    expecting a further child.

26. Mr Warren was able to assist a little better in focusing on the  narrow
    issue before the Tribunal and made some substantive  points  about  the
    impugned decision. He took me to the second sentence  of  [57]  of  the
    decision, submitting that the judge was factually wrong to  state  that
    the children had spent the majority of their lives in Iraq. He  pointed
    out that they left Iraq in 2015 and were a year and a month  travelling
    in different countries, primarily Germany, before arriving in the UK in
    September 2016. He provided me with his calculations  that  the  eldest
    child, now 14 years 2 months, was only 9 years 2 months when they  left
    Iraq and has now spent 5 years outside Iraq. The middle child,  now  12
    years 3 months, was 7 years 4 months when leaving Iraq  and  had  spent
    only 60% of his life so far in Iraq. The youngest child, now 6 years  8
    months, left Iraq at 1 year 9 months and has  spent  74%  of  his  life
    outside Iraq. He then asserted that averaged up, the children has spent
    only half their lives in  Iraq,  which  I  found  a  somewhat  peculiar
    submission that did not reflect the reality, as two of the children had
    spent the majority of their lives in Iraq, even though they  were  much
    younger than they are now when they left. It was further submitted that
    given the chronology it was incorrect for the judge to assert that that
    Iraq was a country with which they were familiar; that could only apply
    to the eldest child.

27. Mr Warren also took me to paragraph  [17]  of  the  appellant's  wife's
    statement of 19.3.19, where she stated, "If I had to go  back  I  would
    continue to be a Christian. I have found  the  right  way  and  I  will
    continue to choose this. I fear that it would be very difficult for  us
    if we had to go back to Iraq. My family know that I have converted  and
    they do not accept my new religion."  Although  I  pointed  out  to  Mr
    Warren that the judge had entirely  rejected  the  claim  to  Christian
    conversion, he maintained that the appellant's family might treat  them
    differently because of their conversion or baptism. However, I  pointed
    out that was not an argument pursued at the First-tier Tribunal  appeal
    hearing and had not been raised in any grounds or been the subject of a
    grant of permission. If the appellant's claim to  Christian  conversion
    by his wife and himself has been rejected, there is no basis  for  them
    to pursue that  faith  on  return  to  Iraq  and  no  basis  for  their
    respective families to treat  them  differently.  At  the  highest,  Mr
    Warren's submission on this point was speculative and did  not  address
    the grounds of appeal, which, effectively, were  limited  to  the  best
    interests of the  children.  It  might  be  possible  to  construct  an
    argument that adverse treatment of the child by extended family members
    arising from the  parents'  baptism  in  a  Christian  faith  might  be
    relevant to their best interests.  However,  in  the  absence  of  this
    ground having been pursued in the application for permission and in the
    absence of supporting evidence, this point does not disclose any  error
    of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal  in  not  considering  it
    when it was never advanced to the Tribunal.

28. In relation to best interests, as Mr Diwnycz  submitted,  it  is  clear
    that this was addressed by the judge. As I have  noted  above,  it  was
    addressed in the written grounds, the skeleton  argument  and  in  oral
    submissions, in rather limited terms. The judge has addressed the issue
    in similarly limited  terms.  In  Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)
    [2014] UKUT 00341  (IAC),  the  Upper  Tribunal  stated  that,  "It  is
    generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier Tribunal  judgements
    to rehearse every detail or issue raised  in  a  case.  This  leads  to
    judgements becoming overly long and confused and is not a proportionate
    approach to deciding cases. It is, however,  necessary  for  judges  to
    identify and resolve key conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear
    and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can  understand  why
    they have won or lost."

29. The fact is that the judge did address best interests of  the  children
    and made the unremarkable and, on the facts of this case,  unsurprising
    finding that the best interests of these children were to  remain  with
    their parents, being raised by them. Their parents had  no  basis  upon
    which to further remain in the UK. The judge took into account the ages
    of the children, their schooling and settlement in the UK, but also the
    relatively short time they have been in the UK, since  September  2016.
    Although not mentioned by the judge, none of the  children  could  meet
    the 7 years' qualification  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  nor  could
    their parents come under s117B(6) of the 2002 Act. In  any  event,  the
    judge considered the reasonableness of expecting them to leave the  UK,
    finding that it was reasonable.

30. I acknowledge Mr Warren's submission on behalf of  the  appellant  that
    the judge may have  been  factually  wrong,  but  in  relation  to  the
    youngest child only, when stating that they had spent the  majority  of
    their lives in Iraq. The assertion that they  are  familiar  with  that
    country might also be questioned when the  length  of  time  they  have
    actually been outside  Iraq  is  taken  into  account.  However,  their
    parents do not speak English and must, therefore, speak Sorani  in  the
    family home, whether or  not  the  children  now  also  speak  English.
    Familiarity with a country does not depend purely on physical presence.
    It is obvious that these children will have been  raised  in  an  Iraqi
    Kurdish family environment and whilst they may well  have  settled  and
    done well in schooling in the UK, their  roots,  native  language,  and
    cultural background must all centre in the  same  background  as  their
    parents. There is no  basis  to  consider  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to integration  on  return  to  Iraq,  where  the
    children can take up further  education  and  where  they  have  family
    members to assist their integration from  both  maternal  and  paternal
    sides of the family.

31. Having considered the grounds and  the  submissions  made  to  me,  and
    having carefully read the decision, I am satisfied that the  judge  has
    properly and correctly addressed best  interests.  In  VW  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 522 at [12], LJ McCombe stated, "Regrettably, there  is
    an increasing tendency in immigration cases, when a First-tier Tribunal
    Judge has given a judgment explaining why he has reached  a  particular
    decision, of seeking to burrow out industriously areas of evidence that
    have been less fully dealt with than others and then to use this  as  a
    basis for saying the judge's decision is legally flawed because it  did
    not deal with a particular matter more  fully.  In  my  judgment,  with
    respect, that is no basis on which to sustain a proper challenge  to  a
    judge's finding of fact." Those remarks might well apply to the grounds
    and submissions in the present case.


32. Frankly, even if the judge had taken greater space in which to  address
    the best interests of the children, I cannot conceive that on the facts
    of this case any different conclusion could have been reached.  On  the
    facts, despite their time and schooling in the UK, the  best  interests
    of these children were obviously to return to Iraq with their  parents.
    In Anoliefo (permission to appeal) [2013] UKUT 00345 (IAC), at para 16,
    the President said that "Where there is no reasonable prospect that any
    error of law alleged in  the  grounds  of  appeal  could  have  made  a
    difference to the outcome, permission to appeal should not normally  be
    granted in the absence of some point of public importance  that  it  is
    otherwise in the public interest to determine."  I  am  satisfied  that
    there is no reasonable prospect that the alleged  error  of  law  could
    have made a difference to the outcome of the appeal.

33. It follows that I am satisfied that there is no error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Even if  there  was  an  error  by
    failing to address best interests of the children more  fully,  I  find
    for the reasons set out above  that  the  error  could  not  have  been
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

Decision

34. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.


     Signed DMW Pickup


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 31 July 2020



        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

