
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/01028/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Teams       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd June 2021                    |On 7th July 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     TS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    London Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpretation:  Ms E Green, in the Tamil language


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Introduction

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1986.  He  arrived  in
      the UK in June 2008 and claimed asylum on arrival. His application was
      refused, and his appeal dismissed in November 2008.  He  made  further
      submissions in November 2010, June 2013 and October  2016  which  were
      all refused. A judicial review of the final refusal  resulted  in  the
      decision letter of 19th December 2017, which is the  decision  against
      which this appeal is brought. His  appeal  against  the  decision  was
      dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colvin  in  a  determination
      promulgated on the 15th January 2019.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted  and  I  found  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons set out in  my  decision  on
      error of law at Annex A promulgated on 13th September 2019. There  was
      then a hearing to determine the issues  as  to  whether  it  would  be
      contrary to the  public  interest  under  s.108  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to disclose an email exchange detailed
      at paragraph 39 of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  not
      provided to the appellant. I decided there was no public  interest  in
      this remaining secret for the reasons set out in my decision which  is
      found at Annex B of this decision, and it was disclosed with the email
      addresses of the officials redacted.

   3. On 15th July 2020 directions were sent out to the parties  to  require
      them to prepare for the remaking hearing. In  response  the  appellant
      provided submissions from Ms Jegarajah dated 4th August  2020,  and  a
      consolidated bundle of documents for the remaking hearing. Nothing was
      received from the respondent until yesterday when Mr Melvin  submitted
      an application under Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules
      2008 with further evidence namely a letter dated 6th January 2021 from
      the Chief Registrar,  Chief  Magistrate's  Court  in  Colombo  to  the
      British High Commission in Colombo stating that the cash receipt  that
      the appellant submitted from the Sri Lanka lawyer was  not  issued  by
      them. Mr Melvin has also provided a skeleton argument today.

   4. The matter now comes before me to remake the appeal. In light  of  the
      need to take precautions against  the  spread  of  Covid-19  and  with
      regard to  the  overriding  object  set  out  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
      Procedure Rules to decide matters fairly and justly this hearing  took
      place via Teams, a format to which  neither  party  raised  objection.
      There were no significant issues of connectivity or audibility  during
      the hearing.

   5. The factual issue to be determined  in  this  appeal  is  whether  the
      arrest warrant against the appellant which, states that he  is  wanted
      in connection with being involved with LTTE terrorist activities, is a
      genuine document or not. It is accepted that if it is genuine then the
      appellant will have a well founded fear of persecution  based  on  his
      imputed political opinions applying the country guidance in GJ  &  Ors
      (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319  at paragraph
      356(7)(d) where it is found  that  being  the  subject  of  an  arrest
      warrant means a person will be on the stop list  at  the  airport  and
      will be detained by the authorities, and will then be at real risk  of
      serious harm for reason of his or her imputed  political  beliefs  and
      thus will be entitled to succeed in his appeal. In light of this being
      the only factual issue for me to decide the appeal proceeded by way of
      submissions only.

   6. Ms Jegarajah agreed to Mr Melvin's application to admit the letter  to
      the British High Commission from the Chief Magistrates  Court  of  6th
      January 2021, and so I admitted this evidence despite it  only  having
      being provided yesterday. The key documentation relevant to the  issue
      I had to  determine,  skeleton  arguments  and  submissions  documents
      aside, is as follows:

      . Letter from Mr Raguraajah,  Attorney  at  Law,  to  Greater  London
        Solicitors dated 3rd April 2018 with a statement of truth  that  he
        had obtained a  certified  copy  of  the  arrest  warrant  for  the
        appellant from Colombo Magistrates Court

      .  Bar Association of Sri Lanka card for Mr Raguraajah

      . Warrant of Arrest B/9840/8/2010 for the appellant in Sinhalese with
        certified translation

      . Cash receipt for obtaining the warrant dated 9th March 2018  to  Mr
        Raguraajah

      . DHL envelope used to send all of the  above  documents  to  Greater
        London Solicitors by Mr Raguraajah

      . Letter of 8th February 2018  by  which  Greater  London  Solicitors
        instructed Mr Raguraajah

      . Letter of 30th November 2018 by  which  Greater  London  Solicitors
        sought opinion of Mr Raguraajah regarding the DVR

      . Letter from Mr Raguraajah dated 3rd December 2018 to Greater London
        Solicitors giving his opinion on the DVR

      . Document Verification Report dated 5th November 2018  with  respect
        to the arrest warrant B/9840/8/2010

      . To Whom it May Concern letter from Ms Emma  Hardy  of  the  British
        High Commission dated 26th September  2018  regarding  verification
        processes for court documents in the Chief Magistrates Court

   Submissions - Remaking

   7. Mr T Melvin for  the  respondent  makes,  in  summary,  the  following
      submissions. He submits that the appellant's arrest warrant is  not  a
      genuine one for the reasons set out in the DVR dated 5th November 2018
      (in summary that the arrest warrant details provided by the  appellant
      through the Sri Lankan lawyer instructed by his UK solicitors  do  not
      match records they have been able to check at  the  Chief  Magistrates
      Court in Colombo), and given the supportive evidence  of  Emma  Hardy,
      Immigration Liaison Manager in the BHC Colombo in her  letter  of  5th
      December 2018 (which explains why the respondent asserts that she  has
      used the correct verification procedure, and that there is no separate
      procedure for terrorism cases). The respondent  argues  that  the  DVR
      evidence was obtained through a procedure  which  was  compliant  with
      Article 22, and the Upper Tribunal should prefer the evidence of  this
      DVR process. It is also argued that it could be possible that the  DVR
      process could confirm whether a reference number for an arrest warrant
      was correct through its process even if this  was  not  a  process  by
      which a full court file/ copy of the warrant could be obtained.

   8.  It  is  noted  by  Mr  Melvin  that  there  is  no  report  from   Mr
      Punethanayagam verifying the letters and  verification  procedures  of
      the Sri Lankan lawyer Mr Raguraajah, which  was  contemplated  at  one
      point by the appellant but abandoned due to lack of funds, and so  the
      appellant has not shown that the process that Mr Raguraajah used is  a
      valid one. It is argued that it is strange that the solicitors who had
      acted for the appellant since 2013 suddenly decided to make  enquiries
      in 2018 about an arrest warrant from 2010 regarding matters which took
      place prior to the appellant's entry to the UK in 2008.  It  submitted
      that  the fact that that Mr Raguraajah only paid  a  small  amount  of
      money to get a warrant that is  ten  years  old  casts  doubt  on  the
      validity of the documents; as does the fact that the  appellant  is  a
      person found to lack credibility in relation to his history of arrests
      in 2005 and 2007 in two decisions of the First-tier Tribunal, and  had
      not previously claimed to be the subject of an arrest warrant or  that
      he was charged, fingerprinted or photographed when detained.  There is
      also a failure to provide a copy of the motion that Mr Raguraajah used
      to obtain the documents, and instead the only document  pertaining  to
      this process is the receipt for the fee, which has been shown to be an
      unreliable document by the correspondence from the  Chief  Magistrates
      Court of 6th January 2021, as this states that  the  receipt  for  the
      appellant's lawyer's application is not a document issued by them  and
      so throws significant doubt on the appellant's verification process

   9. As a result, Mr Melvin submitted, that I should  find  that  appellant
      had not shown the arrest warrant to be  a  document  on  which  weight
      could be placed, and as a result the appeal should be dismissed.

  10. Ms Jegarajah submits, in summary,  as  follows.  It  is  important  to
      understand that the appellant relies  upon  two  letters  from  a  Sri
      Lankan attorney, Mr Raguraajah,  which  do  not  require  any  further
      corroboration as no issue is taken with his integrity, and further his
      Sri Lankan Bar Association card (BASL), proving him to be a Sri Lankan
      attorney, has been provided to the  respondent.  The  appeal  must  be
      determined from the position that the parties are equal, and there  is
      no special deference to the respondent.  It  is  simply  a  matter  of
      considering the  evidence  from  both  sides  in  the  round.  Why  Mr
      Raguraajah was instructed in 2018, and not earlier,  is  a  matter  of
      confidential client privilege, but it is submitted that as soon as the
      appellant was aware that  there  was  a  warrant  for  his  arrest  he
      instructed his UK solicitors  of  this  fact  and  they  independently
      instructed a Sri Lankan lawyer.

  11. It is argued that the appellant has produced compelling evidence  that
      the arrest warrant is genuine.  Mr Raguraajah, a qualified Sri  Lankan
      attorney (verified by a Sri Lankan bar card),  was  contacted  by  the
      appellant's UK solicitors independently of the appellant (see page 165
      of the bundle), and the letter of instruction is provided to the Upper
      Tribunal so it is clear everything was done professionally and  in  an
      entirely  straight  forward  fashion.  The  Sri  Lankan   lawyer,   Mr
      Raguraajah applied to the magistrates court for a  certified  copy  of
      the court file, and provided a  letter  confirming  this  as  well  as
      providing the documents, which appear from page 157 of the  bundle.  A
      certified copy of the court file signed by  the  court  registrar  was
      obtained. There are magistrates court stamps on the  documents  and  a
      certificate of authenticity with the file copy,  and  a  cash  receipt
      from Mr Raguraajah showing his payment of the fee to do this. The  DHL
      envelope in which the copy of the court file was sent by Mr Raguraajah
      to the UK solicitor has also been provided, and is at page 164 of  the
      bundle. It is argued that no specific issue is taken with the copy  of
      the court file signed by the court registrar.

  12. Mr Raguraajah has confirms in his subsequent letter  of  3rd  December
      2018  at page 106 of the bundle, as a result of instructions from  the
      appellant's UK solicitors which appear at page 108 of the bundle, that
      he followed the correct procedure and has explained that  there  is  a
      different procedure for obtaining terrorism case documents,  as  these
      are brought before Court 8 by the TID, and expressed  the  opinion  in
      his letter that the BHC may have checked in the police register  books
      but that these would not have contained terrorism cases  and  so  they
      would not have been able to verify the genuineness of the  appellant's
      arrest warrant in this way. He expresses concern  that  the  BHC  have
      permission to examine confidential police documents. The  evidence  of
      Mr Raguraajah is consistent with the factual finding  made  the  Upper
      Tribunal in VT (Article 22 Procedures Directive - confidentiality) Sri
      Lanka [2017] UKUT 368 at paragraph 63 which refers to a Court 8  being
      where  most  TID  cases  are  heard,  and  it  is  clearly  a  further
      consistency with the evidence in VT that the number 8 features in  the
      reference number for  this  appellant's  document.  VT  also  contains
      evidence that the second secretary migration at  the  BHC  in  Colombo
      accepts that most Sri Lankan lawyers act with integrity  at  paragraph
      55 of the decision, and there is no evidence that Mr Raguraajah is one
      of the few who have been referred  to  the  BASL  as  a  result  of  a
      complaint.  There  is  no  verification  by  the  respondent   of   Mr
      Raguraajah's credentials although this could easily  have  been  done,
      and would have been conclusive in finding the case  made  out  by  the
      appellant, and in addition the respondent failed  to  respond  to  the
      appellant's letter asking that they name a suitable  joint  expert  to
      verify the documents.

  13. It is argued that the DVR and the letter of Ms Hardy should  be  given
      little weight because it is  clear  from  VT  that  the  British  High
      Commission in Colombo has form for breaching Article 22  in  verifying
      evidence by writing to the director of the TID to verify  warrants,  a
      procedure which was found to risk putting genuine asylum  seekers  and
      their families in danger and of producing unreliable evidence, and  it
      is  concerning  that  the  British  High  Commission  have  a  special
      arrangement with the police officers in the court, as set  out  by  Ms
      Hardy, which enables them  to  check  records  without  following  the
      proper procedure of using a  Sri  Lankan  lawyer.  The  DVR  does  not
      identify the people who went to do the verification,  and  the  letter
      from Ms Hardy is unsigned and is a generic letter written "to whom  it
      may concern"  due to concerns about a DVR in a  different  immigration
      appeal expressed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge hearing that appeal.



  14. Ms Jegarajah argues that little weigh should be given  to  the  letter
      apparently from the Chief Registrar of Colombo Magistrates Court dated
      6th January 2021 because there is no letter of instruction  explaining
      how it came into being or by whom it was requested; because  there  is
      no proper seal on the letter; because it  is  not  written  on  headed
      paper; because there is no name of the chief registrar; because it  is
      ungrammatical with "connection" in the first sentence and "has" in the
      second sentence wrongly capitalised; and because the word "Magistrate"
      is wrongly spelt, without an e, in the chief registrar's stamp. It  is
      argued that such a document produced  by  an  appellant  would  almost
      certainly be given no weight. It is argued that it should also be seen
      as having less weight if it was in fact requested by local staff or an
      immigration  officer  working  in  the  High  Commission  who  is  not
      independent of the respondent  rather  than  by  a  senior  member  of
      foreign office staff who might be seen as having  more  distance  from
      the respondent, and so the fact that it is not known who requested  it
      from within the British High Commission or what request precisely  was
      made means that the document should be given even less weight.

  15. In conclusion Ms Jegarajah argues that the evidence of the  respondent
      has not been shown to be independent and worthy of  weight  as  it  is
      obtained by a party to these proceedings who have been shown to have a
      rather too cosy relationship with the Sri Lankan government  from  the
      evidence in VT and by the description of how the  respondent  say  the
      documents were obtained in the letter of Ms Hardy.  Further,  the  Sri
      Lankan government are known to have no ethical standards as  they  are
      happy, amongst other things, to commit war crimes  and  systematically
      torture people in detention.

   Conclusions - Remaking

  16. This is an asylum appeal and so the standard of  proof  is  the  lower
      civil standard and the burden of proof is on the appellant.

  17. If the evidence from  Mr  Raguraajah  stood  alone  I  would  have  no
      hesitation in finding that the arrest warrant was genuine:  there  is,
      as has  been  submitted,  a  complete  set  of  documents  which  show
      solicitors in the UK with professional obligations  instructed  a  Sri
      Lankan attorney with similar obligations to search for and if  present
      obtain an  arrest  warrant.  Mr  Raguraajah  has  provided  a  set  of
      documentation which in itself displays no reason to mean it should  be
      disbelieved, and the DHL envelope in which it was sent to the  UK  has
      also be provided. He has explained how he obtained the  documents  and
      provided the cash receipt for having done so. I do not find it of  any
      significant weight against the appellant that the "motion" document is
      not included,  as  I  find  that  sufficient  documentation  has  been
      provided. I also find  that  it  would  have  be  very  easy  for  the
      respondent to check whether these documents were genuinely provided by
      Mr Raguraajah, and exclude  the  possibility  that  his  identity  had
      somehow be stolen by someone wishing to make money by  providing  fake
      legal documentation or that he  was  acting  dishonestly.  Further  it
      would appear from VT that this is something that has been done in  the
      past so that corrupt or abusive attorneys can be reported to  the  Sri
      Lankan Bar Association. This is a matter which I give  some,  although
      not significant weight, in the appellant's favour  as  a  very  simply
      enquiry via his contact details at  the  Sri  Lankan  Bar  Association
      would have confirmed that the material he provided  was  authentically
      his and in good faith by a person with relevant  professional  skills,
      applying (i) of the guidance in VT.  However, the documentation of  Mr
      Raguraajah does not stand alone and  so  I  must  look  at  the  other
      evidence and examine the context in which it exists and decide  if  it
      is ultimately to be believed.

  18. The appellant himself was found to be totally lacking  in  credibility
      and to have fabricated his claim in its entirety due to  his  evidence
      being vague and implausible by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Cohen
      in his decision of 19th December 2008. This of course was the starting
      point for Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colvin in his  decision  of
      15th January 2019, which I set aside  and  I  am  currently  remaking.
      Judge Colvin looks at the evidence of the arrest warrant and the grant
      of refugee status to the appellant's brother in Australia in 2010, and
      concluded that they did not suffice to  displace  the  conclusions  of
      Judge Cohen. I  have  preserved  his  findings  with  respect  to  the
      brother's refugee status in Australia not  putting  the  appellant  at
      real risk of serious harm as these were not challenged in the  grounds
      of appeal, but set aside those in  relation  to  the  arrest  warrant.
      There are additional findings by Judge Colvin regarding  the  evidence
      of the appellant being implausible and not credible in relation to his
      contact with his brother in Australia.

  19. It is clear therefore that the assessment of the  credibility  of  the
      appellant is not a factor in his favour, however it is the  case  that
      the appellant's history in his original asylum interview  (answers  to
      questions 9-11) does include the fact that he was required to sign  at
      a police station after having been detained in September  2005  for  5
      months and did so up until 27th November 2007, and that this detention
      followed his originally being arrested by the Sri Lankan army  due  to
      his family LTTE association, as set out in his answer to question 7 of
      the asylum interview, and an assumption he had connections  with  them
      (as reflected in his answer to question 50) , and further his evidence
      was that it was necessary to pay a bribe for his release when  he  was
      detained for the second time in 2007/2008 (answer to question 73).  So
      whilst this history has not been found to be credible,  the  existence
      of an arrest warrant is not inconsistent with what the  appellant  has
      said, and so I do not accept the submission of  Mr  Melvin  that  this
      adds a further factor against the appellant. I make it  clear  that  I
      find that the arrest warrant confirmation  from  Mr  Raguraajah  comes
      about without any involvement of the appellant, but  nevertheless  the
      context of the appellant's disbelieved asylum claim  is,  I  find,  of
      relevance as a factor against him  and  as  such  weighs  against  the
      warrant being genuine.

  20. I now turn to the DVR of  the  arrest  warrant  by  the  British  High
      Commission in Colombo dated 5th November 2018. This is by two  unknown
      persons of unknown status and qualifications  from  the  British  High
      Commission. Entry is permitted to the "registry office" of  the  Chief
      Magistrates Court by the superintendent in the police post,  but  they
      were not accompanied into the office whilst they made checks. I accept
      that the procedure described did not run any risk  of  disclosing  any
      personal details  of  the  appellant  to  anyone  in  the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities, and so was compliant with Article 22  of  the  Procedures
      Directive as there was no direct contact with  the  alleged  actor  of
      persecution which might alert them to the protection claim made by the
      appellant. A register was checked for the number  on  the  appellant's
      arrest warrant but the number was found to relate to a  house  "theft"
      by a person with a different name to the appellant. On the face of  it
      this is weighty evidence against the appellant.

  21. However, the question that arises next is whether this was a procedure
      by which the appellant's number on his warrant for a terrorist offence
      could be checked. The respondent says  it  is,  and  relies  upon  the
      general letter regarding the validity of this procedure from  Ms  Emma
      Hardy, Immigration Liaison Manager at the British High  Commission  in
      Colombo dated 26th September 2018. I am satisfied that  the  procedure
      for checking references in Ms Hardy's letter does not  breach  Article
      22 of the Procedures Directive from what is said at paragraph 3 of the
      letter. There is a "cover story" as  to  why  the  officers  from  the
      British  High  Commission  are   making   checks   related   to   visa
      applications, and no personal details of the appellant are taken,  and
      even the reference number being checked is not held in an identifiable
      form. The letter from Ms Hardy indicates that it  is  staff  from  the
      Immigration Enforcement International section of the Home  Office  who
      conduct these checks, as she is the manager of this  section  and  she
      refers to a colleague having done the check in another case  for  whom
      this general letter was prepared at paragraph 4. I find therefore that
      it is a check done by a party to this appeal, the  respondent,  but  I
      also accept that it would be done by a person with civil service  code
      obligations to be honest and act with integrity and  impartially.  The
      letter also states at paragraph  6,  based  on  information  from  the
      "judicial registrar" with responsibility for  courts  6  and  8,  that
      terrorism cases are not treated differently from other crimes  and  so
      their numbers will be in the same registers; and at paragraph  7  that
      records relating to cases prior to  2015  are  not  general,  but  may
      sometimes be, in the Magistrates Court records. Ms Hardy  confirms  at
      paragraph 9 of the letter that in discussion with the Deputy Inspector
      General of Police for Terrorism Investigation Division (TID)  that  he
      confirmed this system, and also said that a "solicitor" would  not  be
      able to obtain a copy of the document. It  is  further  said  that  in
      discussion with the  Solicitor General Ms Hardy was informed  that  an
      individual or solicitor would not have  an  arrest  warrant  in  their
      possession, although the letter does not say that he said it would not
      be possible to get a copy.

  22. Mr  Raguraajah's  second  letter  of  3rd  December  2018  provides  a
      different view on what has happened  when  the  staff  from  the  Home
      Office based on the British High  Commission  go  to  make  their  DVR
      checks from that set out by Ms Hardy. It is his view  that  they  have
      not been checking the court file registers  at  all  but  instead  the
      police are allowing them to check their records in the police register
      books, and that these police records do not  include  terrorism  cases
      handled by TID. It is his view that the court office would  not  allow
      officials from the British High Commission to enter the  court  office
      to review documents, and that the correct procedure is either for  the
      subject of a warrant or a Sri Lankan Attorney with the court to obtain
      certified copy documents.

  23. Whilst it might normally be the case that the  view  of  a  number  of
      senior officials from a country of origin passed to  a  British  civil
      servant at the High Commission should be  given  greater  weight  than
      that of a regular lawyer from that country there is the  consideration
      as to whether information from the judicial  registrar  to  the  Chief
      Magistrates Court, deputy inspector  of  the  TID  and  the  solicitor
      general in Sri Lanka can  be  seen  as  neutral  sources  when  giving
      information to the Immigration Liaison Manager  at  the  British  High
      Commission in Colombo. Ms Jegarajah submits that  information  from  a
      murderous regime, which routinely tortures people and which  may  wish
      to mislead a representative of a country known to  provide  protection
      to substantial numbers of those who  they  see  as  a  threat  to  the
      integrity of the Sri Lankan state, must be  treated  with  caution.  I
      find that there is weight to be given to this consideration.

  24. The final piece of evidence that I must consider is that addressed  as
      coming from the Chief Registrar of Colombo Magistrates Court dated 6th
      January 2021 which states that the payment receipt (giving the  number
      on the receipt produced by Mr Raguraajah) was not issued by this court
      and the number does not relate to it.  This  is  a  worrying  document
      because it has no seal on the letter and it is not written  on  headed
      paper; because there is no name  given  for  the  chief  registrar  or
      legible signature; because it is ungrammatical  with  "connection"  in
      the  first  sentence  and  "has"  in  the  second   sentence   wrongly
      capitalised;  and  perhaps  most  significantly   because   the   word
      "Magistrate" is wrongly spelt without an e in  the  chief  registrar's
      stamp under his signature. It is unclear how it was obtained,  and  Mr
      Melvin made no submissions on how  this  happened  or  addressing  the
      issues with it even though I allowed him to make a brief reply  to  Ms
      Jegarajah's submissions (which he used to emphasis a couple  of  other
      submissions instead). The only information I have therefore is that it
      was  sent  to  him  by  the  British  High  Commission.  I  accept  Ms
      Jegarajah's submission that this is not a document that can  be  given
      weight given the defects in it and in light of the level at  which  it
      is said to have been written and the source it is said  to  have  been
      written for.

  25. This is an extremely difficult decision to make. It  would  of  course
      have been a lot easier if either side had had the funds to instruct an
      expert who could have  clarified  the  current  system  for  obtaining
      details of and verifying an arrest warrant in  Sri  Lanka:  sadly  the
      appellant did not have these funds and I  assume  resources  were  not
      available to the respondent for this purpose either.

  26. Drawing my conclusions together I consider that the evidence from  the
      Sri Lankan attorney, contacted through a firm of UK solicitors, whom I
      start from the position is likely to be honest  and  have  acted  with
      integrity,  is  comprehensive  and  that  Mr  Raguraajah  answers  the
      evidence produced against him in the DVR report and  explains  how  he
      says that the British High Commission have, in his view, been  misled.
      I find that it is possible that the Sri Lankan authorities might  wish
      to mislead the British High Commission in this way, as it  would  seem
      to be likely that they would be aware, whatever cover stories are  now
      given, that until 2017 the respondent was seeking confirmation of  the
      validity or otherwise of arrest warrants in relation to  asylum  cases
      as they were directly approaching the TID in this respect albeit  with
      personal information redacted, as is clear from the evidence in VT. It
      is  also  quite  possible  that  the   senior   officials   questioned
      generically by Ms Hardy did not understand that the officials from the
      British High Commission were looking in police register  books  rather
      than the court file registry when providing reassurance  that  details
      of terrorism case were kept in the court registry. The respondent  has
      not put the explanation of Mr Raguraajah in his letter of 3rd December
      2018 to any of these senior official contacts for comment, and has not
      made contact with him via a call, email or letter challenging that the
      documents did not properly come from him  or  are  forgeries  as  they
      could easily have done: I acknowledge that there is no general duty on
      the respondent to authenticate these documents but I find  the  latter
      check was one as set out at (i) of the guidance in VT where  a  simply
      inquiry could have conclusively and safely resolved  the  authenticity
      of the document. I am unable to give any weight to the  document  from
      the Chief Registrar of Colombo Magistrates  Court  dated  6th  January
      2021 for the reasons I set out above, so this does not  undermine  the
      documents the appellant has submitted from Mr  Raguraajah.  For  these
      reasons, whilst having regard to the fact  that  the  appellant  is  a
      person whose claim has  been  found  otherwise  to  lack  credibility,
      ultimately I find however that the appellant has shown  to  the  lower
      civil standard of proof that there is an arrest warrant for  terrorist
      offences against him in Sri Lanka.

  27. As a result I conclude that the appellant has a well founded  fear  of
      persecution on the basis of his  imputed  political  opinions  and  is
      entitled to succeed in his appeal.




   Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. I remake the appeal by allowing it under the Refugee Convention and on
      human rights grounds.




      Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these  proceedings
      or any form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
      identify the original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst
      others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
      give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to  avoid
      a likelihood of  serious  harm  arising  to  the  appellant  from  the
      contents of his protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   25th June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
Annex A: Error of Law Decision


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Introduction

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1986.  He  arrived  in
      the UK in June 2008 and claimed asylum on arrival. His application was
      refused, and his appeal dismissed in November 2008.  He  made  further
      submissions in November 2010, June 2013 and October  2016  which  were
      all refused. A judicial review of the final refusal  resulted  in  the
      decision letter of 19th December 2017, which is the  decision  against
      which this appeal is brought. His  appeal  against  the  decision  was
      dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colvin  in  a  determination
      promulgated on the 15th January 2019.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted on the 8th May 2019 by Upper Tribunal
      Judge Bruce on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
      judge had erred in  law  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds
      particularly given the grant of permission in  December  2018  by  the
      Court of Appeal in TA (Bangladesh) v SSHD  (C5/208/1691) on a  similar
      point.

   3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal
      had erred in law.

   Submissions - Error of Law

   4. In her  grounds  of  appeal  and  in  oral  submissions  Ms  Jegarajah
      contends, in summary, as follows.

   5. Firstly, it is argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make
      findings on whether the appellant's solicitors' Sri Lankan lawyer  was
      a properly qualified lawyer, whether he provided a letter  to  the  UK
      solicitors, whether he attended the court and obtained a file copy  of
      the arrest warrant relating to the appellant and a receipt;  and  thus
      correctly verified the arrest warrant dated 10th February  2010  which
      documents the fact the appellant is suspected of being  involved  with
      LTTE terrorist activities. These were key issues  that  needed  to  be
      determined in the appeal. It is not correct to discount this evidence,
      as is done at paragraph 46 of the decision, by saying that there is no
      evidence from the Chief Registrar at the Chief  Magistrates  Court  in
      Colombo regarding the application made as there is direct evidence  of
      this application through the cash receipt and the certified  documents
      in the supplementary bundle at S44-S47.

   6. Secondly, it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  and
      acted unfairly by placing reliance on undisclosed materials  (relating
      to the document  verification  process  -  see  paragraph  39  of  the
      decision) not shown to the appellant with  a  failure  to  follow  the
      correct procedure at Rule 13 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014, and
      in particular in not disclosing the documents to  the  appellant  when
      there was no  application  by  the  respondent  for  a  non-disclosure
      direction and giving no reasons why they should not  be  disclosed  to
      the appellant.

   7. Thirdly, it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
      being satisfied that the processes for verifying documents being  used
      by the respondent was compliant with Article 22 of  Council  Directive
      2005/85/EC which is partially transposed into paragraph 339IA  of  the
      Immigration Rules, when in fact that process poses a risk of breaching
      confidentiality in the asylum process,  in  line  with  the  grant  of
      permission  by  Sir  Stephen  Silber  in    TA  (Bangladesh)  v   SSHD
      (although that case had now concluded by consent so there would be  no
      forthcoming guidance from the Court of  Appeal  on  the  issue).  Even
      though there has not been an approach  to  the  director  of  the  TID
      directly as had happened in the matters consider  in  VT  (Article  22
      Procedures Directive - confidentiality) Sri Lanka  [2017]  UKUT  00368
      it is possible that the new DVR process could  also  place  family  at
      risk as what is said about that process  simply  is  not  credible  in
      light of the evidence from the Sri Lankan  lawyer  instructed  by  the
      appellant's solicitors.

   8. Fourthly, it is argued that the appeal was unfairly determined as  the
      appellant only had one day to make submissions about the  letter  from
      Emma Hardy, Immigration Liaison Manager at the British High Commission
      Colombo  dated  26th  September  2018  which  was   submitted  by  the
      respondent in accordance with  directions  dated  6th  December  2018,
      after the hearing as recorded at paragraph 40 of  the  decision,  with
      respect to the verification process carried out by the respondent  for
      court documents in Sri Lanka. This was because the First-tier Tribunal
      directions said to have been posted on Friday 4th  January  2019  were
      not received by the appellant's solicitors until Tuesday  8th  January
      2019  (which is evidenced by their office date stamp) and the deadline
      for submissions by the appellant was the 9th January 2019. Counsel was
      in court on 8th January 2019 and  so  there  was  no  opportunity  for
      submissions to be made on behalf of the  appellant.  Further,  if  the
      appellant had had that  opportunity  to  make  observations  then  the
      points set out in the grounds of appeal at paragraph 9  regarding  the
      fact that the process claimed for checking a terrorist arrest  warrant
      was not  correct  in  light  of  the  evidence  from  the  appellant's
      solicitors' Sri Lankan lawyer and further points regarding the lack of
      compliance with Article 22 and paragraph 229IA would have been made.

   9.  In a Rule 24 notice and through oral submissions made  by  Mr  Melvin
      the respondent argues that the arrest  warrant  was  considered  in  a
      thorough assessment by the First-tier Tribunal, and the DVR was  found
      to be obtained through a procedure which was  compliant  with  Article
      22. It was reasonable  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  prefer  the
      evidence  of  this  DVR  process  rather  than  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant's solicitors' Sri Lankan lawyer, particularly as the  actual
      application to the Sri Lankan court by which the lawyer claims to have
      verified the  arrest  warrant  was  not  produced  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, as is noted by the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraph  46  of
      the decision. It was possible  that  the  DVR  process  could  confirm
      whether a reference number for an arrest warrant was  correct  through
      its process even if this was not a process by which a full court file/
      copy of the warrant could be obtained. There was no evidence that  the
      errors found arguable in TA (Bangladesh) resembled the issues in  this
      case. The First-tier Tribunal had correctly placed the evidence of the
      lawyer in the context of the low  credibility  of  the  appellant.  Mr
      Melvin accepted however that  if  the  contended  arrest  warrant  for
      involvement with terrorist  LTTE  activities  was  credible  then  the
      appellant would be entitled to succeed in his asylum  appeal  applying
      the country guidance in GJ notwithstanding the other issues  with  his
      credibility.

  10. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties that I found that the
      First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in determining  the  appeal  with
      reference to the arrest warrant and that  I  would  set  out  my  full
      reasons in writing. It was agreed that the remaking would be adjourned
      but retained in the Upper Tribunal. It  was  also  agreed  that  there
      should be a preliminary hearing regarding  the  issue  of  the  emails
      described at paragraph 39 of the decision  to  determine  whether  the
      Upper Tribunal should prohibit the disclosure of these documents. Both
      parties were permitted to provide input into this process should  they
      so wish.

   Conclusions - Error of Law

  11. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law firstly  due  to  two  issues  of
      procedural fairness in the making of  the  decision  relating  to  the
      arrest warrant. As argued by  Ms  Jegarajah  above  I  find  that  the
      appellant was not given a fair opportunity to provide further  written
      submissions on the letter of  26th  September  2018  from  Emma  Hardy
      Immigration Liaison Manager at the British  High  Commission  Colombo,
      which had been disclosed after 4th December 2018,  in  the  directions
      issued by the First-tier Tribunal on the 4th January 2019  giving  the
      appellant until 9th January  2019.  I  accept  that  those  directions
      arrived with the appellant's solicitors the day before the deadline to
      respond, and that this was not a reasonable  timeframe.  I  also,  and
      more importantly, find that the internal email exchange relied upon by
      the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 40 of the decision in relation to
      this letter has not been disclosed to the appellant without  a  proper
      process complying with the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014  which  again
      raises issues of procedural fairness and does not uphold the principle
      of maintaining, wherever possible, open justice.

  12. Secondly, I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  failing
      to provide sufficient reasoning for dismissing the verification of the
      arrest warrant by the appellant's solicitors' Sri Lankan lawyer and in
      finding  that  the  process  set  out  in  the  respondent's  document
      verification process was indeed one by which this arrest warrant could
      be verified, and thus that there could be  no  implicit  issues  of  a
      breach of the  duties  in  Article  22  of  the  Procedures  Directive
      prohibiting direct contact with the alleged actor  of  persecution  in
      the country of origin in a  manner  which  might  alert  them  to  the
      likelihood that a protection claim had been made or in a manner  which
      might place applicants or their  family  members  in  the  country  of
      origin  at  risk  (iii  VT  (Article   22   Procedures   Directive   -
      confidentiality) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT 368). I come to this conclusion
      for the following reasons.

  13. Whilst the responses in the Emma Hardy letter, set out at paragraph 38
      of the decision, sets  out  assurances  with  respect  to  Article  22
      issues, the key issue of whether this letter accurately  outlines  the
      process that is and could  be  employed  to  verify  terrorist  arrest
      warrants when it is at odds with the  evidence  from  the  Sri  Lankan
      lawyer instructed by the appellant's solicitors about how a  terrorist
      arrest warrant can be verified is not sufficiently addressed. There is
      a failure to make an explicit finding on whether terrorist  cases  are
      dealt with differently from other matters, with the register of  cases
      held only at the TID office,  as is contended in the evidence  of  the
      Sri  Lankan  lawyer   instructed   by   the   appellant's   solicitors
      particularly in his letter  of  3rd  December  2018,  or  whether  the
      (general) information obtain by Ms Hardy from the  TID,  the  Judicial
      Registrar and the Attorney  General's  Department  that  there  is  no
      separate process and it is possible to gain  access  and  check  these
      with all other warrants in the registry office above the  police  post
      is correct. A reasoned decision needed to be made on this point.

  14. I find that it was not sufficient to  prefer  the  evidence  from  the
      document verification process by say that there was "no copy of such a
      motion" as the appellant's solicitors' Sri Lankan lawyer describes  as
      being necessary to obtain the copy of the arrest warrant as is done at
      paragraph 46 of the decision. The appellant's solicitors provided in a
      bundle of documents lodged with the First-tier Tribunal the following:
      S49 letter of instruction from Greater London Solicitors  Ltd  to  the
      Sri Lankan lawyer;  S41 - S42 a letter from the lawyer  with  his  Bar
      Association of  Sri  Lanka  card  saying  that  he  had  attended  the
      Magistrates Court and obtained a copy of the  arrest  warrant;  S45  a
      cash receipt for the application to obtain a copy of the warrant; S43-
      44 and S46-S47 a copy of the warrant with translation with a record of
      the date the application was made  and  stamps  from  the  Magistrates
      Court with the date the copy was  issued;  S48  DHL  envelope  sending
      documents from the Sri Lankan lawyer to Greater London Solicitors Ltd.
      It is not explained in  the  decision  why  these  documents  did  not
      suffice to show an application had been made, particularly as they are
      stamped with the Magistrates Court stamps.




   Decision:

   4. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   5. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  all  findings
      relating to the arrest warrant at paragraphs 34 to 48 of the decision,
      but preserve all other findings made by the First-tier Tribunal  which
      are not challenged in the grounds of appeal.

   6. I adjourn the remaking of the appeal.





Directions Regarding Disclosure of the internal emails set out at  paragraph
39 of the First-tier Tribunal:

   1. The respondent has 14 days from the date this decision is sent to  the
      parties to apply to the Upper Tribunal for a direction that the  email
      exchange detailed at paragraph 39 of the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal is prohibited from being disclosed to the appellant.

   2. If no application is made within this time period the  email  exchange
      will be disclosed to  the  appellant  21  days  after  the  date  this
      decision is sent to the parties.




   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  original
   appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others,  all  parties.  Any
   failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to  contempt  of
   court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm
   arising to the appellant from the contents of his protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                          Date:    11th  September
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
Annex B:  Decision under s.108 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002 regarding the disclosure of the internal email exchange


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Introduction

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1986.  He  arrived  in
      the UK in June 2008 and claimed asylum on arrival. His application was
      refused, and his appeal dismissed in November 2008.  He  made  further
      submissions in November 2010, June 2013 and October  2016  which  were
      all refused as fresh claims. A judicial review of  the  final  refusal
      resulted in the decision letter of 19th December 2017,  which  is  the
      decision against which this appeal is brought. His appeal against  the
      decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colvin  in  a
      determination promulgated on the 15th January 2019.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce, and  I
      found for the reasons set out in my decision at  Annex  A  dated  11th
      September 2019, that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.  I  set
      aside the decision and all findings relating to the arrest warrant  at
      paragraphs 34 to 48 of the decision, but preserve all  other  findings
      made by the First-tier Tribunal  which  were  not  challenged  in  the
      grounds of appeal.

   3. On 29th October 2019 the parties were notified that there would  be  a
      preliminary hearing on today's date under s.108  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  regarding  the  disclosure  of  the
      internal email exchange detailed at paragraph 39 of  the  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. The test under s.108 of the 2002 Act  is  whether  disclosure  of  the
      email exchange would  be  contrary  to  the  public  interest.  It  is
      necessary under this provision that I investigate that  allegation  in
      private.

   Submissions & Conclusions - Preliminary Issue

   5. Following my directions of the  11th  September  2019  the  respondent
      applied for an order prohibiting the disclosure of the email  exchange
      described in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraph  39
      as  follows:  "copies  of  internal  Home  Office  emails  which   are
      confidential and non-disclosable" and "show  an  exchange  between  Ms
      Sreeraman for the respondent, a Home Office case worker and Ms  Hardy,
      the Immigration and Liaison Manager at the BHC Colombo  following  the
      letter received from the appellant's  solicitors  dated  4th  December
      2018." Mr Tony Melvin, Senior Executive Officer, said, in  his  letter
      of 24th September 2019, making the s.108  application  that  this  was
      done because of "the extremely sensitive information contained  within
      those exchanges". He  added  that:  "  the  email  exchanges  disclose
      information such as names and contact details  of  a  number  of  Home
      Office/  FCO  staff.  The  emails  also   disclose   other   sensitive
      information about other cases and the ongoing  verification  processes
      with several Sri Lankan organisations."

   6. However, when I showed Mr Melvin my bundle of documents marked  "  For
      the Judge's  Eyes  Only",  which  is  the  documents  referred  to  at
      paragraph 39 of the First-tier Tribunal decision, he agreed that  they
      could be disclosed so long as the emails and telephone numbers of  the
      staff members were redacted. They did not  contain  information  about
      other  cases  or  ongoing  verification  processes  with  Sri   Lankan
      organisations. I provided Mr Melvin and the appellant with a  copy  of
      the redacted emails.

   7. Ms Jegarajah then said that she wished to apply for disclosure of  the
      emails referred to in Mr Melvin's letter of 24th September 2019  which
      did include details of the Sri Lankan organisations.  We  agreed  that
      any such application needed to be made in writing with reasoning as to
      why these other emails, which have never been disclosed to the  First-
      tier or Upper Tribunal, are relevant  to  the  determination  of  this
      appeal. I suggested that expert evidence,  ideally  a  jointly  agreed
      expert, might be more relevant to determine which of the  verification
      processes (that of the appellant's lawyer or the High Commission)  was
      correct and thus of greater assistance in deciding the appeal.




   Decision:

   8. The email exchange referred to  at  paragraph  39  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and addressed to Judge Colvin "For  the  Judge's  Eyes  Only"
      dated  18th  December  2018  was  disclosed  by  consent,  with  email
      addresses and telephone numbers redacted, to the appellant.



Directions:

   1. Any application by the appellant for disclosure of further  emails  by
      the respondent must be made in writing within 28 days of today's date.

   2. The appeal is to be listed for a  remaking  before  me  at  the  first
      available date after 17th February 2020.

   3. A consolidated bundle containing only  relevant  documents  is  to  be
      served and filed 10 days prior to the hearing date.




      Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these  proceedings
      or any form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
      identify the original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst
      others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
      give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to  avoid
      a likelihood of  serious  harm  arising  to  the  appellant  from  the
      contents of his protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:    17th  December
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

