

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01738/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On December 9, 2016               |On December 9, 2016            |
|                                  |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           MR JUHAR KEDIR MOHAMMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
Appellant   Ms Bremang, Counsel, instructed by Supreme
      Solicitors
Respondent  Ms Peterson (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    2. The appellant is a  national  of  Ethiopia.  On  May  14,  2015  the
       appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally and he claimed asylum
       the  following  day.  The  respondent  refused  his  application  on
       September 30, 2015 under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

    3. The appellant appealed that  decision  on  October  13,  2015  under
       Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
       and his appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Maxwell
       (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge"  on  June  23,  2016.  In  a
       decision promulgated on July 11, 2016 he dismissed his claims.

    4. The appellant appealed the Judge's decision on  July  25,  2016  and
       permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Bennett on August  3,  2016.  The  matter  then  went  before  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Martin  on  November  18,  2016  and  in  a  decision
       promulgated the same day she  found  the  Judge  had  erred  in  his
       approach to the appellant's sur plas activities. However, she upheld
       the Judge's other findings including the fact he was not an Oromo.

    5. The matter came before me on the above date and on that  occasion  I
       heard submissions from both representatives. I reserved my decision.



PRELIMINARY ISSUES

    6.  The  representatives  confirmed  I  should  have  regard  documents
       numbered 1-4 in the appellant's original bundle and  I  should  also
       have regard to the supplemental bundle.

SUBMISSIONS

    7. Miss Peterson invited me to place  no  weight  on  either  Professor
       Trueman's report or Dr Berri's report.  Professor  Trueman's  report
       was out of date and no weight should be attached to it as  the  last
       reference to problems was  from  2008.  Dr  Berri's  report,  whilst
       current, was not supported by any relevant evidence. No evidence had
       been adduced  to  show  the  Ethiopian  authorities  monitored  what
       happened abroad. Dr Berri's report was prepared on the basis he  was
       an Oromo and this had been rejected by the Judge. She invited me  to
       dismiss the appeal.

    8. Miss Bremang invited me to find that returning the  appellant  would
       place him at risk because of his actions in the United Kingdom.  She
       submitted the issue in this appeal was  whether  his  actions  would
       have come to the attention of the authorities because she  submitted
       if they would come to their attention then  the  objective  evidence
       demonstrated that he would be at risk. She referred me to the expert
       report of Professor Trueman and the letter of Dr Berri  as  evidence
       of problems in Ethiopia for OLF supporters. There were  pictures  of
       his activities here albeit she accepted there was no  evidence  that
       these had been produced in social media. The more recent  bundle  of
       evidence demonstrated there was a state of  emergency  in  Ethiopia.
       She invited me to find he was at risk of persecution.


DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

    9. In setting the remit for today's hearing Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
       identified a narrow issue for me to consider.

   10. The Judge had rejected the appellant's claim to be Oromo  and  there
       was no evidence that the appellant  had  engaged  in  any  political
       activities prior to arriving in the United Kingdom  save  his  claim
       that he distributed leaflets and money and attended  meetings  after
       2013. The Judge rejected his activities in Ethiopia and  accordingly
       the issue for  me  to  determine  was  whether  his  attendances  at
       meetings and demonstrations engaged the Refugee Convention.

   11. The evidence submitted by  him  (Dr  Berri,  his  own  evidence  and
       photographs) showed he  had  started  attended  meetings  after  his
       asylum claim had been refused. Dr Berri only  met  him  in  November
       2015 at the annual OLF and supporters conference in Bolton. Dr Berri
       confirmed that since that  meeting  he  had  participated  in  Oromo
       activities including the aforementioned conference, an Oromo protest
       in London in December 2015 and an OLF meeting in December 2015.

   12. The problem with Dr Berri's report is that he accepted the appellant
       is an Oromo but this has been rejected by the  Tribunal.  The  other
       problem is that Dr Berri's report provided no  country  evidence  to
       support Miss Bremang's  submission  that  sur  plas  activities  are
       monitored by the authorities.

   13. The report of Professor  Trueman  is  out  of  date  with  the  last
       reported incident in 2008. This report was  not  prepared  for  this
       appeal and is generic in nature. The report again does  not  support
       Miss Bremang's submission that sur plas activities are monitored  by
       the authorities.

   14. Miss Bremang acknowledged that there was no evidence  to  support  a
       submission that the photographs  in  the  bundle  had  come  to  the
       attention of the Ethiopian authorities. They did not appear  on  any
       social media. There was no evidence his attendance  at  any  of  the
       meetings referred to above had been monitored by the authorities.

   15. I  am  therefore  drawn  to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant's
       activities in the United Kingdom would not place  him  at  risk.  He
       does not form part of a risk category as set out in MB (OLF and MTA-
       risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030 and I  therefore  find  he  can
       safely be returned to Ethiopia.

DECISION

   16. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I have remade the decision
       and I dismiss the appellant's asylum claim.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as I dismissed the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
