

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01639/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |        Decision & Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                       |
|On 16 March 2018                    |        On 20 March 2018          |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                              SURESH SINGARAJAH
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr J Martin (counsel) instructed by Nag Law,
solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Swaniker promulgated on 6 November 2017, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  rejection  of  his  protection
claim.




Background


3. The Appellant was born on 28 November 1970  and  is  a  national  of  Sri
Lanka. On 30 January 2017 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.
The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Swaniker ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 14 December 2017 Judge Page  granted
permission to appeal, stating

      This application has raised arguable grounds of appeal that go  beyond
      disagreement with the Judge's findings of fact. It is argued that  the
      Judge has acted irrationally in her credibility findings by relying on
      one inconsistency in  the  appellant's  evidence  as  her  reason  for
      discounting the appellants evidence in its entirety. At  paragraph  26
      of the decision the  Judge  has  said:  "I  do  not  accept  counsel's
      argument that there was no inconsistency between the  appellant's  two
      accounts of how he came into contact with the man who helped with  his
      escape from his claimed airport detention". Counsel for the appellant,
      who has made this application for permission to appeal, has  revisited
      this argument in her application for permission to appeal. Counsel for
      the appellant, in this application, has said that  the  appellant  was
      cross examined extensively for a period of approximately 3  hours  and
      gave evidence that was "entirely consistent throughout" save  the  one
      contested inconsistency. The grounds of appeal argue that  significant
      weight  was  placed  by  the  Judge  upon  the  plausibility  of   the
      appellant's account of his escape from the  airport.  It  is  arguable
      that if  there  was  no  inconsistency  between  the  appellant's  two
      accounts of how he came into contact with the man who helped with  his
      escape from airport detention that the Judge's finding that there  was
      a material inconsistency is an arguable error. Permission to appeal is
      granted on all grounds.

The hearing

6. (a) Mr Martin, for  the  appellant,  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
reminded me that the appellant's earlier appeal against refusal of  a  claim
for asylum was dealt with in a determination promulgated in  July  2006.  He
took me through the terms of that earlier determination  and  told  me  that
although the appellant's asylum claim was rejected then, the  2006  decision
upheld the respondent's reasons for refusal letter which did not take  issue
with the appellants claimed membership of EPRLF. In  line  with  Devaseelan,
Mr Martin told me that the Judge  should  have  taken  that  as  a  starting
point.

(b) Mr Martin took me to the Judge's findings  from  [24]  of  the  decision
onwards. He told me that the Judge's error is that she  has  focused  solely
on the appellant's return to Sri Lanka in 2007 and not considered his  wider
account. He told me that at [24] & [25]  the  Judge's  findings  are  flawed
because they are based on plausibility.

(c) Mr Martin moved onto [26] to [29] of the decision and told me  that  the
Judge incorrectly and unfairly found that there are inconsistencies  in  the
appellant's evidence. He told  me  that  consideration  of  the  appellant's
mother's evidence did not take account of her age and her  poor  memory.  He
told me that the Judge's findings are inadequately  reasoned  and  that  the
analysis of the appellant's mother's evidence is lacking. He  told  me  that
overall the Judge's analysis of the evidence was  inadequate  and  that  the
Judge places too much reliance on credibility findings made in 2006, and  on
unsustainable findings that there is an inconsistency where (he  argued)  no
inconsistency  has  occurred.   He  told  me  that   the   Judge's   overall
credibility assessment was inadequate.

(d) Mr Martin urged me to find that  the  Judge's  decision  is  tainted  by
material errors of law. He asked me to allow  the  appeal  and  to  set  the
Judge's decision aside.

7. (a) For the respondent, Mr Clarke told me that the Judge's decision  does
not contain any errors, material or otherwise. He  reminded  me  that  there
are two grounds of appeal. The first ground of appeal  is  in  irrationality
argument. He reminded me that there is a high threshold  for  irrationality.
He told me that I must be satisfied that no other Judge  or  tribunal  would
have come to the same conclusions.

(b) Mr Clarke took me to [24] where he  told  me  that  the  Judge  properly
applied the Devaseelan principles. He reminded me  that  the  2006  decision
found that the appellant's conduct is not that of a genuine  asylum  seeker.
He told me that the Judge's credibility findings are not restricted to  [26]
to [30] of the decision. He took me through some of the evidence before  the
First-tier Tribunal and argued that, in the  light  of  that  evidence,  the
Judge's findings are sustainable. He told me that  the  appellant  has  made
prior inconsistent statements and that his mother's evidence  is  in  direct
conflict to the evidence of the appellant. He told me that in  the  face  of
that evidence the Judge was bound to come to the conclusions that  she  came
to.

(c) Mr Clarke turned to the second ground of appeal, which argues  that  the
Judge made adverse inferences drawn from plausibility only. He  took  me  to
[25] of the decision and told me that the Judge's  findings  are  not  drawn
exclusively from her view of plausibility.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge's
finding  that  one  aspect  of  the  appellant's   account   is   inherently
implausible is only one small part of the overall credibility assessment.

(d) Mr Clarke urged me to dismiss the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

8. The first ground of appeal is summarised at paragraph 9  of  the  grounds
of appeal and is clearly an argument about rationality. It is said  for  the
appellant that the Judge acted  irrationally  when  making  her  credibility
findings and provided in sufficient reasons for her findings.

9. In Dasgupta (error of law - proportionality -  correct  approach)  [2016]
UKUT 00028 the Tribunal held that  in  error  of  law  appeals  relating  to
findings of fact, the Upper Tribunal should apply the principles in Edwards
v Bairstow [1956] AC 14. In Edwards  v  Bairstow [1956]  AC  14  Viscount
Simonds  said " For it is universally conceded that, although it is  a  pure
finding of fact, it may be set aside on grounds which have  been  stated  in
various ways but are, I think, fairly summarised by saying  that  the  court
should take that course if it appears  that  the  commissioners  have  acted
without any evidence or upon a view of the facts which could not  reasonably
be entertained."  Elsewhere the House of Lords referred  to  "  perversity",
defining  this as a case in which " ..... the facts found are such  that  no
person acting judicially and properly instructed  as  to  the  relevant  law
could come to the determination under appeal."   In  R  and  Others  v  SSHD
(2005) EWCA civ 982 Lord Justice Brooke noted that perversity represented  a
very  high  hurdle.   It  embraced  decisions  which  were   irrational   or
unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense.

10. At 23 the Judge reminds herself of the Devaseelan  principles.  At  [24]
the Judge applies those  principles  and  explains  why  the  2006  findings
cannot be preserved.

11. At [27] the Judge starts an analysis of the evidence presented  to  her.
The Judge explains why she finds  one  aspect  of  the  appellant's  account
inherently implausible,  but  that  finding  is  not  determinative  of  the
appellant's appeal. The Judge  goes  on  to  consider  each  aspect  of  the
appellant's account and gives clear  reasons,  between  [25]  and  [33]  for
finding that the appellant is neither a credible nor a reliable witness.

12. At [27], [28] and [29]  the  Judge  explains  why  she  finds  that  the
appellant's mother, who was led as  a  witness  to  support  the  appellants
evidence, not  only  fails  to  support  his  evidence  but  undermines  his
evidence. Between [25] and [33] the Judge explains fully why she finds  that
the appellant is neither a credible nor reliable witness.

13. The Judge's findings of fact are  manifestly  drawn  from  the  evidence
presented before her. The conclusions that she reaches are well  within  the
range of reasonable conclusion s  available  to  the  Judge  -  and  on  any
construction cannot be described as either irrational or perverse. They  are
findings which the appellant does not  like,  but  they  are  evidence-based
findings which were open to the Judge. The Judge sets out  adequate  reasons
so that the objective reader is  left  in  no  doubt  about  how  the  Judge
reached her conclusions.

14. At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia)  [2010]  UKSC  49,   it  was  said  that
"Where a tribunal has referred to considering all the evidence, a  reviewing
body should be very slow to conclude  that  that  tribunal  overlooked  some
factor, simply because the factor is  not  explicitly  referred  to  in  the
determination concerned". McCombe LJ  in  VW(Sri  Lanka)  C5/2012/3037  said
"Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,  when  a
First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  given  a  judgment  explaining  why  he  has
reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow out industriously  areas
of evidence that have been less fully dealt with than  others  and  then  to
use this as a basis for  saying  the  judge's  decision  is  legally  flawed
because it did not  deal  with  a  particular  matter  more  fully.   In  my
judgment, with respect, that is no  basis  on  which  to  sustain  a  proper
challenge to a judge's finding of fact"

15. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)   the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

16. It was noted in MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  1958  that  adequacy
meant no more nor less than that.  It  was  not  a  counsel  of  perfection.
Still less should it provide  an  opportunity  to  undertake  a  qualitative
assessment of  the  reasons  to  see  if  they  are  wanting,  perhaps  even
surprising, on their merits.  The purpose of the duty to  give  reasons,  is
in part, to enable the losing party to know why she has lost and it is  also
to enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what  the  reasons  for  the
decision are so that they can be examined in case there has  been  an  error
of approach.

17. There is no merit in the first ground of appeal. What is argued for  the
appellant does not approached the  threshold  of  irrationality.  The  Judge
gives adequate reasons for her findings. The fact  that  the  appellant  was
cross examined for almost 3 hours is entirely irrelevant. It is the  quality
of the evidence which counts, not the quantity of the  evidence.  The  Judge
explains that she considered each strand  of  the  appellants  evidence  and
explains why she found that the appellant gave  inconsistent  evidence.  The
appellant's mother was led as a witness to support the appellant. The  Judge
explains why the appellant's  mother's  evidenced  damaged  the  appellant's
overall account rather than providing support for it.

18. What the Judge has done  is  carefully  analyse  the  lengthy,  detailed
evidence from different sources and use that analysis to  draw  conclusions.
That is precisely what the Judge should do. The Judge cannot  be  criticised
for doing what she should  do.  Despite  the  efforts  of  counsel  for  the
appellant,  there  is  no  valid  criticism  of  the  Judge's   fact-finding
exercise. At [32] of the decision the Judge takes correct guidance in law.

19.  The  second  ground  of  appeal  challenges  the  Judge's  reliance  on
plausibility. It is only at [25] of the decision that the Judge  finds  part
of the appellant's account

           to be inherently implausible.


20. The finding of inherent plausibility at [25] is  made  by  reference  to
background materials about the Sri Lankan authorities' desire to  prevent  a
resurgence of LTTE  activity.  It  forms  one  small  part  of  the  overall
assessment carried out between [25] and [33] of the decision.

21.  In MM (DRC) 2005 UKIAT 00019 the Tribunal said that the  assessment  of
credibility may involve an  assessment  of  the  plausibility,  or  apparent
reasonableness or truthfulness of what was being said.  This  could  involve
a judgement on  the  likelihood  of  something  having  happened,  based  on
evidence  or  inferences.   Background  evidence  could  assist  with   that
process,  revealing  the  likelihood  of  what  was  said  having  occurred.
Background  evidence  could  reveal  that  adverse  inferences  which   were
apparently reasonable when  based  on  an  understanding  of  life  in  this
country, were less reasonable when the circumstances of life in the  country
of origin were exposed.  Plausibility  was  an  aspect  in  the  process  of
arriving at a decision, which might vary  from  case  to  case,  and  not  a
separate stage in  it.  A  story  could  be  implausible  yet  credible,  or
plausible yet properly not believed.  Plausibility is not  a  term  of  art.
It is simply that the inherent likelihood or apparent  reasonableness  of  a
claim is an aspect of its credibility  and  an  aspect  which  may  well  be
related to background material  which  may  assist  when  judging  it.   The
Tribunal went on to say that  "the  more  improbable  the  story,  the  more
cogent the evidence necessary to support it, even to the lower  standard  of
proof." In  relation  to  the  contention  that  there  was  an  alternative
satisfactory  explanation  for  matters  found  to  be  implausible  by  the
Adjudicator, the Tribunal said that it was for the claimant to  put  forward
all relevant evidence and to recognise and explain any  inconsistencies  and
improbabilities and a conclusion was not necessarily  erroneous  because  it
did  not  contemplate  possibilities  that   were   not   raised   for   the
Adjudicator's consideration. In Gulnaz Esen v SSHD 2006 CSIH  23  the  Court
of Session said  that  Adjudicators  are  entitled  to  draw  inferences  of
implausibility when assessing credibility and to draw on their common  sense
and ability to identify what was or was not plausible, as  long  as  it  was
based on hard evidence.

22. In this case the Judge's starting point  was  a  finding  in  2006  that
there was no risk to the  appellant  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  The  Judge
correctly focused on events since 2006 and  after  carefully  analysing  the
evidence finds that the appellant does not give an honest  account  of  what
has happened to him since February 2007. The correct focus is taken to  this
appeal in the first two sentences of [25] of the  decision;  thereafter  the
Judge carries out a  detailed  analysis  of  the  evidence  before  reaching
conclusions. Those conclusions do not rely exclusively on  the  plausibility
assessment in the middle of [25] of the decision. That is one small part  of
the overall assessment. The Judge's decision does not rest on a  finding  of
plausibility.

23. There is nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  In
reality the appellant's appeal amounts to little more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as she found them  to  be.  The
respondent might not like the conclusion that the Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result of the correctly applied legal  equation.  The
correct test in law has been  applied.  The  decision  does  not  contain  a
material error of law.

24.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

25.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

26.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 06 November 2017, stands.


Signed        Paul Doyle
  Date  19 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


