

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01853/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Determination issued                 |
|on 31 May 2017                        |On 02 June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    [R M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  for  reasons
    explained in her letter dated 6 October 2015.

 2.  FtT  Judge  McGavin  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  for  reasons
    explained in her decision promulgated on 1 September 2016.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT  on  grounds  which
    (lightly edited) are as follows:

    Ground 1 - findings not supported by the evidence.

    At paragraph 20 the FtT found that persons expelled from Ethiopia  were
    deemed a security risk and that Eritrean  refugees  were  crossing  the
    border into Ethiopia rather than the other way round.   Those  findings
    were not supported by the country information.

    Ground 2 - Mibanga point.

    The  FtT  at  paragraph  17  found  the  claim  materially  lacking  in
    credibility, prior to assessing evidence of witnesses at  paragraph  41
    onwards.

    Ground 3 - failing to exercise anxious scrutiny.

    (1) The FtT at paragraph 22 relied on the Nationality  Proclamation  to
    undermine the appellant's claim that he was deported  [in  2002],  when
    the Proclamation came into force only in 2004.

    (2) The FtT at paragraph 26 relied on the Proclamation to criticise the
    appellant for not  using  it  to  resolve  their  status.  However,  ST
    Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 252 held that a person was unlikely to be  able
    to re-acquire Ethiopian nationality as a matter of right  by  means  of
    the Proclamation and would likely  have  to  live  in  Ethiopia  for  a
    significant period  (probably  4  years)  and  applied  only  to  those
    resident in Ethiopia  when  Eritrea  became  independent  and  who  had
    continued  so  to  reside  until  the  date  of  the  directive.    The
    legislation would not assist the appellant.

    Ground 4 - looking for corroboration.

    At paragraph 22 when finding that the appellant  provided  no  evidence
    that the family were nationals of Eritrea, the FtT  effectively  looked
    for corroboration, when there is no onus to corroborate a claim.

    Ground 5 - engaging in impermissible speculation.

    The FtT engaged in impermissible speculation:

    (1) at paragraph 23, when finding it not likely the appellant's parents
    would not have applied for an identity card for him, particularly  when
    the appellant was not old enough to vote;

    (2) at paragraph 26, when finding reasonable to  assume  the  appellant
    would have learned how his family became Eritrean nationals,  and  that
    documents would have been carefully kept by the family;

    (3) at paragraph  26,  that  he  would  not  have  kept  even  a  birth
    certificate;

    (4) at paragraph 38, that his parents would not have spoken Tigrinya to
    him;

    (5) at paragraph 40, that it was reasonable  to  assume  Amharic  would
    have been replaced by Tigrinyan;

    (6) at paragraph 44, when  finding  that  the  witness  ought  to  have
    remembered such an event.

    Ground 6 - arriving at contradictory findings and  failing  to  resolve
    these.

    The appellant is  criticised  for  his  parents  not  applying  for  an
    identity card, and implying they did have them, but then  at  paragraph
    24 is criticised for failing to  produce  the  identity  cards.  It  is
    unclear why the appellant is criticised  for  failing  to  produce  the
    cards when the FtT appears to proceed on the assumption his parents had
    identity cards.

    Ground 7 - error assessing the witness' evidence.

    (1)  The  FtT  does  not  identify  any  material  inconsistencies   at
    paragraphs 42 and 45;

    (2)  the  alleged  inconsistencies  at  paragraph  43  are   not   true
    inconsistencies.

 4. Designated FtT Judge McCarthy refused permission  on  25th  of  October
    2016, explaining why he thought the grounds amounted to  no  more  than
    disagreement, and at some points misrepresented the judge's findings.

 5. UT Judge Allen granted permission on 25 April 2017 on grounds 3, 6  and
    7, but agreed with the decision of Judge McCarthy  in  respect  of  the
    other grounds.

 6. The respondent's rule 24 response to the grant of permission, dated  16
    May 2017, submits that the judge reached adequately  reasoned  findings
    of fact which do not disclose contradictions or error of law.

 7. By letter from his solicitors dated 30 May 2017 the  appellant  advised
    that he was "seeking permission to argue all the grounds of appeal".

 8. There was some preliminary debate on whether the  UT  could  permit  an
    appellant to revive grounds on which it had refused  permission.  Under
    reservation of that point, I allowed submissions on all the grounds.

 9. In course of submissions, grounds 1, 2 and 4  were  withdrawn,  so  the
    foregoing issue remains relevant only to ground 5.

10. Mr Winter's submissions made these main points:

    Ground 3 (1), there was no evidence that there was any lead-in  to  the
    Nationality Proclamation, such that it undermined the appellant's claim
    to have been deported from Eritrea in 2002.

    Ground 3 (2), the judge's view was contrary to the guidance  in  ST  at
    headnotes 6 - 7.

    Ground 5, at each issue there was no reasonable or  evidential  support
    for the judge's views.

    Ground 6 disclosed a plain self-contradiction.

    Ground 7, by reference to the  decision,  showed  that  no  significant
    inconsistencies were identified.

    The grounds cumulatively required a remit to the FtT.

11. Mrs O'Brien argued thus:

    The judge had good reasons to  doubt  the  appellant's  evidence  about
    nationality and deportation.  Paragraphs 20 and 21  contained  decisive
    reasons.

    Ground 3. Matters related to the  Nationality  Proclamation  were  only
    supplementary.

    Ground 6.  There was no contradiction between finding at  paragraph  23
    that it was not likely that the appellant's parents would  have  failed
    to obtain an identity card for him, and at paragraph 24 that if what he
    said was true they would have had cards, contrary to his claim never to
    have had one.  The  ground  sought  to  construct  a  contradiction  by
    extracting elements from their context.   There  was  no  flaw  in  the
    reasoning, as a whole.

    All the matters in ground  5  were  reasonable  inference  rather  than
    impermissible speculation.

    Ground 7.  The evaluation of the evidence of the witness was  not  only
    on the points selected but throughout paragraphs 41 - 47.  This was not
    only a slip about the  timing  of  a  distant  event  but  an  evolving
    narrative about a crucial  event.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  note
    inconsistency over whether the witness was  present  or  had  left  the
    country by that time (paragraph 44).

    The judge found at paragraphs 27 - 37 that the appellant's case  failed
    in terms of ST.  The grounds did not  criticise  those  findings.   The
    appellant having failed to show that he  could  not  avail  himself  of
    Ethiopian nationality, there could have been no other  outcome.   There
    was no substance in the grounds of appeal, but in any event the outcome
    was not affected.

12. In response, Mr Winter submitted that on  reflection,  ground  7  alone
    would justify a rehearing, because if the  witness  was  believed,  the
    appellant is Eritrean.  As to the respondent's overall  argument  based
    on ST, although the appellant failed on the  "letter  to  the  Embassy"
    issue, that  was  only  one  factor,  and  the  case  required  further
    resolution.

13. I reserved my decision.

14. Ground 3 (1) does not disclose error.  Paragraph 22 is to  be  read  in
    full and in context.  The judge found the evidence to show  "developing
    and continuing legislation, which must have been in process  about  the
    time of the ... claimed deportation ... aimed at resolving  status  and
    residence issues of Eritreans resident in Ethiopia".  That is sensible.
     It shows that she was aware of the timing point.  It is  fortified  in
    the same sentence by the observation that there was no evidence of  the
    family's Eritrean nationality or any other basis for deportation.

15. Ground 3 (2) is based on a partial reading of ST at  headnote  (6)  and
    paragraphs 110 - 113.  The guidance relates  to  those  who  fall  into
    headnote (4).  The appellant failed to show that he  had  done  all  he
    could to facilitate return as a national of Ethiopia.

16. Whether or not the appellant is procedurally entitled to seek to revive
    ground 5, I find no substance in it.  It does no more than select  some
    findings and categorise them as speculative.  Each of those assessments
    was well within the scope of reason.

17. No true contradiction is disclosed by  ground  6.   As  the  presenting
    officer submitted, both observations are valid and they may co-exist.

18. Ground 7 does not fairly reflect paragraphs 41 - 47,  where  the  judge
    gives a more than adequate  explanation  why  she  does  not  find  the
    evidence of the witness to support the appellant.

19. The appellant's case as a whole fell well short of the requirements  of
    country guidance.  He failed  to  show  that  he  is  not  entitled  to
    Ethiopian  citizenship,  or  that  the  Ethiopian   authorities   would
    arbitrarily deprive him of that citizenship.

20. The grounds of appeal resolve into no more  than  disagreement  on  the
    facts.  They do not show that the making of the FtT's decision involved
    the making of any error on a point of law.

21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            31 May 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




