
                                    [pic]
IAC-BFD-MD-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01785/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd December 2016                 |On 19th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     mp
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr B Davison, Solicitor.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-tier Tribunal, where  the
    Secretary of State was referred to as "the Respondent" and MP  as  "the
    Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. She  and  her  three  children
    arrived in the United Kingdom on  or  around  29  June  2015  when  she
    claimed asylum, Humanitarian Protection and leave to remain  under  the
    Human Rights Act.

 3. An anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and I direct
    that it continues in the same terms in the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The Appellant's application was  refused  by  the  Respondent  and  she
    appealed.  Following  a  hearing  at  Bradford,  and  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 4 October 2016, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Myers
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum and Humanitarian  Protection
    grounds but allowed it on Human Rights grounds. Reasons for allowing it
    on Article 3 grounds can be gleaned from paragraphs 31, 32  and  33  of
    the Judge's decision which state:-

         "31. Under this Article I have to decide whether there is a  breach
             of  the  prohibition  on  torture,  or  inhuman  or  degrading
             treatment or  punishment.   In  the  asylum  section  of  this
             determination I indicated that I found the  Appellant's  claim
             credible.

         32.  She has been diagnosed as suffering with severe depression and
             post-traumatic stress disorder. Dr Bonnet  concludes  that  at
             present whilst in the UK she is a medium risk of suicide,  and
             has denied any intent to act on her suicidal thoughts and  her
             children are a strong protective factor. However, her risk  of
             suicide can change in response to adverse  events  such  as  a
             change of asylum status. The report noted that at present  she
             avoids thinking about Sri Lanka wherever possible and when she
             is forced to recall she becomes agitated and very unwell.  She
             had described an improvement in some  of  her  symptoms  since
             arriving in the UK and taking  anti-depressant  medication.  I
             find it very likely that her mental health will deteriorate if
             she is forced to return to  the  country  where  she  suffered
             appalling ill treatment.

         33.  If at present she is of medium risk of suicide, in my judgment
             enforced return will increase the risk to that of high, and in
             those circumstances I find her situation comparable to that of
             the third Appellant in GJ and note the comments  made  by  the
             Upper Tribunal

                  453.  Although  the  appeal  fails   under   the   Refugee
                  Convention and Qualification Directive, we  must  consider
                  whether the suicide risk which this appellant presents  is
                  such as to engage Article 3 ECHR.  Applying the  J  and  Y
                  principles, and reminding ourselves of the gravity of  the
                  appellant's  past  experience  of  ill-treatment  and  his
                  current grave mental health problems, with severe forms of
                  both post-traumatic stress  disorder  and  depression,  we
                  have considered whether returning  the  appellant  to  Sri
                  Lanka  will  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  international
                  obligations under Article 3.

                  454. The evidence  is  that  there  are  only  25  working
                  psychiatrists in the whole of Sri Lanka.   Although  there
                  are  some  mental  health  facilities  in  Sri  Lanka,  at
                  paragraph 4 of the April 2012  UKBA  Operational  Guidance
                  Note on Sri Lanka, it  records  an  observation  by  Basic
                  Needs that "money that is  spent  on  mental  health  only
                  really goes to the large  mental  health  institutions  in
                  capital cities, which are inaccessible and do not  provide
                  appropriate care for mentally ill people" .

                  455. In the UKBA Country of Origin Report issued in  March
                  2012, at paragraph 23.28-23.29, the following  information
                  is recorded from a BHC letter written on 31 January 2012:

                      "23.28 The BHC letter of  31  January  2012  observed
                      that: "There are no psychologists working within  the
                      public sector although there are [sic] 1 teaching  at
                      the University  of  Colombo.  There  are  no  numbers
                      available  for  psychologists  working   within   the
                      private sector. There are currently 55  psychiatrists
                      attached to the Ministry of Health and working across
                      the country."

                      Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)

                      23.29 The BHC letter of 31 January  2012468  observed
                      that:

                      "Post Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  (PTSD)  was  first
                      recognised in Sri Lanka in patients affected  by  the
                      2004 tsunami. Many of the psychiatrists  and  support
                      staff  in  Sri  Lanka  have  received   training   in
                      Australia  and  the  UK  for  the  treatment  of  the
                      disorder. A Consultant Psychiatrist  from  NIMH  said
                      that  many  patients  often   sought   ayurvedic   or
                      traditional treatment for  the  illness  long  before
                      approaching public hospitals, adding that this  often
                      resulted in patients then suffering from psychosis."

 5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal on two grounds. Firstly that
    the Judge materially misdirected herself in law and secondly  that  she
    failed to give adequate reasons.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Froom in a decision  dated  19  October  2016.  His  reasons  for  that
    decision are: -

         "Permission is granted because  it  is  arguable  that  the  FtTJ's
         analysis fails to apply the guidance given by the Court  of  Appeal
         in J. The grounds may be argued."

 7. The Respondent asserts that the Judge failed  to  conduct  any  careful
    analysis of the case law in relation to  Article  3  and  the  risk  of
    suicide. In particular the authorities of J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ  629
    and Y (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362. It is asserted  that  the
    principles set out in J have not been analysed  at  all  and  that  the
    Judge has done no more than adopt the stance that the Appellant is  "on
    a par with the third Appellant in GJ". This, the Respondent asserts  is
    inadequate as this is a fact sensitive decision.

 8. Secondly it is asserted that the Judge's  decision  is  flawed  as  the
    Judge appears to speculate at paragraph 33 of her decision that if  the
    Appellant were returned to Sri Lanka her suicide  risk  would  go  from
    medium to high. This, it is said, appears not "to  be  founded  on  the
    medical report - such an opinion must have been asked  of  the  expert,
    and the lack of any direct reference to  a  high  risk  of  suicide  if
    returned within the medical report arguably shows the FTJ assuming  the
    role of a medical expert of which she is not qualified". Moreover, that
    in coming to such a speculative conclusion the Judge  has  ignored  her
    previous findings at paragraph 32 of her decision that the  Appellant's
    children are a "strong protective factor" and the Appellant has  denied
    any intent to commit suicide. Finally it is said that the Judge  failed
    to consider "if the risk could be mitigated for  by  the  provision  of
    medication, and medical escorts".

 9. Thus the appeal came before me today.

10. Beyond the materials already filed within this appeal I have taken into
    account, alongside the respective submissions of both  representatives,
    a Rule 24 (Reply/skeleton) handed up by Mr Davison.

11.  In  his  submissions  Mr  Diwnycz  relied  upon  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal. He referred me to the report of Dr J  Bonnet  and
    in particular paragraph 88. He urged me to accept that  the  Judge  had
    "stretched the point" and that  the  expert  evidence  in  relation  to
    potential suicide was not as  found  by  the  Judge  who  had  come  to
    speculative conclusions.

12. Unsurprisingly Mr Davison asked me to adopt the opposite view so far as
    the expert evidence is concerned. He said there was ample  evidence  of
    the Appellant's mental health issues to show that the level of risk she
    is at if faced with imminent or actual return to Sri Lanka entitled the
    Judge to come to the  conclusions  that  she  did.  There  has  been  a
    thorough consideration of the Appellant's mental health and  the  Judge
    directed herself to the appropriate paragraphs of GJ and  others  (Post
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] which he  submitted  included
    the proper application of J. Accordingly it is clear that the Judge has
    taken into account relevant guiding case law when reaching her decision
    in respect of the Appellant's risk of suicide if returned and that  the
    application made by the Respondent for permission to  appeal  fails  to
    take account of the expert evidence.

13. The medical evidence in this case comes from a report prepared  by  the
    Medical Foundation, Medico Legal Reports Service and prepared by  Dr  J
    Bonnet. The report is dated 30 June 2016 following two examinations  of
    the Appellant in April of that year and one in May.

14. Dr Bonnet assesses the Appellant's risk of suicide as medium.  This  is
    gleaned from paragraph 88 of her report which states:-

         "MP has frequent thoughts of wishing she was dead  particularly  in
         relation to thinking about having been raped. She denies any intent
         to act on these thoughts. There are protective factors such as  her
         religious belief that suicide is wrong and the fact that she wishes
         to live to care for her children. Currently I  judge  her  risk  of
         suicide as medium. Suicide risk is not fixed but rather can  change
         in response to a change in circumstances. Adverse events such as  a
         change in asylum status could lead to an  increased  risk  and  she
         would require reassessment."

15.  Paragraphs 89 to 91 of Dr Bonnet's report states:

         "As instructed in the Istanbul Protocol, Paragraph 105(f),  I  have
         considered the possibility of a false allegation of torture. I find
         nothing in MP's account to suggest this. I found her  psychological
         symptoms and physical lesions accord with her account. I  have  not
         relied solely on her testimony but also  on  the  large  number  of
         objective observations of psychological symptoms which I have noted
         throughout this report.

         I have considered whether I would expect  this  presentation  in  a
         refugee who had not been ill-treatment (sic) and in my opinion this
         would not occur. The psychological symptoms experienced by  MP  are
         highly specific to the ill-treatment she described. The  nightmares
         she experiences are directly related to being raped and  beaten  in
         the police station and her anxiety and  low  mood  are  related  to
         recollections of this ill-treatment

         It is my opinion that this report would be of assistance to MP's GP
         in the treatment of both her and children. I recommend that a  copy
         should be sent to her registered surgery by  her  Solicitors,  with
         her consent."

16. She summarises her findings at paragraph 92 onward of her report  which
    state:

         "MP is a 44-year-old Tamil woman from Sri Lanka. Her husband was  a
         member of the LTTE and he disappeared in 2012. Between January 2012
         and June 2015 MP was required  to  report  monthly  at  the  police
         station.  There  she  was  questioned   regarding   her   husband's
         activities and subject to the following forms of ill-treatment:

                . Made to stand outside in the sun for long periods of time

                . Made to kneel for long periods of time

                . Hit with a wooden stick

                . Forced to undress

                . Hand cuffed

                . Raped on two or three occasions

                . Burnt with cigarettes on her back and her chest

         In March 2014 MP did not keep her  appointment  to  report  to  the
         police station as she felt too psychologically unwell.  The  police
         came to her house and took her 15-year-old son. He was kept at  the
         police station for a week. His leg was broken by the police with  a
         cricket bat.

         She has the following lesions attributed to ill-treatment:

             . Two lesions consistent with being beaten with a stick

             .  20  lesions  highly  consistent  with  being  burnt  with  a
               cigarette

             . Two lesions diagnostic of being burnt with a cigarette

         She has three lesions she does not attribute to ill-treatment.

         She has a joint diagnosis of Severe Depression and  Post  Traumatic
         Stress Disorder. She has thoughts of wanting to die but no  current
         suicidal plans. Her children are a strong protective factor.

         I have considered the six questions set out at paragraph 105 of the
         Istanbul Protocol in formulating my clinical opinion on MP's  claim
         to  have  been  tortured.  In  my   opinion,   the   physical   and
         psychological evidence I have documented in  this  report  and  the
         clinical findings I have made correlate with  MP's  claim  to  have
         been tortured in the manner she describes."

17. The other evidence considered by Judge Myers  was  background  material
    detailed in Section B of the Index to the Appellant's bundle  and  from
    Section A thereof a chronology and a witness statement of the Appellant
    dated 12 September 2016.

18.  Paragraph 16 of the judgment in J assists in the  distinction  between
    "foreign cases" and "domestic cases". A "foreign case" is one where  it
    is  not  claimed  that  that  State  complained  of  has  violated  the
    applicant's ECHR rights within its own territory, but where it is  said
    that the conduct of the State in removing a person from  its  territory
    to another territory will lead to violation of the person's ECHR rights
    in that other territory. "Domestic cases" are  ones  concerning  claims
    based on the ECHR where a State is said to have acted  within  its  own
    territory in a way which infringes  the  enjoyment  of  an  ECHR  right
    within that territory.

19. Like the Appellant here the Appellant in J was Sri  Lankan  claiming  a
    risk of suicide if returned to his country of origin.

20. Paragraph 17 of J assists in the approach  to  an  Appellant  in  these
    circumstances. It states: -

         "17. This has been recognised as an important distinction  both  in
         Strasbourg and in our own  jurisprudence.  In  cases  such  as  the
         present case the risk of a violation of article  3  or  8  must  be
         considered in relation to three stages. By reference to  the  claim
         made in this case, these are: (i) when the  Appellant  is  informed
         that a final decision has been made to remove  him  to  Sri  Lanka;
         (ii) when he is physically removed by airplane to  Sri  Lanka;  and
         (iii) after he has arrived in Sri Lanka. In relation to stage  (i),
         the case is plainly a domestic case. In relation to stage (iii), it
         is equally clearly a foreign case. The classification of  the  case
         in  relation  to  stage  (ii)  is  less  easy.  Since  in  practice
         arrangements are made by the Secretary of State  in  suicide  cases
         for an escort it is safer to treat this as a domestic case."

21. It is settled law that in the context of a foreign case the  Article  3
    threshold is particularly high because it is a "foreign  case".  It  is
    even higher where the alleged in-human treatment is not the  direct  or
    indirect responsibility of the  public  authorities  of  the  receiving
    State, but results on some naturally occurring illness whether physical
    or mental. The Article 3 claim of  this  Appellant  can  of  course  in
    principle succeed on the basis of suicide risk.  The  Judge  must  have
    regard to whether the removing and/or  receiving  State  has  effective
    mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide and  if  there  are  effective
    mechanisms that will weigh heavily against an  Appellant's  claim  that
    removal will be a violation of her Article 3 rights.

22. Having considered the evidence in this appeal I am satisfied that Judge
    Myers  has  speculated,  as  asserted  by  the  Respondent,  that   the
    Appellant's risk would go from medium  to  high  as  she  concludes  in
    paragraph 33 of her decision. Such a conclusion cannot  be  drawn  from
    evidence within the report of Dr Bonnet and as such it can be said that
    the Judge has materially erred in failing to give adequate  reasons  as
    to how such a speculative conclusion has been reached.

23. The Judge has also similarly erred in failing to give consideration  to
    how any risks the Appellant faces could be mitigated by  the  provision
    of, for example, medication or medical escorts and the like.

24. Whilst GJ is Country Guidance in relation to the Appellant's country of
    origin and was rightly taken into account by the Judge it was incumbent
    upon her to give consideration to other material authorities  including
    J.

25. The ill-treatment relied upon by the Appellant must  attain  a  minimum
    level  of  severity  such  that  it  is  an  affront   to   fundamental
    humanitarian principles to remove her to a country where she is at risk
    of serious ill-treatment. The Appellant here had to show  before  Judge
    Myers a causal link between the act or threatened  act  of  removal  or
    expulsion and the in-human treatment relied on as violating her Article
    3 rights. Examination of the Article  3  issue  had  to  focus  on  the
    foreseeable consequences of the removal of the Appellant to her country
    of origin and here the medical  evidence  was  insufficient  to  enable
    Judge Myers to come to  the  conclusion  that  she  did  and  does  not
    demonstrate the necessary causal link.

26. Therefore in her consideration of the totality  of  evidence  that  was
    before her the Judge has materially  erred  for  the  reasons  set  out
    within the Respondent's application for seeking permission  to  appeal.
    Accordingly I set aside the Judge's decision and remake it myself.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 18 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 18 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

