
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01603/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 21st June 2019 On 9th August 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR R M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     McGlashan McKay Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

        1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal the decision
           of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mrs D H Clapham. In a decision
           promulgated on 4 February 2019 she dismissed the appellant's
           appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant him protection.


        2. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq. He made a claim for
           protection on 13 October 2015. He said he had been born on 27
           February 1999 which would have made him a minor at the date of
           claim. The respondent was not satisfied as to his claimed age.
           He had submitted an age assessment report in support of this.
           However, the respondent obtained its own report, conducted
           through Glasgow Social Services and concluded the appellant was
           significantly over the age of 18. For convenience, they took his
           age as being two years older than that claimed.

        3. His claim was that he was from a village in the Kirkuk Province
           where he lived with his mother and siblings. ISIS were fighting
           in the area. In February 2015 his family and others were taken
           captive by ISIS. He said that they were able to escape shortly
           afterwards. He went to stay with an uncle in Kirkuk for several
           months. It was then decided he should leave the country. He
           travelled through Turkey and onwards before arriving in the
           United Kingdom.

        4. He claims to still fear ISIS. He said since arriving he was able
           to make contact with his uncle who told him his family were safe
           although the appellant does not know how reliable this is.

        5. His underlying claim as accepted was consistent with country
           information but it was not felt that the Refugee Convention was
           engaged. He suggested a generalised fear of Isis rather than
           being specifically targeted by them.  It was not felt he would
           be of any ongoing interest to ISIS. The respondent considered
           sufficiency of protection and relocation. It was felt he could
           relocate and live safely in Erbil in the IKR where the security
           situation was stable.

        6. The appellant subsequently added to his claim by stating that
           since living in the United Kingdom he realised he was bisexual.
           He described having a male companion, Shawn. The respondent did
           not accept this was true.

        7. His appeal was initially heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
           Clough on 5 July 2017. In a decision promulgated in December
           2017 the appeal was dismissed. Permission was then granted to
           appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on
           19 July 2018 found material errors of law and concluded that the
           decision should be set aside for a de novo hearing. The judge
           guided the next tribunal to make appropriate findings on the
           evidence about his experiences in Iraq and his sexuality. The
           next tribunal was also to consider the relevant country guidance
           cases and make findings on contacts the appellant retained in
           his home country.

        8. Thus the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Mrs D H
           Clapham. The judge set out in detail the arguments advanced at
           the evidence at hearing. The appellant's credibility was
           central.

        9. The judge's findings are set out from paragraph 93 onwards. The
           judge found that by the date of hearing the appellant was an
           adult. The judge accepted the appellant had been captured by
           Isis along with his family and managed to escape. The judge also
           found that up-to-date evidence indicated the influence of Isis
           had declined. The appellant had been taken by them, along with
           his mother and siblings, and his capture was random.
           Consequently, the judge saw no evidence to suggest he was at any
           greater risk than any other civilian on return and his previous
           experiences did not increase that. The judge also recorded that
           the appellant is from a contested area and as such there was a
           15 C risk for him in his home area. Consequently, the judge
           turned to consider the question of relocation.

       10. The judge concluded that he continues to have contact with
           either his uncle or his immediate family and friends.
           Consequently the judge concluded he was in a position to obtain
           the necessary CSI D and his Iraqi card or at least details to
           obtain replacements.


       11. The judge then turned to the question of relocation to the IKR
           at paragraph 99. The judge recorded that he had a friend there
           with whom you can resume contact. The judge noted he was a
           Kurdish Sorani speaker. As a Kurd he was entitled to enter the
           IKR and there would be no legal impediments or requirement for a
           sponsor. The judge stated there were direct flights from the
           United Kingdom to Erbil. The judge pointed out he would receive
           a returns package which would help him at first instance. The
           judge acknowledged that unemployment rates were high. However,
           she concluded the appellant was extremely adept. She referred to
           him be able to speak English with transferable skills. The
           conclusion therefore was that return to the IKR was feasible.

       12. The judge rejected his claim to be bisexual.

The Upper Tribunal

       13. The application for permission to appeal did not challenge the
           negative credibility findings. Rather the focus was upon the
           question of the appellants relocation to the I KR. There was no
           dispute about the judge's findings in relation to documentation.


       14. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the
           basis it was arguable the judge did not adequately consider the
           question of internal relocation to the IKR. Reference was made
           to the decision of KH (Iraqi Kurds- internal relocation) Iraq CG
           [2018] UKUT 212.

       15. The respondent has lodged a rule 24 response opposing the
           appeal.

       16. In tandem with considering relocation the judge considered the
           appellant's article 8 rights and whether there would be very
           significant obstacles to his integration. The judge referred to
           the respondent's Guidance and of the very significant obstacles
           test. The judge pointed out a high threshold indicated. The
           guidance stated that lack of employment prospects would be
           unlikely to be a significant obstacle to integration. The
           comparator is with the proposed destination rather than United
           Kingdom. The judge then went on to the finding that the
           appellant could obtain a CSI D and refers to him having skills
           and friends if not family.

       17. At hearing, the appellant's representative confirmed that no
           challenge was being made to the negative credibility findings.
           The representative was critical of the judge's findings at
           paragraphs 99 to 100 and suggested the reference to him having a
           friend was vague. The judge did not indicate where the finding
           that he had skills came from. I was then referred to the high
           level of unemployment in the IKR and the country guidance
           details on this.

       18. In response, the presenting officer continued to oppose the
           appeal and referred to the rule 24 response. I was referred to
           the country guidance decision of AAH which the judge referred
           to. In the appellant's witness statement he had indicated he had
           engaged in agricultural work and those skills could continue. At
           paragraph 99 the judge had referred to how he might obtain
           employment. No difficulties with integration were identified.
           The judge had rejected his claim that he had lost contact with
           his uncle. He paid for his journey to the United Kingdom and
           could continue to help him. The judge had acknowledged that life
           in the IKR might be harsh for the appellant.

       19. In response, the appellant's representative referred to
           statistics about conditions in the IKR. It was submitted that
           the negative credibility findings were not relevant to the
           question of relocation.

Consideration

       20. AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq [2018] CG UKUT
           00212 (IAC)122 has provided guidance on living in the IKR. The
           guidance remains up-to-date. The guidance highlights the
           difficulties in the region exacerbated by the number of people
           coming from outside. The majority going into the IKR live with
           other family members. Some families will be living in very
           difficult circumstances with high levels of unemployment.
            Family connections are very important for accommodation and to
           obtain employment. The camps are full. In the short term it
           would remain open to the returnee to rent an apartment. The
           resettlement grant would only cover the cost for the first few
           weeks. Conditions in 'critical shelter arrangements' vary. An
           individual facing destitution cannot be returned and it would be
           unduly harsh to return someone likely to be living in conditions
           coming close to this. The conclusion was that for those with no
           realistic prospect of securing a regular income, or support by
           other means, internal relocation to the IKR is likely to be
           unduly harsh.

       21. I turned then to consider what factors the judge has referred
           to. The first observation I would make is that the judge had an
           appreciation of what was said in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal
           relocation) Iraq [2018] CG UKUT 00212 (IAC)122.It is not
           necessary for the judge to repeat what was said in the decision.
           What is important is to consider whether on a fair reading of
           the decision it has been demonstrated, either directly or
           impliedly at the judge has had regard to the relevant features.

       22. The appellant is a young adult male. He is unmarried. There was
           no evidence of any health issues. He was found not to be
           credible in aspects of his claim. In cross-examination the
           appellant confirmed that he had been living with his mother and
           two brothers and a sister. He also stated he had a paternal
           uncle who was married and had four children. He said he had
           lived with his uncle for several months before coming to the
           United Kingdom. He claimed he had no contact with his immediate
           family since leaving and that contact with his uncle had ceased.
           He was cross examined in detail about this.

       23. He was asked about his reference to having a friend in Iraq.
           Again, he claimed to have lost contact. The presenting officer
           in submissions raised inconsistencies about his claimed.

       24. At paragraph 98 the judge did not accept he had lost contact
           with his uncle. The judge concluded that he has contact with
           either his uncle or his immediate family and/or friends. At
           least one of whom was in the IKR.At para 99 the judge accepted
           that life in the IKR might be harsh. Against that he is an
           ethnic Kurd from Iraq who speaks Kurdish Sorani. The judge then
           refers to the resettlement package and acknowledges this is
           finite. The judge recognises that unemployment rates are high at
           paragraph 100. However, her view was that the appellant was
           adept. He had been able to learn English. The question of the
           ability to integrate in terms of private life is a parallel but
           different consideration which the judge dealt with at paragraph
           103.

       25. The decision indicates that the judge was fully aware of the
           difficulties existing in the IKR. In considering the
           reasonableness of the appellant's relocation the judge
           highlighted relevant factors. The judge reached the finding that
           he was not without support there. Not only was there the
           resettlement package but he had family contacts. The judge is
           attempting to piece together the pieces of information in
           assessing the reasonableness, bearing in mind the appellant has
           been found to lack credibility. It is my conclusion no flaw has
           been demonstrated in the judicial process. I find no material
           error of law established.

Decision.

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Mrs D H Clapham. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.
Date 7 August 2019




















