
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01881/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 May 2017                        |On 17 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                               Mr Khaksar Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson, Counsel, instructed by Turpin Miller
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Mr Khan against the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Broe, whose determination was promulgated on 1  February
    2017.  In it the judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 6 October 2015 to refuse his
    asylum claim.  The appellant was found to have been born on  1  January
    1998 in accordance with an age assessment which had been  conducted  by
    Oxford.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and  he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom avoiding immigration controls on 21 January 2015 and thereafter
    made a claim for asylum in April  2015  and  was  interviewed  both  at
    screening level and for  a  full  interview  in  the  course  of  2015,
    resulting, as I have said, in the refusal decision of October 2015.

 3. The appellant's claim was set out in some detail between  paragraph  10
    and paragraph 36 of the Judge's determination.  It is a feature of this
    case that evidence was available to  the  judge  which  included    the
    account that was advanced by Noor and his elder brother Wali,  who  had
    left Afghanistan in 2006 and had since been granted settled  status  in
    the United Kingdom and is now, as I understand it, a British citizen.

 4. The determination contains findings of  credibility  and  fact  between
    paragraph 41 and paragraph 51.  The challenge made in  the  grounds  of
    appeal is a step-by-step challenge to each of the relevant findings  of
    fact made by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  which  culminated  in  his
    conclusion that the appellant had  failed  to  make  out  a  claim  for
    international protection.   It  is  important  to  note  that  the  age
    assessment setting the appellant's age as 1 January 1998 meant that the
    appellant was 19 years old or thereabouts when the appeal was heard  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge in Birmingham on 3 January 2017 though of
    course one takes a certain flexibility of approach  when  one  realises
    that the  dating  of  birthdays  in  Afghan  is  a  difficult  process;
    normally, it is a matter of attributing 1 January to a given year.   In
    any event what it means is that on any view the appellant was an  adult
    when the case was determined by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 5. The judge opens his comments by noting that the appellant is  18  years
    old but that much of his account had been provided at a time  when  the
    appellant was a minor.  He also noted that although  his  brother  Wali
    was a great deal older than he was, nevertheless much of his account in
    Wali's interview many years ago was provided at a time  he  too  was  a
    minor.  The judge took that into account.

 6. The judge's findings begin at paragraph  42  when  he  notes  that  the
    appellant was fingerprinted in  Hungary  on  27  November  2014.   That
    provides a sort of datum point  from  which  all  assessments  of  time
    relating to the date of his departure from Afghanistan can properly  be
    assessed.  We know that the appellant was  present  in  Hungary  on  27
    November 2014.  It is also the case that when he was interviewed  on  7
    April 2015 he said that he had left Afghanistan three  months  earlier.
    The judge took that therefore as being inconsistent (as indeed it  was)
    with a claim to have been in Hungary on 27 November  2014.   The  judge
    worked back and said that the appellant must have  left  Afghanistan  a
    great deal earlier.

 7. Ms Robinson on behalf of the appellant makes a number of submissions in
    relation to the chronology.  These are fully set out in paragraph 14 of
    her skeleton argument where she notes that  the  appellant  was  indeed
    fingerprinted on 27 November 2014.  It is also clear  that  he  entered
    the United Kingdom on 21 January 2015 and claimed  asylum  on  7  April
    2015 and that he said, at some stage, that  he  had  left  his  country
    roughly three months before as seen at A4 in the  respondent's  bundle.
    In the screening interview he said at B4 that he had  left  Afghanistan
    about three months ago and it took approximately two  months  to  reach
    the United Kingdom.  In other passages in his statement of evidence and
    in his appeal statement he said at one time that he did not  know  when
    he left the country and in his appeal statement that  he  had  left  in
    early October 2014.

 8. What therefore is said is  that,  whilst  the  judge  relied  upon  the
    inconsistency arising from the screening interview, that  inconsistency
    may have been the appellant saying that it was not three months  before
    the interview that he had left Afghanistan  but  it  was  three  months
    before  he  arrived,  which  would  render  the   appellant's   account
    consistent with  fingerprints  having  been  taken  in  Hungary  on  27
    November 2014.

 9. For my part, I do not consider this was a particularly compelling piece
    of reasoning on the part of the Judge.  He was  certainly  entitled  to
    say that his interviews were at variance with each other but overall  I
    would not regard it as being central; nor is there any indication  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge attached an over-amount of weight on  it.
    Suffice it to say that  it  was  open  to  him  to  comment  upon  this
    discrepancy and the weight that he attached to it is obviously seen  in
    the context of the reasoning which follows between  paragraphs  43  and
    51.  Accordingly I do not treat it as being a flaw  which  renders  the
    remainder of the determination unlawful but nor do I consider it to  be
    a particularly compelling piece of the judge's reasoning.   Inevitably,
    when assessing credibility some points are going to carry  more  weight
    than others.

10. There then follows in paragraph 43 a consideration of  the  appellant's
    claim, the centrepiece of his claim being that he was abducted  by  the
    Taliban and then forced to be a suicide bomber.  This  was  an  account
    which was not accepted by the judge.  It is a feature of the claim that
    in his interview he said that the Taliban had come to the  house  on  a
    number  of  occasions  to  persuade  his  mother  to  join   them   and
    unsurprisingly his mother was adamantly opposed to that.   Nevertheless
    he was abducted by force and forced to become  a  suicide  bomber,  the
    inference being (quite reasonably) that he  did  not  wish  to  do  so.
    There is no suggestion that he espoused extreme Islamic thinking  about
    others in  Afghanistan.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  he  espoused
    extremist ideology and if  he  had  been  a  suicide  bomber  then  the
    inference at any rate is that he would have done so as a result of  his
    abduction by the Taliban.  There is not any evidence, as  I  understand
    it, of a process of indoctrination.

11. Against that background the judge came to assess his claim that on  the
    day before he was about to commit suicide in an attack  in  Afghanistan
    the Taliban brought him back to his home and it was at  that  stage  he
    claims that  he  was  persuaded  by  his  mother  and  brother  not  to
    participate.  There is a difference in the nature of the claim that the
    appellant was advancing in that there was no reference in his statement
    to his being a willing and 'happy' participant in the potential bombing
    by his suicide whereas when he  gave  oral  evidence  he  said  he  was
    'happy' to be such a bomber until dissuaded by his mother and  brother.
    Why he should have been happy is left unexplained.  It is also part  of
    his claim that his mother and brother were living at  the  family  home
    until he left Afghanistan.

12. The Judge's finding is challenged in paragraph 3 of the grounds  but  I
    am in no doubt that this was a finding that was open to the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  If the appellant had been a radicalised member of  the
    Taliban it was on its face implausible and indeed highly unlikely  that
    the Taliban would take steps to return him to his family on  the  night
    before his suicide.  If he was in such a  committed  sense  then  logic
    would  dictate  that  the  Taliban  would  do  nothing  to  upset   his
    commitment, all the more so since the Taliban must  be  taken  to  have
    known that his mother and brother were not similarly radicalised and in
    a position where they would continue to persuade him of the good  sense
    of not being a suicide bomber.

13. It follows from this that even if he was committed then it is  unlikely
    that this would have taken place but if he were not committed  then  it
    is improbable to a  very  high  degree  that  the  Taliban  would  have
    jeopardised the chances of a successful suicide bombing attack  on  the
    following day by placing the appellant in the heart of  his  family  in
    circumstances where his mother and brother might reasonably attempt  to
    dissuade him, as indeed happened, according to his account.  For  those
    reasons I see nothing wrong in paragraph 43.  It was a matter that  was
    open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

14. As I have said, the appellant's account  was  on  the  basis  that  his
    mother and sister were living at the family home at the relevant  time.
    As the Judge points out in paragraph 44, that could not  be  reconciled
    with the  evidence  of  his  brother  Noor,  with  whom  the  appellant
    travelled and on whom the appellant relied as a witness of  truth.   On
    his account the house collapsed after an attack by  shelling  in  2004,
    some ten years before, and indeed that account  was  supported  by  his
    elder brother Wali, who said that the home had indeed been struck in an
    attack but this time an attack in August 2006 and it was said  that  he
    left Afghanistan immediately or some time after  that  attack.   Noor's
    evidence was that Wali left Afghanistan not because of the  attack  but
    because their mother did not want them to work with the Taliban.

15. The appellant clearly sought  to  reconcile  the  various  accounts  by
    providing a third and one might say a midway version  of  events  which
    sought to square the circle.  He did not mention an attack on the house
    in his screening interview or in his subsequent  documentary  accounts.
    However, what he said in cross-examination was that  one  side  of  the
    house had collapsed.  This was  therefore  an  attempt  at  reconciling
    claim that he continued to live in the house until he left  Afghanistan
    and the brother's account that the  house  had  been  destroyed  in  an
    attack in either 2004 or 2006.  It is entirely  unsurprising  that  the
    judge did not accept this and, indeed, made the legitimate  point  that
    he did not find it credible that such a  significant  event  would  not
    have been mentioned in the various sources of material  that  had  been
    provided prior to the proceedings and in the course of the  proceedings
    but mentioned only for the first time when the hearing  took  place  in
    January of 2017.

16. The Judge went on to  find  a  further  discrepancy  and  that  was  in
    relation to the various accounts that had  been  provided.   In  Wali's
    screening interview he had said in answer to question 3.3 that  he  saw
    his mother's body two days after her death.  This would have  been  the
    clearest evidence that his mother had died.  That of course is  not  to
    be reconciled with the appellant's claim to have been living  with  her
    in 2014 That was a difficulty which had to be faced and it was all  the
    more difficult because Wali was found to be evasive  when  asked  about
    the evidence that he had provided on another matter.  Paragraph  44  of
    the determination is a proper recital of the  accounts  that  were  put
    forward upon which there were significant differences  and  upon  which
    the judge was not satisfied that a truthful account had  been  provided
    by the appellant.

17. He then turned to consider Wali's evidence in somewhat more detail  and
    Wali had said that the appellant himself had died in the attack on  the
    house in August 2006.  He had also said that the appellant was  13  and
    that he had been born in 1993.  There is a substantial  discrepancy  in
    the age that was attributed to the appellant by  Wali.   Contrast  that
    with the appellant's case that he was born on 1  January  1999  or  the
    Oxford finding that he had been born on 1 January 1998.  This of course
    could have been  entirely  explicable  by  Wali's  lying  and  was  not
    anything to do with the appellant.  The judge rightly found that it was
    Wali who was not telling the truth but then of course it was  also  the
    case that the appellant's claim was said  to  be  supported  by  Wali's
    evidence.  In paragraph 46 there  is  also  a  reference  made  to  the
    inadequacy of Wali's evidence in relation to no mention being made of a
    sister.

18. Perhaps more importantly is not what Wali  had  to  say  but  what  the
    appellant himself had to say and this is dealt with in paragraph 47  of
    the determination where the appellant said that  he  had  relatives  in
    Afghanistan being a mother and sister.  In examination-in-chief he said
    that he did not have anyone in Afghanistan apart from mother and sister
    but in cross-examination he revealed the existence of a maternal  aunt.
    Not only was there a maternal aunt but that this aunt was living in the
    same area.

19. More significantly still perhaps is that notwithstanding the fact  that
    he had an aunt who lived in the same area, he said that he did not know
    if she had children.  It was  not  simply  that  he  knew  she  had  no
    children but he did not know whether  she  had  children  and  did  not
    therefore know whether he had any  cousins.   Those  cousins  had  been
    mentioned by Wali as being persons who had arranged his  journey.   The
    Judge was rightly able to take into account  that  this  was  a  highly
    incredible version of events provided by the appellant in  that  if  he
    had an aunt living in the area it was inevitable  that  he  would  know
    something about her circumstances and in particular whether there  were
    children.

20. It also goes, in my judgment, to a further element  in  that  where  an
    individual does not tell the truth about other family members then this
    is likely because the individual wishes to maintain  the  fiction  that
    there is no-one to whom he could turn either living in  Afghanistan  or
    elsewhere.  Were there to have been relations including cousins  living
    nearby that  would  undermine  his  claim  to  be  in  difficulties  in
    returning to Afghanistan.

21. The attempts  to  trace  the  mother  and  the  sister  in  Afghanistan
    conducted by the Red Cross resulted in a letter from the Red  Cross  to
    the effect that the mother and sister had moved  from  the  village  in
    February 2016 but had moved to an unknown location but the Judge  noted
    that no reference was made to aunts or cousins in the search  conducted
    by the Red Cross.

22. There is a final point made by the Judge in paragraph 49 and that is in
    relation to a curious feature of this case and that is that  DNA  tests
    were undertaken in which it  was  revealed  that  Wali  and  Noor  were
    brothers but the appellant himself was only a half-brother.  The  judge
    makes no  finding  in  relation  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    appellant was conceived, indeed, he could not do so but I think he  was
    entitled to make the point that, had there been another man who was  in
    a relationship with his mother then it would have been something  about
    which the appellant might properly have made some comment, even  if  it
    was merely to say that he was unaware during his stay in Afghanistan of
    anybody who might have been his father.

23. In paragraph 50 the Judge then concludes by  saying  that  he  did  not
    accept the account of the appellant's claim for asylum and  accordingly
    he rejected it.

24. There is also in paragraph 51 another significant finding which,  as  I
    understand it, is not challenged by the appellant and indeed could  not
    properly be challenged and this is that, when considering the  question
    of relocation to Kabul,  the  Judge  found  it  more  likely  that  the
    appellant answered truthfully when he said that he came to this country
    for a better life.  That finding is entirely consistent with the  Upper
    Tribunal's thinking in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    163, in which the Tribunal considered the  position  of  relocation  to
    Kabul and said this:

         "Whilst when assessing a claim in the context of Article  15(c)  in
         which the respondent asserts that Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable
         internal relocation alternative,  it  is  necessary  to  take  into
         account both in assessing safety and reasonableness  not  only  the
         level  of  violence  in  that  city  but  also   the   difficulties
         experienced by that  city's  poor  and  also  the  many  internally
         displaced persons living there, these considerations  will  not  in
         general make return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable."

    So in conclusion the judge's finding that there was a relocation option
    reasonably open to the appellant was one that was properly open to him.

25. For these reasons I find that  notwithstanding  the  detailed  critique
    that is made of the determination  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  those
    grounds are not made out and  consequently  I  reject  the  appellant's
    appeal against the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    decision I make is that there is no error on a material  point  of  law
    and that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge will stand.

    DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error of law and his determination  of
the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 11 May 2017


