
                                    [pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01549/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At North Shields                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 8th November 2016               |on 11th November 2016              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    H.K.M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
                    Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is an Iranian national born in April 1989. He is of
       Kurdish ethnicity and lived with his parents and siblings in the
       Kershanshah Province.

    2. He claimed he made a living smuggling alcohol from Iraq. He decided
       to stop doing this before he was caught. He then became involved in
       distributing leaflets promoting Kurdish rights. He subsequently
       learnt the leaflets were being produced on behalf of the PJAK. One
       night whilst distributing leaflets he encountered the Iranian
       authorities but managed to evade them. He then left his country and
       arrived in the United Kingdom.

    3. When he came to the United Kingdom he met other Iranians who
       introduced him to the Baptist Church. Although raised a Muslim he
       said he had a weak faith and he subsequently converted to
       Christianity. Since being in the United Kingdom he has engaged in
       Facebook activity involving references to Christianity and criticism
       of the Iranian regime.

    4. He made a claim for protection based upon this background. This was
       refused by the respondent on 19 September 2015 mainly on credibility
       grounds.

The First Tier Tribunal

    5. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal James on 21
       June 2016. In a decision promulgated on 5 July 2016 his appeal was
       dismissed. At paragraph 44 the judge concluded the appellant would
       not be of interest to the Iranian authorities on account of his
       claimed smuggling activities as he had never been caught. The judge
       did not accept the claim of distributing leaflets.

    6. Turning to the appellant's religious conversion the judge at
       paragraph 47 onwards said:

           "47.   ... I have been greatly assisted by the evidence of the
           Reverend Taylor-Black. I was impressed by the manner he gave
           evidence and that he did not appear to over emphasis his firm
           belief that the Appellant had become a committed Christian. I
           have noted that the amount of time the Appellant was required to
           undertake the Alpha course and the baptism course was not
           significant. I have also noted that the Senior Minister Waugh
           indicated that determining whether a person has truly converted
           to Christianity is difficult to verify simply from the
           observance of religious practice. However, taking the evidence
           in the round I am satisfied that the appellant would be
           considered to be a convert to Christianity by the Iranian
           authorities. However I have noted that he does not appear to
           undertake proselytising or any other form of missionary
           activities. He has helped within the church but does not appear
           to be working to convert others to Christianity.

           48.    I have considered the entries in the Appellant's Facebook
           pages. There are almost exclusively images from other sources
           rather than his own work. For the most part they are entries
           showing Christian faith. However, there are several entries
           showing executions in Iran to which he has added disapproving
           comments.

           49.    I have considered whether the Appellant would face a real
           risk of persecution or ill-treatment on return to Iran as a
           result of his Christian faith or his Facebook activities. I have
           been referred to FS which was confirmed in SZ. I have been
           referred to paragraph 190 of the decision in FS but this
           provision must be read in the context of paragraphs 186 to 190
           read together. Paragraph 187 states:

                "For the ordinary convert, who is neither a leader, lay or
                ordained, nor a Pastor, nor proselytiser or evangelist, the
                actual degree of persecution or treatment breaching Article
                3 is not sufficient to warrant the protection of either
                Convention. The reality is that a social and economic life
                can be maintained; Christianity can be practice, if
                necessary, cautiously at times, by church attendance,
                associated with Christians and Bible study."

           50.    Based upon the evidence before me I find that the
           appellant is an ordinary convert. I have noted that where an
           ordinary convert has additional risk factors there may well be a
           real risk of persecution or mistreatment. Having found that the
           appellant was not known as an alcohol smuggler and that I do not
           accept that he was a political activist, the final matter that I
           must consider is whether his Facebook activities create an
           additional risk factor.

           51.    I have been referred to the extensive decision in AB. I
           note the references provided by the Appellant and have taken
           them into account. I have also noted the conclusions in
           paragraphs 466 to 472 of that decision. I have noted that where
           a person returns to Iran after a prolonged period in the UK
           there is a risk that they will be asked about their Internet
           activity. I have noted the`pinch point' on return to Iran and
           the fact that a person returning on a special passport may
           attract`enhanced interest'. Furthermore I have noted that a
           person returning to Iran after a reasonably short period of time
           with an ordinary passport having left illegally would almost
           certainly not attract particular attention. The appellant has
           been in the UK just over a year which I consider to be a
           reasonably short period. I do not know if he has an Iranian
           passport or if we would need to use a special passport which
           makes it more likely that the Iranian authorities would take
           interest in him. The Appellant has not been particularly active
           on the Internet. It is limited to social media.

           52.    Based upon the conclusions in AB, looking at the evidence
           in the round and using the lower burden of proof I am satisfied
           that due to the short-term the appellant has been in the UK and
           the limited Internet activity he would not face a real risk of
           persecution on return to Iran. He would be viewed as an ordinary
           convert to Christianity ..."

The leave applications

    7. The application for leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was focused
       upon the conversion. It was submitted that Judge of the First-tier
       Tribunal James erred in concluding the appellant was an `ordinary
       convert' and concluding that as such the appellant would practice his
       faith cautiously. It was also argued that the judge failed to
       consider the church as being a sacrament-based church and in
       categorising the appellant's Internet activity as limited.

    8. Allied to this was the judge's acceptance of the evidence of Rev
       David Taylor Black and the document provided by Senior Minister Waugh
       .The ministers referred to the appellant encouraging others to
       consider the Christian faith and that members of the Baptist Church
       should speak to others about their beliefs. There was reference to
       the appellant sharing his faith with other Iranians and inviting them
       to the church. The Rev Andrew Waugh referred to the biblical duty of
       every Christian to encourage others to believe. The acceptance of
       their evidence by the judge was arguably inconsistent with the
       conclusion that the evidence did not suggest the appellant would seek
       to convert others. It was contended therefore that the appellant was
       not an `ordinary convert' within the meaning of the case law. Finally
       it was contended that the judge did not properly evaluate the risk
       from the appellant's Facebook activity. The fact some of the postings
       where from third parties did not remove the risk created by the
       content.

    9. The application for leave made to the First-tier Tribunal was
       refused. The refusal reasons commented that the appellant's
       discussions about Christianity with other church members and Iranians
       who had already shown an interest in Christianity did not mean he
       would seek to evangelise or proselytise on return.

   10. In a renewed application directly to the Upper Tribunal it was
       submitted that the Iranian authorities would be unlikely to draw such
       a distinction between the types of person approached.

   11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on
       the basis it was arguable that the conclusion that the appellant
       would not proselytise was inadequately reasoned and irrational in
       light of the accepted evidence.

At hearing.

   12. The respondent filed a rule 24 response. It was of a general nature
       and submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed themselves
       appropriately and followed the relevant country guidance.

   13. Ms Cleghorn indicated that she had drafted the renewal leave
       application and adopted the arguments advanced there. She submitted
       that the appellant would be at risk on arrival and if he managed to
       gain entry safely would remain at risk because of his Christianity.
       She submitted there was no basis for the judge to conclude the
       appellant was an ordinary convert. There followed some discussion
       between the representatives as to the meaning of the concept of an
       ordinary convert.

   14. Both representatives agreed that should I find an error of law I was
       in a position to remake the decision.

Consideration

   15. The First-tier Judge had found as a fact that the appellant would be
       considered as a convert to Christianity by the Iranian authorities.
       The judge also accepted the evidence from the Ministers in the
       Baptist Church which included testimony and letters submitted.

   16. Reference was made in the First-tier Tribunal to paragraphs 186
       onwards of the decision of FS and other's (Iran- Christian Converts)
       Iran CG [2004] UKAIT 00303. References are made to an ordinary
       convert who is neither a leader, lay or ordained, or who proselytises
       or evangelises. Paragraph 25 of the country guidance decision makes a
       distinction between the centuries old ethnically based Christian
       churches in Iran which did not proselytise and rarely admitted
       converts from more recent Protestant or evangelical churches. The
       tribunal concluded that Christians who are not converts from Islam
       but who are members of ethnic minority churches were not persecuted
       but did experienced discrimination. The focus in the country guidance
       was upon the latter. The guidance referred to the country information
       and the harsh response that any attempt of proselytising of Muslims.
       Apostasy is punishable by death albeit there was no evidence of any
       executions. Paragraph 190 said that there would be a real risk if
       there were additional factors not necessarily related to religion
       then the danger was increased.

   17. The decision of SZ and ZM (Christians -FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008]
       UKAIT 00082 had the benefit of the decision given on remittal from
       the Court of Appeal to the AIT in HJ Iran [2008] UKAIT 00044. Since
       then the Supreme Court has taken a broader approach to why a person
       would be discrete. SZ and ZM was considering developments Iran since
       FS and others. Paragraph 79 on the decision questioned whether there
       is in reality a distinction between ordinary converts and others.
       There was a discussion about what was meant by proselytising and
       evangelical churches with the conclusion being that the distinction
       could be blurred. The tribunal acknowledged that Christians are
       required to spread the word though some are more evangelical than
       others. The tribunal conclusion was that whether someone was an
       `ordinary convert' will depend on its own facts.

   18. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge James has obviously been
       carefully prepared. However, having found as a fact the appellant
       would be considered a convert to Christianity by the Iranian
       authorities and having accepted the evidence of the Ministers in the
       Baptist Church the judge failed to analyse the meaning of an ordinary
       convert and why the appellant would not be at risk through either
       proselytising or other features specific to him. Given this became
       then a central issue I find a material error of law.

   19. The letters of support from the church in the file also includes post-
       hearing evidence about his baptism. There is evidence from the church
       that they regularly have a remembrance service of the Lord's Supper.
       The Ministers pointed out it is important that Christians meet
       regularly for practical and spiritual guidance. The Ministers
       indicated he was a regular attendee who had undertaken an 11-week
       course. The church would be looking for signs of commitment and for
       any contra indicators in his lifestyle. The Rev David Taylor Black
       said that the appellant shared his faith with other Iranians and
       invited them to the church.

   20. I remake the decision bearing in mind the evidence of the Ministers
       about the appellant's activities and the Supreme Court guidance in HJ
       Iran in relation to why a person would act the way they would.

   21. I have also seen the Facebook postings in the file. They do link the
       appellant with Christianity and ridicule of the regime in Iran.
       Whilst the content is fairly basic nevertheless it would heighten his
       profile. A further feature which makes him vulnerable is the fact he
       is Kurdish. This will be relevant in relation to how he would be
       treated by the authorities. For these reasons I find there is a real
       risk if he is returned to Iran.



Decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge James dismissing the appellant's
appeal contains a material error of law and cannot stand. I set it aside
and remake the decision, allowing the appeal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

