
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01425/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2019                      |On 23 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    m m s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, Counsel, instructed by Fisher Day
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 24 January 2019 Judge Williams of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the  appellant,  a  national  of
    Nigeria, against a decision made by the respondent on  3  January  2018
    refusing her protection claim.  The basis of her  claim  was  that  she
    would be at risk on return because the head of her husband's family, Pa
    Bello, was a powerful man who was a member of the Ogboni cult  and  had
    ordered her and her husband to bring her daughter,  F,  to  him  to  be
    subjected to FGM.  She now has two daughters who would face risk of FGM
    on return.

2.   The judge accepted that Pa Bello existed and had been  described  in  a
    newspaper report as "a  strong  finance  yet  notorious  Godfather  and
    staunch supporter of the former governor".   The  judge  also  accepted
    that the appellant herself had undergone FGM and that it was reasonably
    likely the appellant's niece had been "forcibly circumcised".  However,
    the judge did not accept that the appellant or her  daughters  were  at
    any risk of FGM or other adverse attention from family  members  or  Pa
    Bello.  In this context, the judge did not  accept  that  the  evidence
    established that the appellant's husband's family were linked  with  Pa
    Bello or that threatening letters  purported  to  come  from  him  were
    reliable.

3.   The appellant's grounds, ably developed by Mr  Schwenk,  first  contend
    that the judge's finding that Pa Bello was not in a family relationship
    with the appellant's husband's family  represented  an  attempt  to  go
    behind the concession of the respondent that Pa Bello was both the head
    of the appellant's  husband's  family  and  has  a  political  profile.
    Formally noting that the respondent no longer relied  on  his  Rule  24
    notice, Mr Bates accepted that the judge had indeed wrongly gone behind
    a concession regarding the role of Pa Bello made  in  the  present  and
    previous refusal decisions.  Those letters are far from clear  on  this
    matter, but I think Mr Bates was right to take the view that there  are
    passages in them which proceed on the assumption that Pa  Bello's  role
    was accepted.  However, I am not persuaded this error  material  since,
    despite rejecting Pa Bello's involvement with  the  family,  the  judge
    went on to assess the appellant's claim on the basis that he had such a
    role.  At paragraph 25 the judge  set  out  a  number  of  reasons  for
    finding  that,  even  assuming  Pa  Bello  had  threatened   that   the
    appellant's daughter would be forced by him and the family  to  undergo
    FGM:-

    (i)   the  appellant's  daughter  had  been  able  to  remain  in   the
         appellant's home area for over four years since the threat was made
         and had never made any attempt to circumcise  F  when  he  had  had
         every opportunity;


    (ii) the appellant's husband's behaviour did not indicate that  he  had
         any concerns for F's safety from circumcision over this period; and
         the fact that both he and the  appellant  were  educated  and  were
         opposed to FGM was likely to mean they would have acted (and  would
         keep on acting) to ensure that;


    (iii)    the appellant had been confident enough to leave  F  with  her
         brother and sister-in-law and travel to the UK  for  two  weeks  in
         November/December 2009;


    (iv) the appellant felt it safe enough to attend  a  wedding  with  her
         husband's family in 2010 which she would not reasonably  have  done
         if she truly feared for her daughter;


    (v)  if as claimed Pa Bello had conducted a house invasion in  February
         2011, he would clearly have been able there and then to ensure  FGM
         was carried out; and


    (vi) if Pa Bello had actually wanted to inflict FGM on F, he would have
         acted to do so during her first 5 years (between 2007 to 2012) when
         most FGMs were carried out on young girls, not waited until she was
         older.

4.   I consider these findings were reasonably open to the  judge  and  were
    ones that were not based on a rejection of Pa Bello's involvement  with
    the family.

5.   It is argued in the grounds that the respondent had accepted  that  the
    husband's family had also harassed and threatened the appellant.   That
    is the case, but I do not consider that the  judge's  above  assessment
    failed to take that into account.  The judge's essential point was that
    any threats made had not been acted on and did not demonstrate that the
    appellant and her daughter were at risk before they left, or that  they
    would be (along with the second daughter) at risk now.

6.   The appellant's grounds also take issue with the failure of  the  judge
    to attach significant weight to the accepted fact that the  appellant's
    niece had been forcibly subjected to FGM or to the fact that  F,  since
    learning about this, had become very fearful that the same  fate  would
    happen to her.  However,  the  judge  plainly  took  into  account  the
    adverse experiences of the appellant's niece and was entitled  for  the
    reasons he gave, to conclude that the same fate would  not  befall  her
    daughters.  The judge was also clearly aware of the younger  daughter's
    expressed fears, making reference in paragraph  26  to  the  'Guardian'
    project report commissioned by  the  appellant's  solicitors.   It  was
    clearly open to the judge to consider that  the  evidence  as  a  whole
    indicated that, notwithstanding  such  fears,  the  appellant  and  her
    husband would be able to secure their daughter's safety.

7.   Even if I had not found the judge's findings on the lack of  real  risk
    in the appellant's home area sustainable,  I would still not have found
    any material error, in view of the fact  that  the  judge  went  on  to
    consider whether, in the alternative,  the  appellant  and  her  family
    would have a viable internal relocation alternative.  The judge  stated
    at paragraph 31:


         "31. Fourthly, it would be reasonable for the family to  internally
             relocate  away  from  the  appellant's  husband's  family   in
             Akeokuta and Lagos (such as the Federal Capital  Territory  of
             Abuja, where the VAPP Act  is  effective  -  AB  291);  having
             regard to the size of  Nigeria/the  large  cities  the  family
             would not be discoverable and could  re-establish  themselves.
             The appellant is a Muslim which is the largest religious group
             in  Nigeria.   Moreover,  the  appellant  speaks  Yoruba   and
             English.   Both  the  appellant  and  her  husband  have  work
             experience both in Nigeria and in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
             appellant's own relatives remain in Nigeria will  be  able  to
             provide the appellant with emotional  and  practical  support.
             Moreover, the appellant's parents are opposed to FGM and  will
             be to provide a further level of  protection.   The  appellant
             lived in Nigeria with her child without  any  harm  and  I  am
             satisfied that the appellant's husband's family would not have
             the interest nor the ability  or  inclination  to  locate  the
             appellant if her family returned to Nigeria."


8.   Mr Schwenk, in amplification of the written grounds, argues  that  this
    finding and reasoning failed to grapple with the fact that Pa Bello had
    been accepted by the respondent to be  a  "Godfather"  with  power  and
    influence and being  a  member  of  the  Ogboni  cult.   The  principal
    drawback to this submission is that the appellant failed to produce any
    evidence to indicate that Pa Bello, a non-state  actor,  had  power  or
    influence beyond the appellant's home area or  that,  if  he  did,  the
    authorities in other parts of  Nigeria  could  not  provide  sufficient
    protection against it.  It was not for the  respondent  to  prove  that
    this man did not have such power and influence.

9.   The appellant's grounds also challenge the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    appellant's and her children's Article 8 circumstances both  under  and
    outside the Immigration Rules.

10.  One aspect of the judge's decision  that  is  challenged  is  that  the
    judge did not properly address the test of very significant  obstacles.
    It is correct to say that when addressing the issue of very significant
    obstacles, starting at paragraph 39, the judge in fact concentrates  on
    the reasonableness test. But Mr Schwenk has not identified any relevant
    factor going to the very significant obstacles test that the judge  did
    not in fact address and evaluate, albeit in  the  course  of  assessing
    reasonableness.  I see no legal error in this deficiency.

11.  Insofar as Mr Schwenk appeared to suggest  that  the  judge  failed  to
    factor into either the reasonableness  or  very  significant  obstacles
    tests the fact that the appellant had two daughters  at  risk  of  FGM,
    ignores that the judge had made clear findings that this  was  not  the
    case.

12.  The principal thrust of the appellant's grounds in relation to  Article
    8 tis hat despite (i) stating that he would assess the appellant's case
    on the basis that both children were de facto qualifying children  (see
    paragraph 39); and (ii)  despite  properly  noting  that  as  a  result
    "strong reasons" had to be shown for requiring the children  to  leave,
    the judge failed to  identify  any  strong  or  powerful  reasons.   Mr
    Schwenk accepted that the judge was entitled to treat the existence  of
    strong reasons as a cumulative exercise, but submitted that all of  the
    factors identified were not "strong" or "powerful" but rather  "run-of-
    the-mill".  I cannot agree.

13.  Firstly, the judge's approach was entirely consistent  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal guidance given in MT and ET [2018] UKUT 88 (IAC).

14.  Second, in paragraph 44  the judge  properly  considered  a  number  of
    factors that indicated the existence of strong or powerful reasons: the
    parent's lack of immigration status taken together with the  fact  that
    it was in the children's best interests to remain with  their  parents;
    that the family would be returned as a  unit;  that  the  children  had
    close relatives in Nigeria (including on their mother's side); that the
    children's lives, given their ages, were still mainly focused on  their
    parents; that there  were  no  health  difficulties,  that  they  speak
    English/Yoruba - widely spoken in Nigeria; and that the  children  will
    have the benefit  of  help  from  their  parents  in  adapting  to  the
    educational system and cultural context of Nigeria.

15.  In my view such factors taken  cumulatively  were  clearly  capable  of
    operating as strong or  powerful  reasons  and  clearly  sufficient  to
    outweigh the accepted disruption, uncertainty and distress the family's
    return to Nigeria would cause the children (see paragraph 49).

16.  Just because the appellant's immigration history was  not  particularly
    poor,  did  not  mean  that  the  judge  was  obliged  to  demote   the
    considerations be applied to a lower level than "powerful" or "strong".

17.  To say "no reasonable judge" could have taken the view  the  judge  did
    is quite misplaced.

18.  For all the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not  materially
    err in law.  Accordingly his decision must stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 10 July 2019

                [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


