
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01729/2016
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 27 April 2017                   |                                   |
|                                   |On 08 May 2017                     |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                       HAITHAM GHAZI FAISAL AL-ZIAYYIR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 16 December 1975 and is a national of Iraq.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Brookfield promulgated on 22 November 2016 which dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  22
   January 2016 to refuse his protection claim.
The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge  Brookfield  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal   against   the
   Respondent's decision.
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged which argued:
   a) The Judge failed to relate her findings  to  the  background  material
      provided by the Appellant.
   b) The Judge failed to apply the concession made in the  summary  by  the
      Respondent at paragraph 23 of the refusal letter  that  the  Appellant
      had taken part in demonstrations in Iraq.
   c) The Judge applied the wrong standard of proof.
   d) The Judge failed to consider and give  adequate  reasons  for  finding
      that the Appellant would not be at risk on return.
   e) The Judge's assessment under Article 8 was flawed.
7.   On  19  December  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Shimmin   refused
   permission to appeal. The application  was  renewed  and  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Perkins gave permission to appeal.
8. There is a  Rule  24  Response  dated  10  February  2017  in  which  the
   Respondent argues that the  Judge  directed  herself  appropriately;  the
   Judge made a 'plethora' of adverse credibility findings  which  are  well
   reasoned and while rejecting the credibility of his account  in  relation
   to events in Basra made an alternative finding that the  Appellant  could
   relocate to Baghdad.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Howard  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that who enlarged on the grounds of appeal which he relied on :

10. He acknowledged that he could not pursue the issue in  relation  to  the
   findings on the death certificate on  the  basis  of  a  letter  that  he
   acknowledges was not before the Judge.

11. The Judge applied the wrong standard of proof in referring at  paragraph
   10(vi) to finding it 'highly probable' and 'highly improbable.'

12. He argued that the Judge had failed to  take  into  account  the  wife's
   evidence and made no findings in relation to it as to the events in issue
   or to the documentary evidence that supported his account  including  the
   police report and the DVD and  news  report  of  the  demonstration.  The
   Respondent accepted that the Appellant attended the demonstration.

13. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Bates relied on the Rule 24 response  and
   submitted that :

14. The Judge did not take issue with  the  consistency  of  the  Appellants
   account with other evidence but rather  she  did  not  find  the  account
   credible.

15. She found that there was nothing in the evidence  to  suggest  that  the
   Appellant was anything other than a bystander at the demonstration rather
   than a participant.

16. In relation to the kidnapping she set out  well  reasoned  findings  for
   finding that the claim was incredible.

17. In relation  to  the  police  letter  he  argued  that  this  could  not
   undermine her conclusions: it was a self serving document in that someone
   reported an incident and the police recorded that report.

18. In reply Mr Howard on behalf of the Appellant submitted  that  care  was
   required in relation to findings on plausibility in relation  to  general
   norms.

19. In relation to the risk on return the Judge had not only failed to  take
   into account the police report but other relevant documentary evidence.

The Law

20.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

21. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.
Finding on Material Error

22. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

23. It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail  every
   single argument advanced before her,  nor  consider  in  isolation  every
   single piece of evidence. The Judge was not required  to  each  piece  of
   documentary evidence contained within the 275 page bundle  relied  on  by
   the Appellant. She was required to weigh all of the evidence before  her,
   and give clear reasons for her conclusions such that the parties, and  in
   particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for her decision.
   I am satisfied that in this case the challenge is simply  a  disagreement
   with well reasoned findings made by the Judge.

24. In relation to the argument that the  Judge  had  erred  in  failing  to
   apply the correct standard of proof I find that his challenge is  without
   merit. The Judge at paragraphs 4-6 sets out the law and  the  burden  and
   standard of proof in  respect  of  the  claim  for  asylum,  humanitarian
   protection and the ECHR claim. Complaint is made because in her  findings
   while for the vast majority of the decision she uses expressions such  as
   'I did not find it reasonably likely'  or 'I did not find it credible' or
   'I find that the appellant has failed to establish there is a  reasonable
   degree of likelihood' at paragraph 10(vi) she states 'I  find  it  highly
   probable that' the Appellants father would have reported him  missing  to
   the police and at 10(x) having reviewed the evidence  in  relation  to  a
   letter about his attendance at a demonstration in  London  she  found  it
   'highly improbable' that the letter was genuinely sent by Shia militia. I
   find that on any reading of the decision the Judge has always had in mind
   the appropriate standard of proof. On these two occasions it is clear  to
   me that that she is simply saying that the Appellant has in  fact  fallen
   far from meeting the standard of proof as the Appellants account  was  so
   wholly lacking in credibility.

25. At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, it was said that  "Where
   a tribunal has referred to considering all the evidence, a reviewing body
   should be very slow  to  conclude  that  that  tribunal  overlooked  some
   factor, simply because the factor is not explicitly referred  to  in  the
   determination concerned". The Judge set out  in  her  decision  that  she
   heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant's  wife  (paragraph  8(iv)  and  at
   paragraph 10 that she took all of the evidence into account and of course
   her evidence was that she was present at the alleged kidnapping  and  the
   Judge  mentions  that  at  paragraph  10(iii).  The  Judge  made  adverse
   credibility findings not on the basis of any discrepancy between the  two
   accounts but on the basis that the account that they both  gave  was  not
   credible and she sets out at paragraphs 10(ii)  and  (iii)  a  number  of
   reasons why she found their account incredible. Those reasons  were  open
   to her.

26. In relation to claim in relation to  the  demonstrations  at  Basra  the
   Judge  accepts  all  of  the  background   material   that   there   were
   demonstrations in Basra. There is nothing in  that  material  to  suggest
   that simply being present in an area where  a  demonstration  was  taking
   place would put an applicant at risk. It is again clear from reading  the
   refusal letter as a whole that while  the  Respondent  accepts  that  the
   Appellant was present at the demonstrations  that  he  was  not  actively
   participating in them. This was the finding made by the  Judge  at  10(i)
   and it was a finding that was open to her.

27. In relation to the claim that her Article 8 assessment was inadequate  I
   am satisfied that given the Judges rejection of the Appellants claim  and
   therefore the rejection of his account that he  was  at  risk  on  return
   taken together with the short period that the Appellant  and  his  family
   had lived in the UK her findings at paragraphs 10(xxii) to  (xxvi)  which
   includes a consideration of the best interests of the  children,s117B  of
   the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and s 55 of  the  Borders
   Act 2009 and relevant caselaw is more than adequate.

28. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

29. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

30. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                                              Date
7.5.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell









