
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01072/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th December 2017                 |On 28th December 2017                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     HSR
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. H Pratt, WTB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although  an  anonymity  direction  was  not  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, as  this  a  protection  claim,  it  is  appropriate  that  a
    direction is made.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  Court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of
    his family. This direction  applies  amongst  others  to  all  parties.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a national of Iran.  He  arrived  in  the  UK  on  5th
    February 2016 and claimed asylum. The claim for asylum was refused  for
    the reasons set out in a decision dated 19th January  2017.   That  was
    the underlying decision that was the subject of the appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  The appeal was  dismissed  by  FtT  Judge
    Lloyd for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated  on  13th  July
    2017.


The decision of the FtT Judge


 3. A summary of the appellant's asylum claim is set out at paragraphs [21]
    to [40] of the decision of the FtT Judge.  I do not repeat the  account
    of events relied upon by the appellant in  this  decision.   The  Judge
    also heard evidence from a number of witnesses and that evidence is set
    out at paragraphs [41] to [50] of the decision.  At paragraph  [51]  to
    [53], the  Judge  refers  to  an  expert  report  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant.  The Judge states:


         "51. ...This says the letter of attestation by Mr Fathi is the sort
         used in filing a judicial  complaint,  if  lodged  officially,  the
         allegations would have to be investigated. The Appellant  would  be
         wanted for questioning.  An  arrest  warrant  would  be  circulated
         nationwide and to border posts  (sic).  He  could  be  arrested  on
         arrival in Iran.


         52.  The report says trials  are  not  fair  as  the  judiciary  is
         corrupt. He is at risk from an influential figure, namely Mr Fathi.




         53.  The report says the Appellant will be at risk on return as  he
         has converted. He could face prison or execution."


 4. The findings and conclusions of the Judge are to be found at paragraphs
    [70] to [100] of the decision.  The Judge accepts, at  [71],  that  the
    appellant worked as a police officer in Iran, and that he retired  from
    the police.  However, the Judge rejected the appellant's  account  that
    he was given an intelligence role to monitor the illegal activities  of
    Mr Fathi.  He also rejected, at [74], the appellant's  account  of  the
    indirect threats that the appellant perceived as a warning to him.  The
    Judge was able to attach little weight to the  threatening  texts  that
    the appellant claimed to have received in the UK.  The Judge  rejected,
    at [78], the appellant's account that he was being monitored by  Sepah.
    The Judge concludes:


         "79. I find the Appellant has had no  problems  with  Mr  Fathi  or
         Sepah in Iran, or since he left Iran. He will  be  at  no  risk  on
         return from any such problems on his return.


         80.  I am not persuaded that the  Appellant's  wife  and  daughters
         have had any problems in Iran. The  Appellant  said  they  were  in
         hiding, however his brother said they were living  in  Tehran.  The
         Appellant or his brother have made no attempts to arrange for  them
         to leave Iran. This is despite the fact Saied turned to  Iran  last
         year.


         81.  I found the expert report to  be  of  limited  assistance.  It
         essentially repeats the Appellant's political problem which I  have
         found not to be credible.


         82.  The legal documents are ones which could be put together quite
         easily to support an asylum claim which is not true. The letter  of
         attestation from Mr Fathi is  handwritten.  I  find  it  reasonably
         likely that someone with such influence as the  Appellant  says  Mr
         Fathi has, would have submitted a typed, formal document instead of
         a handwritten note."


 5. The Judge states, at [92], that he is satisfied to the  lower  standard
    of proof that the appellant is no longer loyal to Islam.   He  accepted
    that the appellant has attended a Kingdom Hall since he arrived in  the
    UK and that he has participated in services.   The  Judge  states  "The
    weight of the evidence suggests the appellant is a genuine and  willing
    to convert to the Jehovah Witness faith.".


 6. The Judge had already found, at [71] and [72], that the  appellant  was
    not suspected by the police to have  converted  from  Islam,  and  that
    there were no problems for the appellant in Iran regarding a  suspected
    conversion.  At [93], the  Judge  states  "..I  found  the  Appellant's
    account of the discovery of his conversion in Iran  to  be  lacking  in
    credibility...".  The Judge rejected the appellant's account  that  the
    authorities have raided his home  and  found  religious  material  that
    shows he has  converted  from  Islam.   The  Judge  also  rejected  the
    appellant's account that he was being followed by Sepah and  found,  at
    [95], that  the  appellant  has  not  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities, due to any conversion in Iran.


 7. Against that backdrop the Judge states:


         "96. The question is whether the Appellant's conversion  would  put
         him at risk on return  to  Iran.  I  remind  myself  of  the  lower
         standard of proof which is in the Appellant's favour. I  note  that
         the court in SA (Iran) said there was a real risk that someone  who
         has professed themselves to be a Christian and conducted themselves
         as one (sic) "may be taken in Iran as evidence of apostasy".


         97.  In his asylum interview (question 51), the Appellant said  his
         faith was private and he kept it to himself. I  have  asked  myself
         whether the Appellant would live openly as  a  Jehovah  Witness  in
         Iran (as per HJ (Iran)).


         98.  I find there  is  no  evidence  connecting  the  Appellant  to
         Christianity in Iran  as  I  have  already  found  that  I  am  not
         satisfied that he has come to the attention of the  authorities  as
         religious material was found in his house. On the evidence  I  have
         seen, I find that the Iranian authorities would only find out about
         the Appellant's connection with the Jehovah Witness and  conversion
         if he told the authorities.


         99.  I therefore ask myself would the Appellant be likely  to  tell
         the authorities about his conversion or behave in such a way as  to
         bring himself to their attention through his  religious  behaviour.
         Considering  all  the  evidence  about  the   Appellant   and   his
         background, I find there is ample evidence about his activities  in
         Iran that I do not find to be remotely credible. I find  this  good
         evidence that he can and will dissemble when it suits him. I do not
         think he would deliberately put himself in  unnecessary  danger  in
         Iran by deliberately alerting the authorities to his connections to
         the faith. The Appellant will be more than able to stay  under  the
         radar of the Iranian authorities' interest. On his own evidence, he
         has practiced his faith undetected for  ten  years.  The  Appellant
         said he had no problems as a result during  this  period  of  time.
         There is little evidence of the Appellant going out of his  way  to
         evangelise other  people  or  unnecessarily  drawing  attention  to
         himself in a way likely to attract the  adverse  attention  of  the
         Iranian authorities. At the appeal hearing, the Appellant  said  he
         could practice his faith without a problem  in  Iran,  it  was  the
         political problem that caused him to leave Iran. On this basis,  it
         follows the Appellant will not be at risk of  serious  harm  if  he
         returns to Iran.


The appeal before me


 8. The appellant refers to the two strands to the  appellant's  claim  and
    claims that there are legal errors in Judge's analysis of both  aspects
    of the claim. As to the claim on  "political"  grounds,  the  appellant
    claims that the Judge fell into legal error by dismissing  this  matter
    on  grounds  of  general  implausibility,  without  more,  and  without
    considering the possibility that the Iranian Security Police might  not
    act in a manner that the Immigration Judge would expect them to.  It is
    said that the Judge pays scant regard to the  expert  report  that  was
    commissioned specifically to comment on the plausibility of an  unusual
    asylum account, as set against the known country information. As to the
    claim on the grounds of the appellant's  "conversion",  it  is  claimed
    that the Judge failed to properly address the issues identified  in  HJ
    (Iran).  The Judge failed to address the motivation for  the  appellant
    concealing his faith.  The appellant states that it  was  his  evidence
    throughout his asylum application and the appeal, that  whilst  he  did
    indeed conceal his conversion to the Jehovah  Witness  faith  while  in
    Iran, this was due to his fear of persecution.


 9. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT  Judge  Pedro  on  9th  October
    2017. The matter comes before me to consider whether  the  decision  of
    the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if  so,  to
    remake the decision.


10. Mr Pratt adopted the appellant's grounds of appeal and submits that the
    Judge erred in his assessment of both strands of the appellant's claim.
    He submits that having found that the appellant is no longer  loyal  to
    Islam, and that the appellant is a genuine and willing  to  convert  to
    the Jehovah Witness faith, the Judge failed to  properly  consider  the
    issues in accordance with the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  HJ
    (Iran) -v- SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.   He submits that the Judge  failed  to
    determine why the appellant had lived quietly and discreetly  in  Iran.
    The appellant's evidence was that he  had  lived  discreetly  to  avoid
    persecution. During the appellant's asylum interview, when he was asked
    about who knew of his conversion to a Jehovah  Witness,  the  appellant
    explained that it was his father, his brothers,  his  wife,  and  their
    children. When asked why  nobody  else  knew  of  the  conversion,  the
    appellant explained that  he  could  not  tell  anyone  because  it  is
    considered a crime  punishable  by  capital  punishment,  if  a  person
    changes their religion.  In his witness statement before the  FtT,  the
    appellant had stated that when he had returned to Iran  previously,  he
    had to keep his faith secret, because he would  almost  instantaneously
    face execution due to apostasy. He had maintained that he  could  never
    practice his religious beliefs openly, because had he done so, it would
    have instantaneously meant his death.  He  submits  that  although  the
    Judge may have considered whether the appellant would live openly as  a
    Jehovah Witness, he did not ask himself "why" the appellant  would  not
    be able to live openly as a Jehovah Witness.


11. Mr Pratt submits that the Judge also erred in  his  assessment  of  the
    expert evidence that was relied upon by  the  appellant.  At  paragraph
    [81], the Judge dismisses the expert evidence in a perfunctory  fashion
    finding  it  to  be  of  limited  assistance  because  it  repeats  the
    appellant's account of events. Mr Pratt submits that the report  is  in
    fact a report that sets the appellant's account of events against known
    background information. He submits that the Judge  did  not  adequately
    engage with the expert's report, and the Judge gives inadequate reasons
    for rejecting that report.


12.  In reply, Mr Bates submits that in assessing the  "conversion"  claim,
    it is clear from a careful reading of paragraphs [97] to  [99]  of  the
    decision, that the Judge was alive to the issues to be  considered.  At
    paragraph [99], the Judge noted that on his own account, the  appellant
    had practised  his  faith  in  Iran,  undetected,  for  10  years.  The
    appellant's case was that he had no problems as a  result  during  that
    period of time. The Judge also noted that there is little  evidence  of
    the appellant going out of his  way  to  evangelise  other  people,  or
    unnecessarily drawing attention to himself in a way likely  to  attract
    the  adverse  attention  of  the  Iranian  authorities.  It   was   the
    appellant's case that he could practice his faith  without  problem  in
    Iran, and it was the political problem that caused him to  leave  Iran.
    Mr Bates submits that the findings and conclusions reached by the Judge
    were open to him on the evidence.


13.  Mr Bates submit that it was for the  Judge  to  make  his  credibility
    assessment of the account of events and advanced by the  appellant.  He
    submits that the appellant is unable to point to  anything  within  the
    expert report that undermines  the  findings  made  by  the  Judge.  He
    submits that the Judge looked at the specifics of the case,  and  found
    the account advanced by the appellant not be credible, for reasons that
    were open to the Judge.


Discussion


  14. I remind myself of the observations made by Mr. Justice Hadon-Cave  in
      Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


           It  is  generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for   First-tier
           Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a
           case. This leads to judgments becoming overly long and  confused
           and is not a proportionate approach to deciding  cases.  It  is,
           however, necessary  for  judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
           conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms
           their reasons, so that the parties can understand why they  have
           won or lost.


  15. I have also had regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Shizad
      (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC where it was
      stated in the head note that:


             "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of
             the conclusions on the central issue on which  the  appeal  is
             determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
             decision makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted
             by the judge."


  16. Dealing first with the Judge's overall assessment of the claim and the
      credibility of the appellant, in HK -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037, the
      appellant's account had been rejected at first instance simply because
      the facts he described were so unusual as to be thought, unbelievable.
       The Court of Appeal held that that was not a safe basis upon which to
      reject the existence of events that were said to have occurred  within
      an environment and culture that were wholly outside the experience  of
      the decision-maker.  At paragraph [28] of his  judgment  Neuberger  LJ
      stated:


         "Further, in many asylum cases, some, even most, of the appellant's
         story may seem inherently unlikely but that does not mean  that  it
         is untrue. The ingredients of the story, and the story as a  whole,
         have to be considered against the available  country  evidence  and
         reliable expert evidence,  and  other  familiar  factors,  such  as
         consistency with what the appellant has said before, and with other
         factual evidence (where there is any)."


  17. The assessment of credibility is always a highly fact sensitive  task.
      The FtT Judge was required to consider the evidence as  a  whole.   In
      assessing the credibility of the appellant and the claim  advanced  by
      him, the Judge was required to consider a  number  of  factors.   They
      include, whether the account given by the appellant was of  sufficient
      detail, whether the account is internally  consistent  and  consistent
      with any  relevant  specific  and  general  country  information,  and
      whether the account is plausible.  Some of those factors may  be  more
      relevant in an individual case than others.  If an account is littered
      with internal inconsistencies that  may  be  enough  for  a  Judge  to
      dismiss the evidence of an  appellant  as  incredible.   It  does  not
      follow that a Judge is entitled to dismiss an account in the same  way
      simply because the account is implausible.


  18. In Y -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223, Keene LJ stated:


         "25 There seems to me to be very little dispute between the parties
         as to the legal principles applicable  to  the  approach  which  an
         adjudicator, now  known  as  an  immigration  judge,  should  adopt
         towards issues of credibility.  The  fundamental  one  is  that  he
         should be cautious before  finding  an  account  to  be  inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that  he  will  be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or  is  not  plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been  influenced  by  his  own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of  our  own
         society. It is therefore important that he should seek to  view  an
         appellant's account of events, as Mr Singh rightly argues,  in  the
         context of conditions in  the  country  from  which  the  appellant
         comes. The dangers were well described in an article by Sir  Thomas
         Bingham, as he then was, in 1985 in a passage quoted by the IAT  in
         Kasolo v SSHD 13190, the passage being taken  from  an  article  in
         Current Legal Problems. Sir Thomas Bingham said this:


                       "'An English judge may have, or think that he has,  a
                  shrewd  idea  of  how  a  Lloyds  Broker  or   a   Bristol
                  wholesaler, or a  Norfolk  farmer,  might  react  in  some
                  situation which is canvassed in the course of a  case  but
                  he may, and I think should, feel very much more  uncertain
                  about the reactions of a Nigerian merchant, or  an  Indian
                  ships' engineer, or a Yugoslav banker. Or even, to take  a
                  more  homely  example,  a  Sikh  shopkeeper   trading   in
                  Bradford. No judge worth his salt could possibl[y]  assume
                  that men of different nationalities,  educations,  trades,
                  experience, creeds and temperaments would act as he  might
                  think he would have done or even  -  which  may  be  quite
                  different - in accordance  with  his  concept  of  what  a
                  reasonable man would have done."


             26. None of  this,  however,  means  that  an  adjudicator  is
             required to take at face value an account of  facts  proffered
             by an appellant, no matter how contrary to  common  sense  and
             experience of human behaviour the account may be. The decision
             maker is not expected to suspend his own judgment, nor does Mr
             Singh contend that he should.  In  appropriate  cases,  he  is
             entitled to find that an account of events is  so  far-fetched
             and contrary to reason as to be incapable of belief. The point
             was well put in the Awala case by Lord Brodie at paragraph  24
             when he said this:


                       "... the tribunal of fact need not necessarily accept
                  an  applicant's  account  simply   because   it   is   not
                  contradicted at the relevant hearing. The tribunal of fact
                  is  entitled  to  make  reasonable   findings   based   on
                  implausibilities, common sense and  rationality,  and  may
                  reject  evidence  if  it  is  not  consistent   with   the
                  probabilities affecting the case as a whole".


                   He then added a little later:


                       "... while a decision on credibility must be  reached
                  rationally, in doing so the decision maker is entitled  to
                  draw on his common sense and his ability, as  a  practical
                  and informed  person,  to  identify  what  is  or  is  not
                  plausible".


             27.   I agree. A decision  maker  is  entitled  to  regard  an
             account as incredible by such standards, but he must take care
             not to do so merely because it would not seem reasonable if it
             had happened in this country. In essence, he must look through
             the spectacles  provided  by  the  information  he  has  about
             conditions in the country in question.  That  is,  in  effect,
             what Neuberger LJ was saying in the case of HK and  I  do  not
             regard Chadwick LJ in the passage referred to  as  seeking  to
             disagree."


  19. Here, at paragraph [70], the Judge  confirms  that  he  has  not  made
      findings without first looking at  all  the  evidence  in  the  round.
      Having made that clear, there is no reason for me to believe  that  he
      did not adopt that approach.  What follows at paragraphs [71] to  [82]
      are findings that, in  my  judgement,  arise  from  a  combination  of
      inconsistencies in  the  account,  a  lack  of  detail  or  sufficient
      explanation,  and  matters  that  appeared  to  the   Judge,   to   be
      implausible.


  20. The Judge found, at [71] that the appellant worked as a police officer
      in Iran and that he retired from the police.  The appellant's own case
      was that  he  was  asked  to  attend  an  interview  with  the  Police
      Intelligence Force in spring 2011 and was asked about his parents  and
      brothers who had converted to be Jehovah's Witnesses.  The Police said
      the appellant had been in  contact  with  foreign  nationals  to  sell
      information, and it was made clear to him that he  should  leave.   He
      claims that after his early retirement, he was given an assignment  to
      carry out, working in the office of Mr Fathi,  to  gather  information
      about his activities to pass to the Police  intelligence.   The  Judge
      considered it unlikely that the appellant would have been given such a
      role, knowing of the treatment of Christian  Converts  in  Iran.   The
      Judge considered the fact that the appellant had  travelled  regularly
      out of Iran in 2012 to Spain, Holland, Belgium, France and Italy.  The
      Judge found that the appellant was happy to return to  Iran,  and  was
      not  at  any  risk.   At  paragraph   [74],   the   Judge   identified
      inconsistencies in the appellant's account as to the threats  received
      from  Mr  Fathi  and  at  paragraph  [80],  the  Judge  identified  an
      inconsistency between the evidence of the appellant and his brother as
      to whether the appellant's wife  and  daughters  are  in  hiding.   At
      paragraph [76], the Judge notes that the appellant was evasive  giving
      evidence at  the  hearing  as  to  his  work  for  Mr  Fathi.  On  the
      appellant's account of events that under-cover work  was  what  caused
      the appellant to leave Iran.


  21. I accept that in some respects the Judge has found  that  the  account
      advanced by the appellant is implausible. However, when properly read,
      in my judgement, the Judge reached his decision as  to  whether  those
      aspects of the appellant's account are plausible, not by reference  to
      whether it would not seem reasonable if it had happened in the UK, but
      by reference to what is known in  the  objective  evidence  about  the
      Iranian regime, and the view they take of  those  that  convert  their
      faith generally.


22. As to the Judge's assessment of the expert report, the Judge  found  at
    paragraph [81], that the expert report was of  limited  assistance.   I
    have carefully read the report of Roya Kashefi for myself.  At  page  4
    of the  report,  the  expert  records  the  documents  that  have  been
    provided.  The expert then sets out a summary of the  appellant's  case
    and notes that she has been instructed "to place the claim  in  context
    of background evidence and assess the risk to the appellant  on  return
    to Iran.".  The report is set out in three parts addressing the  issues
    for a Jehovah Witness from a Muslim background, covert work,  and  then
    information  concerning  the  returns  procedure  and  punishment   for
    claiming asylum.  The conclusions are summarised in section  4  of  the
    report.  In my judgment, the Judge carefully considered the opinions of
    the expert, but concluded that in  the  end,  he  could  attach  little
    weight to the report because the report is based upon  the  appellant's
    account of events of the political problems that he had claimed,  which
    were found by the Judge not to be credible. In my judgment, the more an
    expert report and conclusions are based  on  the  assumption  that  the
    account given by the appellant is to be believed, the less likely it is
    that any significant weight will be attached to it, in the  event  that
    the account is found, as here, not to be credible.


  23. In reaching his decision as to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
      account,  the  Judge  did  not  disregard  the  expert's  report.   At
      paragraphs [51] to [53] of the decision, the Judge refers to the  main
      conclusions of the expert, but the assessment of  the  credibility  of
      the account advanced by the appellant was a matter for the Judge.  The
      Judge had the opportunity of hearing  the  appellant  and  having  his
      evidence tested.  The Judge did not consider irrelevant  factors,  and
      the  weight  that  he  attached  to  the  expert's  evidence  in   the
      circumstances, was a matter for him.


24. As Brooke LJ observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran)  v  The
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,
    "unjustified complaints" as to an  alleged  failure  to  give  adequate
    reasons are all too frequent.  The obligation on a Tribunal is to  give
    reasons in sufficient detail  to  show  the  principles  on  which  the
    Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.  Such
    reasons need not be  elaborate,  and  do  not  need  to  address  every
    argument or every factor which weighed in the decision.  If a  Tribunal
    has not expressly addressed an argument, but if there  are  grounds  on
    which the argument could properly have  been  rejected,  it  should  be
    assumed that the Tribunal acted on such grounds.  It is sufficient that
    the critical reasons to the decision, are recorded.


  25. In my judgment,  the  FtT  Judge  assessed  the  account  through  the
      spectacles provided by the information  he  had  about  conditions  in
      Iran. More importantly however, the  FtT  Judge  reached  his  overall
      findings by reference to  a  combination  of  inconsistencies  in  the
      account, a lack of detail or sufficient explanation, and matters  that
      appeared to the Judge, to  be  implausible.  I  therefore  reject  the
      appellant's first ground of appeal.


  26. Turning to the second strand of the appellant's case, I remind  myself
      of the test set out by Lord Hope in his judgement  in  HJ  (Iran)  -v-
      SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  Such appeals  involve  what  is  essentially  an
      individual and fact-specific inquiry.  At paragraph  [35],  Lord  Hope
      set out the test in the following way:


         "35. This brings me to the test that should be adopted by the fact-
         finding tribunals in this country. As Lord  Walker  points  out  in
         para 98, this involves what is essentially an individual and  fact-
         specific inquiry. Lord Rodger has described the  approach  in  para
         82, but I would like to set it out in my own words. It is necessary
         to proceed in stages.


             (a) The first stage, of course, is  to  consider  whether  the
             applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of
             that orientation he will not be entitled to be  treated  as  a
             member of the particular social group. But I would regard this
             part of the test as having been satisfied if  the  applicant's
             case is that he is  at  risk  of  persecution  because  he  is
             suspected of being gay, if his past history shows that this is
             in fact the case.


             (b) The next stage is to examine a group  of  questions  which
             are directed to what his situation will  be  on  return.  This
             part of the inquiry is directed to what  will  happen  in  the
             future. The  Home  Office's  Country  of  Origin  report  will
             provide the background. There will  be  little  difficulty  in
             holding that in countries such as Iran and  Cameroon  gays  or
             persons who are believed to be gay  are  persecuted  and  that
             persecution is something that may reasonably  be  feared.  The
             question is how each applicant, looked at  individually,  will
             conduct himself if returned and how others will react to  what
             he does. Those others will include everyone with whom he  will
             come in contact, in private as well as in public. The  way  he
             conducts himself may vary from one situation to another,  with
             varying degrees of  risk.  But  he  cannot  and  must  not  be
             expected to conceal aspects of his sexual orientation which he
             is unwilling to conceal, even from those  whom  he  knows  may
             disapprove of it. If he fears persecution as a result and that
             fear is well-founded, he will be entitled  to  asylum  however
             unreasonable his refusal to resort to concealment may be.  The
             question what is reasonably tolerable  has  no  part  in  this
             inquiry.


             (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be
             able to do in the country of his nationality  everything  that
             he can do openly in the country whose protection he  seeks  is
             not the test. As I said earlier (see para 15), the  Convention
             was not directed to reforming  the  level  of  rights  in  the
             country of origin. So it would be wrong to approach the  issue
             on the  basis  that  the  purpose  of  the  Convention  is  to
             guarantee to an applicant who is  gay  that  he  can  live  as
             freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to do
             if he were not returned. It does not guarantee to everyone the
             human rights standards  that  are  applied  by  the  receiving
             country within its own territory. The focus throughout must be
             on what will happen in the country of origin.


             (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will  in
             fact conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is
             to consider why he will do so.  If  this  will  simply  be  in
             response to social pressures  or  for  cultural  or  religious
             reasons of his own choosing and  not  because  of  a  fear  of
             persecution, his claim for asylum must be rejected. But if the
             reason why he will resort to concealment is that he  genuinely
             fears that  otherwise  he  will  be  persecuted,  it  will  be
             necessary to consider whether that fear is well founded.


             (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have  a
             well-founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he  has,  the
             causative condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi -v-
              SSHD [2006] 2 AC 426, para 5 will have been established.  The
             applicant will be entitled to asylum.


27. The Judge found that the appellant is a genuine and willing convert  to
    the Jehovah Witness faith.  The first stage of the test set out  in  HJ
    (Iran) is satisfied by the appellant.  The next  stage  is  to  examine
    what the appellant's situation will be on return. The question  is  how
    the appellant looked at individually, will conduct himself if  returned
    and how others will react to what he does.  The  appellant  cannot  and
    must not be expected to conceal  aspects  of  his  faith  which  he  is
    unwilling to conceal, even from those whom he knows may  disapprove  of
    it. As Lord Hope emphasised in HJ (Iran), the fact that  the  appellant
    will not be able to do in Iran, everything that he can do openly in the
    UK is not the test.


28. The FtT Judge rejected the appellant's account that the authorities  in
    Iran had become aware of his conversion.  The  Judge  found,  at  [95],
    that "..the appellant has not come to the attention of the  authorities
    due to any conversion in Iran".  That was  of  course  looking  at  the
    past, but at paragraph [96] of the decision, the Judge reminds  himself
    that the question is whether the appellant's conversion would  put  him
    at risk on return to Iran. At paragraph [97],  the  Judge  states  "..I
    have asked myself whether the appellant would live openly as a  Jehovah
    Witness in Iran (as per HJ Iran).".   As  to  how  the  appellant  will
    conduct himself if returned, and how others will react to what he does,
    the Judge states at [99];


         "....I do  not  think  he  would  deliberately  put  himself  in  I
         unnecessary danger in Iran by deliberately alerting the authorities
         to his connections to the faith. The Appellant will  be  more  than
         able to stay under the radar of the Iranian authorities'  interest.
         On his own evidence he has practiced his faith undetected  for  ten
         years. The Appellant said he had no problems  as  a  result  during
         this period of time. There is  little  evidence  of  the  Appellant
         going out of his way to evangelise other  people  or  unnecessarily
         drawing attention to himself in a way likely to attract the adverse
         attention of the Iranian authorities. At the  appeal  hearing,  the
         Appellant said he could practice his faith  without  a  problem  in
         Iran. It was the political problem that caused him to leave  Iran."




29. Adopting the test set out in HJ (Iran), the next stage, if it is  found
    that the applicant will  in  fact  conceal  aspects  of  his  faith  if
    returned, is to consider why he will do so.  In  order  to  reach  this
    stage, there must be a prior finding that the appellant  will  in  fact
    conceal aspects of his faith if returned to Iran.  The  Judge  did  not
    find that the appellant will conceal aspects of his  faith.   Carefully
    read, the Judge found that the appellant had been able to practice  his
    faith previously and would be able to continue doing so,  upon  return.
    As the Judge notes at paragraph [99]  of  the  decision,  "On  his  own
    evidence he has practiced his  faith  undetected  for  10  years.   The
    Appellant said he had no problems as a result  during  this  period  of
    time. There is little evidence of the Appellant going out of his way to
    evangelise other people or unnecessarily drawing attention  to  himself
    in a way likely  to  attract  the  adverse  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities...the Appellant said he could practice his faith without  a
    problem in Iran...".


30. Having carefully considered the findings made by the Judge against  the
    test set out in HJ (Iran), I reject  Mr  Pratt's  submission  that  the
    Judge failed to properly consider the issues  in  accordance  with  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran).   He submits that the Judge
    failed to determine why the appellant had lived quietly and  discreetly
    in Iran, but one only reaches that stage if there is  a  prior  finding
    that the appellant will conceal aspects of his faith if  returned.   On
    the evidence, in my judgment, it was open to the Judge to find that the
    appellant has practiced his faith undetected for many years without any
    problems.  There was, as  the  Judge  notes,  little  evidence  of  the
    appellant  going  out  of  his  way  to  evangelise  other  people,  or
    unnecessarily drawing attention to himself.  The appellant's  own  case
    was that he could practice his faith without a problem in Iran.   There
    is no evidence that he will conduct himself  any  differently  now,  if
    returned.  There was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  will  conceal
    aspects of his faith if returned.   On  return,  he  will  be  able  to
    continue practising his faith, as he did previously.


31. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a judgment  at  first
    instance, unless it  really  cannot  understand  the  original  judge's
    thought process when he was making material findings. In my  judgement,
    the Judge identified and resolved key conflicts  in  the  evidence  and
    gave a brief explanation of the conclusions on  the  central  issue  on
    which the appeal was determined. The findings made by  the  Judge  were
    findings that were properly open to the Judge on  the  evidence  before
    the FtT.  The findings cannot be said to  be  perverse,  irrational  or
    findings that were not supported  by  the  evidence.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed after the  Judge  had  carefully  considered  the  facts  and
    circumstances of the claim and all the evidence before him.


32. In my judgment, the appellant is unable to establish that there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the FtT and  it  follows  that
    the appeal is dismissed.


DECISION


33. The appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge stands.


34. No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As this  is
    a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless
    and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
    granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies amongst others to all parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


      Signed                                 Date         18th December 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


35. I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


      Signed                                 Date     18th December 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





