

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/01567/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 October 2017                      |     On 19 October 2017             |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                MR (PAKISTAN)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Manyarara sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  13
    March  2017)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of   the
    respondent to refuse to grant her asylum, and to  give  directions  for
    her removal from the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal  made  an
    anonymity direction in the appellant's favour, and I consider  that  it
    is appropriate that this direction be maintained for these  proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.



Relevant Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan,  whose  date  of  birth  is  6
    September 1978.  Her late husband entered the UK on 23  June  2013  for
    private medical treatment.  The appellant entered  the  UK  with  their
    three children on 4 December 2013, all  of  them  holding  valid  visit
    visas which ran from 4 November 2013 until 4 May 2014.  The appellant's
    husband died after medical treatment on 6 November 2013, but this  news
    was kept from the appellant by her in-laws until after she had  arrived
    in the UK.

 3. On 29 April 2014 the appellant applied for leave to remain as a parent,
    and on private life grounds.  The application was refused  on  10  July
    2014, and the Secretary of State made a concomitant decision to  remove
    her by way of directions under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  &
    Nationality Act 2006.

 4. Her appeal against this decision came before Judge Fox.  The  appellant
    was acting in person, and she  asked  for  her  appeal  to  be  decided
    without a hearing.  In a decision  promulgated  on  13  November  2014,
    Judge Fox dismissed her appeal.  He noted what the appellant  had  said
    in regard to wishing to continue her education, with a view to  finding
    employment in the UK, but he found  that  this  was  not  a  legitimate
    expectation for a visitor.  The circumstances in  which  she  lost  her
    husband were tragic.  But, any leave that she was granted, as with  her
    husband, could only have ever been temporary.  She must always have had
    the realistic expectation that she would return to Pakistan  after  her
    short visit.  If her brother-in-law was happy to  continue  maintaining
    her while in the UK, he would be happy to continue maintaining her upon
    her return to Pakistan.

 5. The appellant appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  but  permission  was
    refused by both the First-tier Tribunal and by the Upper Tribunal.   In
    her reasons, Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam said  that  the  Judge  had
    considered the appellant's evidence about political unrest in Pakistan,
    but had found that she had overstated her case.  There was nothing that
    the Judge had considered that he should not have done, and he  had  not
    failed to consider relevant evidence.

 6. Permission to appeal was refused on 27 April 2015, and so the appellant
    became appeal rights-exhausted shortly thereafter.  By letter  dated  7
    December 2015, the appellant informed Immigration Enforcement that  she
    was now in the process of seeking a judicial review.

 7. The core bundle contains a Statement of Grounds for a proposed judicial
    review claim, ostensibly settled by the  appellant  as  a  litigant  in
    person.  In the Statement of Grounds, she said  that  the  only  family
    members she had left in Pakistan were her father, who was  elderly  and
    frail, and her brother.  They lived in Peshawar, which was  a  troubled
    area rife with political and military conflict involving  the  Taliban.
    She had not lived in that region since her marriage,  and  she  had  no
    wish to do so, as it was dangerous.  She and her late husband had lived
    in  Kotli.  But  now  that  he  had  died,  she  had  to  leave   their
    accommodation in Kotli because she had no income with which to pay  the
    rent.  Her late husband's friends in the UK were willing to accommodate
    and support her in the UK, so that she would have no recourse to public
    funds.

 8. The appellant did not proceed with a claim for a judicial  review,  and
    instead claimed asylum on 27 July 2016.

 9. Her claim was that, in mid-2014, her father  and  brother  had  started
    pressurising her over the telephone to  return  to  Pakistan  with  her
    children so that she could be married off to an  elderly  man  for  her
    family's financial benefit.  She was  told  that  her  eldest  daughter
    would also be married, and her other children would be put out to work.
     She refused to return to Pakistan, and when  her  father  and  brother
    persisted, she ceased telephone contact with  them.   However,  between
    2014 and May 2016 her father had sent her several letters  pressurising
    her to return to Pakistan.  She feared that, on return to Pakistan, she
    would be forced to marry against her  will,  or  that  her  father  and
    brother might seek to harm her if she refused to re-marry.  In  support
    of her asylum claim, the appellant  relied  on  two  letters  from  her
    father: one dated 2 March 2016; the other dated 1 May 2016.

10. On 13 January 2017, the respondent gave her  reasons  for  refusing  to
    recognise the appellant as a refugee.  Her claim was  not  credible  or
    consistent.  She claimed to have received threatening letters from  her
    father, but she had not been consistent about  when  the  letters  were
    received.  She had also been vague about exactly how many  letters  had
    been received.  It was also not credible that the reason why she  could
    not produce more than two letters  was  because  she  had  allowed  her
    children to play with the other letters.   She  had  claimed  that  her
    father would kill her if she returned to Pakistan,  or  that  he  would
    kill her children.  But when asked if anyone in the family had actually
    threatened her or her children, she said they had not.

11. It was noted that she had made representations to the Home Office dated
    7 December 2015.  In these, she had submitted  detailed  grounds  about
    her reasons for wishing to remain in the UK.  Her claim  at  that  time
    was that she had no family support in Pakistan.  She said that she  did
    not want to return to her  home  region  of  Peshawar  due  to  general
    instability in the region. If she had genuinely feared  persecution  at
    the hands of her brother and father since 2014, it  was  reasonable  to
    expect her to have stated this in her grounds of  December  2015.   The
    fact  that  she  had  relied  on  a  contradictory   set   of   claimed
    circumstances, and then only raised her current claim  when  all  other
    avenues  failed,  indicated  that  her  current   claim   of   familial
    persecution was a last-minute fabrication to avoid removal from the UK.

12. The respondent commented on the letters dated 2 March 2016  and  1  May
    2016.  They were written on plain, unmarked paper and could  have  been
    written by any person at any time in Pakistan and posted to  her.   The
    March 2016 letter referred to several previous letters, but she had not
    supplied these. At the start and at the end of the May 2016 letter, the
    author has expressed his wish for her  continued  wellbeing.   In  that
    regard, the letter did not read as a culmination of several acrimonious
    letters demanding her return so  that  she  might  be  persecuted.   No
    threats were made against her in either of the two letters.   The  tone
    and content of the letters was inconsistent with  her  claim  that  her
    life was under threat.





The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-Tier Tribunal

13. At the hearing before Judge Manyarara, the appellant was represented by
    Mr Islam of City Link Solicitors.  Ms Chopra  of  Counsel  appeared  on
    behalf of the respondent.  At paragraph [6] of her subsequent decision,
    the Judge noted  that  the  documents  before  her  included  a  bundle
    provided by the appellant's  representatives  on  the  morning  of  the
    hearing, consisting of 199 pages.  There was also a  witness  statement
    in the name of the appellant's father-in-law.  The Judge received  oral
    evidence from the appellant and her father-in-law,  and  she  expressly
    noted oral evidence from the appellant  that  she  was  suffering  from
    depression.

14. At paragraphs [51] following, the Judge gave her  reasons  for  finding
    that the appellant was not at risk of a forced marriage at the hands of
    her father and brother, and that she would  not  be  a  lone  woman  on
    return to Pakistan.  The Judge repeated an  earlier  finding  that  the
    appellant had a supportive family of  in-laws  who  retained  links  to
    Pakistan. She held that the appellant  was  very  much  part  of  their
    family; and she did not accept that the appellant would be left to fend
    for herself in Pakistan.

15. The Judge found at paragraph [69] that there  was  no  suggestion  that
    those who remained in Pakistan on her  husband's  side  of  the  family
    would not be willing to assist her.

16. The Judge addressed a private life claim at paragraphs [76]-[84].   The
    Judge noted the  appellant's  evidence  that  she  was  suffering  from
    depression.  She took into account the fact that she was not  receiving
    any treatment for a mental health condition, and was not receiving  any
    specialist input, which one would expect (she said) if  her  functional
    limitations were as a result of  any  mental  health  problems  of  the
    nature and level described.  There was no indication of any referral to
    psychotherapy, professional help from Social Services, a Key Worker,  a
    Support Worker, a community nurse or mental health  team,  which  would
    suggest a more serious mental health condition.  This suggested to  her
    that any mental health condition was mild and would  not  significantly
    affect the appellant's functional abilities.

17. The Judge went on to dismiss the appeal on all grounds raised.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

18. City Link Solicitors Ltd settled lengthy grounds of appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.  They raised a number of  disparate  grounds,  the  first  of
    which related to an adjournment application which had been made  orally
    at the hearing.  They pleaded that the Judge had refused to grant  such
    an adjournment, and had failed to make any  finding  in  her  decision.
    They pleaded that her refusal to accede to the adjournment request  was
    erroneous in law, citing Nwaigwe (Adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
    00418 (IAC).

19. The appellant had sought to present further evidence to the Tribunal in
    support of her appeal, "which [was] not available at the  date  of  the
    hearing, including evidence of her risk in Pakistan and evidence of her
    mental health condition."  Although the Judge inspected the appellant's
    medication  at  the  hearing  -  without  making  a  finding   in   her
    determination - she had failed to grant  an  adjournment  and  she  had
    failed to give any reasons  for  her  refusal.   So  her  decision  was
    unfair.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

20. On 7 August 2017, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         It is an arguable error of law that the Judge  misdirected  herself
         in not giving any reasons why she refused the  adjournment  request
         to allow the appellant  more  time  to  bring  evidence,  including
         mental health evidence.  Reference was made to the case of  Nwaigwe
         (Adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) where  fairness  is
         the test to be applied.   Had  the  request  been  granted,  it  is
         arguable that it may have made a material difference to the outcome
         or to the fairness of the proceedings.

The Rule 24 Response

21. On 18 August 2017, a member of the Specialist Appeals Team settled  the
    Rule 24 response opposing the appeal. The response was sent out on  the
    same day.  He pleaded that it was of note that no evidence  or  witness
    statement had been served to evidence that an  adjournment  application
    was in fact made on the day  of  the  hearing.   Equally,  the  grounds
    failed to identify whether "the missing evidence" that was  subject  of
    the alleged application in March had now been obtained, or whether  the
    said evidence materially affected the appeal.  It was for the appellant
    to evidence that the application was made; the  basis  upon  which  the
    application was pursued; and the prejudice suffered.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

22. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Melvin applied at the outset of the hearing for an adjournment.
     Mr Islam had passed away, and he had been instructed to represent  the
    appellant last week.  He had been instructed via an  intermediary,  not
    by City Link Solicitors Ltd.  The appellant and her father-in-law  were
    in attendance, but it was difficult for him to  get  instructions  from
    them without the assistance of an interpreter.

23. I refused to grant an adjournment, having  regard  inter  alia  to  the
    history of the claim and the fact that the appellant had shown  herself
    in the past to be a competent litigant in person. I understood from  Mr
    Melvin that Mr Islam had not passed away recently (i.e. in the last few
    weeks), and I considered that objectively there had been ample time for
    the appellant to instruct someone else to appear on her behalf; and for
    the new representative to take instructions from her  on  "the  missing
    evidence" that was the subject of the adjournment application in March.
     I took into account that no  adjournment  request  had  been  made  in
    advance of the hearing. In addition, as I informed the representatives,
    I  was  able  to  ascertain  from  the  Judge's  manuscript  record  of
    proceedings  that  she  had  taken  a  contemporaneous  note   of   the
    adjournment application.  Accordingly, I was satisfied that  proceeding
    with the error of law hearing would not be unfair.

24. On the resumption of the hearing after a short adjournment,  Mr  Melvin
    submitted  that  the  Judge's  failure  to   record   the   adjournment
    application in her decision, or to record her reasons for refusing  it,
    was fatal.  He submitted that it had to be unfair for  the  adjournment
    request not to be mentioned at all.

Discussion

25. I accept that Mr Islam made an application for an  adjournment  at  the
    outset of the hearing before Judge  Manyarara.   So,  the  first  issue
    raised in the  Rule  24  response  falls  away.   I  am  not,  however,
    persuaded that  the  Judge  did  not  give  reasons  for  refusing  the
    adjournment request at the hearing, nor is it clearly asserted  in  the
    grounds of appeal that she did not do so.  The complaint in the grounds
    of appeal is essentially three-fold: (a) the Judge did not mention  the
    adjournment request in her determination; (b) she did not give  in  the
    determination her reasons for not acceding to the adjournment  request;
    and (c) her refusal of the adjournment request deprived  the  appellant
    of a fair hearing.

26. The Judge erred in not referring to the adjournment request, and in not
    stating in her promulgated decision her reason or reasons for  refusing
    it.  But, I do not consider that these errors in  themselves  undermine
    the fairness of the proceedings.

27. It is apparent from the Judge's manuscript note that Mr Islam began  by
    apologising for the late service of the appellant's  bundle,  and  then
    announced that further documents were awaited.  These were letters from
    the appellant's father, which were in the process of being  translated.
    He also made reference to two witnesses, but it is  not  clear  whether
    this was said in parenthesis (he went on  to  call  two  witnesses)  or
    whether he was saying there were two additional witnesses whom he would
    wish to call to give evidence on a subsequent occasion. If the  latter,
    there is no indication as to who they were, or what they were going  to
    say.  The  grounds  of  appeal  refer  to  additional  documents,   not
    witnesses, and  so  I  consider  that  if  calling  evidence  from  two
    additional witnesses was in contemplation at the outset of the hearing,
    it was no longer in contemplation by  the  time  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal were settled.

28.  There  is  no  reference  in  the  judge's  note  of  the  adjournment
    application  to  the  appellant  suffering  from  depression,  and   no
    suggestion of an adjournment being sought to  obtain  medical  evidence
    pertaining to the appellant's mental health.

29. Counsel for the respondent opposed the application, submitting that the
    appellant and/or her representatives had had ample time to prepare  for
    the hearing, and that the adjournment request came far too late.

30. Although the Judge does not record her ruling, I infer that at the very
    least  she  indicated  to  the  parties  that  she  was  refusing   the
    adjournment  request  for  the  reasons  given  by  Counsel   for   the
    respondent.

31. The question which remains is whether the refusal  of  the  adjournment
    request deprived the appellant of a fair hearing. The burden rests with
    the appellant to make out a case that the refusal of an adjournment was
    unfair.

32. I consider that the grounds fall very far short of disclosing  a  prima
    facie case of unfairness. Firstly, with  regard  to  "evidence  of  her
    mental health condition",  I  am  not  persuaded  that  an  adjournment
    request was made. But even if it was, the grounds fail to specify:  (a)
    what the appellant's asserted mental health condition was; and (b)  the
    evidence about her mental health condition which was not  available  at
    the date of the hearing, but which has become available subsequently.

33. The bundle of documents served on the day of  the  hearing  included  a
    witness statement from the appellant, which was signed  by  her  on  14
    March  2017.   The  witness  statement  contained  no  mention  of  her
    suffering from any mental  health  problem.   As  is  recorded  in  the
    decision of the Judge, the appellant gave oral  evidence  of  suffering
    from depression. However, no case on the significance of the  appellant
    having depression appears to have been advanced at the hearing, and  it
    is certainly absent from the grounds of appeal.  I also note that there
    is no error of law challenge to the  findings  made  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraph [82] on the appellant's evidence that she was suffering  from
    depression.  On the available evidence, the Judge held that any  mental
    health condition that the appellant suffered from was  mild  and  would
    not significantly affect her functional abilities.  It is  not  pleaded
    that the appellant's mental health condition was in fact  significantly
    worse than that apprehended by the Judge, and that the  effect  of  the
    refusal of the adjournment was to deprive her  of  the  opportunity  to
    produce evidence of this.  In the absence of such a pleaded case, it is
    not arguable that, had the alleged request been granted, it might  have
    made a material difference to  the  outcome  or  the  fairness  of  the
    proceedings.

34. The other category of evidence which is said to have been not available
    at the date of the hearing was evidence  of  the  appellant's  risk  in
    Pakistan.  Again, there is the failure to be specific about the  nature
    of such evidence.  In the absence of a pleaded case as to  the  precise
    nature of the evidence in question, and confirmation of its  existence,
    the grounds do not disclose a prima facie or arguable case that  -  had
    the request for an adjournment been granted -  it  might  have  made  a
    material difference to the outcome or the fairness of the proceedings.

35. Moreover, if there  was  in  existence  at  the  date  of  the  hearing
    untranslated letters from the appellant's father, or any other material
    bearing upon the issue of risk  on  return  upon  which  the  appellant
    wished to rely, it is reasonable to expect such material to  have  been
    identified and produced  by  now.   The  appellant  received  a  formal
    education in Pakistan. As the respondent observed at paragraph [43]  of
    the refusal decision, she had proved herself to be an articulate person
    who was well able to make her case to the authorities, as  demonstrated
    by her own statement of grounds to the Home Office on 7 December  2015.
    Mr Islam's request for an adjournment  would  have  been  made  on  the
    appellant's instructions. She would have known  if  she  had  found  or
    received further letters from her father. Against this background,  the
    sad passing of Mr Islam does not give rise to a reasonable  excuse  for
    the  non-production  of  any  further  material  encompassed   by   the
    adjournment request.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 19 October 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



