
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01043/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2021                           |On 2 March 2021               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     SH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A S Islam of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He appealed to  a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  27
    January 2020 refusing his protection claim.  The appeal  was  dismissed
    by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in a  decision  dated  26  August
    2020.

2.   Little need be said about the judge's decision  in  the  circumstances.
    It was common ground between Mr Islam and Mr Walker that the judge  had
    erred in particular as set out at ground  1,  in  misunderstanding  the
    background material concerning a particular element of the  appellant's
    claim.  He had claimed to be at risk from the Peshmerga in the IKR, and
    the judge had concluded  from  the  evidence  that  the  Peshmerga  was
    divided and controlled separately by the two main parties, the KDP  and
    the PUK.  However, the background evidence provided to the judge showed
    that the risk to the appellant came from the internal  security  forces
    in the IKR rather than being simply a risk from the PUK.  As was argued
    in the grounds,  the  appellant  was  at  risk  on  the  basis  of  the
    documentation  provided  from  the  Ministry  of  Peshmerga  which  had
    influence and power throughout the IKR.

3.   I agree with the joint submission that has made in this regard.   There
    is therefore a material error of law by the  judge  in  conflating  the
    evidence with regard to the military presence on the  ground,  and  the
    extent of re-making the decision is such that it will have to  be  done
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  I direct that there be a full rehearing of
    this appeal at a face to face hearing  in  Birmingham  before  a  judge
    other than Judge Chohan, with a three hour time estimate and a  Kurdish
    Sorani interpreter.

4.   An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 12th February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
