
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01975/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2018                            |On 15 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                    MR BK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Walker, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a national of Iran whose date of birth is  [  ]  1996.
    The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 August
    2016 and claimed asylum on 23 August 2016.  He claims he left Iran on 7
    October 2015, was fingerprinted  twice  on  his  journey,  latterly  in
    France on 1 December 2015.  He did not claim asylum in Greece or France
    and travelled from France to the UK clandestinely.  On 23  August  2016
    he had an initial screening interview and his asylum interview was held
    on 23 January 2017.  The  basis  of  his  claim  is  that  the  Iranian
    authorities suspect him of supporting the KDPI

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's claim for asylum on  9  February
    2017.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    respondent's decision.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. In a decision promulgated on 24 July  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wylie dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The Tribunal  did  not  accept
    that the appellant's evidence that he was sought by  Ettela'at  due  to
    his political activities.  The Tribunal did not find the  appellant  to
    be a witness of truth and was not satisfied that the appellant would be
    at risk of serious harm on return to Iran.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 23  October  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

Submissions

 6. A skeleton argument was submitted at the hearing and the arguments were
    amplified by Ms Walker in oral submissions. Ground 1 sets out that  the
    Tribunal's approach to the documentary evidence amounted to a  material
    error of law. In relation to this ground of appeal the appellant's case
    is that the letter from the KDPI forms the starting point of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning.  It is submitted that the  letter  was
    considered in isolation rather than considering it in then  context  of
    the appellant's account and the objective evidence as set out in  Ahmed
    (Tanveer) (documents unreliable  and  forged)  [2002]  UKIAT  439.   At
    paragraph 65 the judge finds that the letter is not reliable - this  is
    her first finding.

 7. Ms Walker submitted that the letter forms the focal point of the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision.  This was only one piece  of  evidence  which
    arrived late. There were four points to consider regarding the  letter.
    The country information guidance as  to  how  such  letters  should  be
    retrieved was referred to by the judge.  The procedure as  set  out  at
    paragraph 7.4.1 is very consistent with what  occurred  in  this  case.
    She referred to the guidance and submitted that the only distinction is
    that the document was faxed to the  appellant's  legal  representatives
    rather than the Home Office as set out in the guidance.  The  appellant
    did not realise that it should go to the Home  Office.   The  appellant
    set out his representative's fax number on the letter.

 8. The second point was that the judge at paragraph 63 set out that no one
    knew of the  appellant's  involvement  except  his  cousin  which  goes
    against the evidence given by the appellant.  At paragraph  44  of  his
    witness statement the appellant gave an explanation as to how his  name
    was known, four men knew his name. The person he approached  was  known
    through his cousin which suggests that the cousin was an integral  part
    of the contact to obtain the letter and that the appellant's  name  and
    identification was known at that point.

 9. The third point at paragraph 64 of the decision that the  judge  failed
    to consider the documentary evidence  in  total.   There  was  the  fax
    number of the solicitors in the letter to the KDPI and the  letter  was
    sent back by fax as indicated on the top of that letter.  The appellant
    gave evidence to that effect.  Those three factors taken  together  are
    sufficient to demonstrate that the correct procedure was  followed  and
    that the appellant's details would have been known by the  KDPI.   Even
    if the judge placed no weight on the letter the appellant's case  could
    still be made out.

10. Ground 2 asserts that  at  no  point  does  the  judge  deal  with  the
    substance of the case and has failed to give adequate  reasons.   There
    were only two inconsistencies  identified  by  the  judge,  namely  the
    arrest warrant and the letter.  Those two factors on their own fall far
    short of being sufficient to say that the appellant's  evidence  should
    not be believed.  There was a lack of reasoning as to how the judge had
    arrived at the decision in paragraph 67.

11. At paragraph 66 the judge states that there had been an arrest  warrant
    she would have expected him to declare it at  an  early  stage  in  his
    claim. The appellant has given a consistent account  that  the  Iranian
    authorities are interested in him. In his asylum interview at  q37  the
    appellant made it clear the authorities had raided his house and at  86
    said he feared arrest  by  the  authorities.  The  judge  has  unfairly
    focused on a semantic point.

12. At paragraph 68 the judge  simply  adopts  wholesale  the  Home  Office
    submissions.  The judge  did  not  engage  with  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant.  She  referred  to  the  appellant's  evidence  of  the  men
    bringing materials from Iraq to Iran which would be a good reason as to
    why the meetings took place in Iran.  The judge failed also to consider
    the appellant's case, that he had never asked where the  meetings  were
    as his job was simply to arrange a place for the meetings.  With regard
    to the judge's comment that there seems no reason why  the  KDPI  would
    arrange meetings between Iraqis and Iranians in Iran rather than in the
    safety of Iraq no allowance is made for the fact that such matters  are
    beyond the knowledge of UK decision makers. The appellant was not asked
    in cross-examination how the two men were able to  pass  from  Iraq  to
    Iran.  There are many possible reasons why this may have been the case.



13. With regard to the judge's statement that there seems no reason why the
    appellant could not have fled to his wife and other family in Iraq  the
    judge ignored the appellant's answer which was that he would  not  have
    rights in Iraq, would not be allowed  to  enter  or  to  stay  and  the
    authorities might find it easier to find him across the border.  It  is
    submitted that Iraq is clearly not deemed a  safe  country  for  asylum
    purposes and so it is a fundamentally  flawed  approach  to  expect  an
    asylum seeker to have sought refuge there.

14. Ground 111 assets that the judge has failed to make  adequate  findings
    of fact.  The appellant gave a detailed account of his  experiences  in
    his asylum interview and in his other evidence.  The appellant has been
    completely consistent throughout with regard to  his  account  of  what
    happened in Iran.   The  decision  simply  does  not  engage  with  the
    appellant's core  account  of  his  experiences.   The  judge  did  not
    consider the account in the round and does not state  any  reasons  for
    not believing the appellant's account.

15. Mr Walker submitted that the judge was clearly  aware  of  the  correct
    approach to the documentary evidence setting out evidence  setting  out
    at paragraphs 52 and 53 the principles in Tanveer Ahmed and Karanakaran
    v SSHD [2000] EWCA Civ 11. The judge finds at paragraphs 63 and 64 that
    there is no receiving fax number on the  document  which  is  accurate.
    There was no translation of the letter sent to Paris.  The  interpreter
    gave a rough translation.  At paragraph 63 the judge  was  entitled  to
    consider that the letter did not mention the appellant's cousin at  all
    and that the only way that the KDPI would be aware of the appellant was
    through his connections with his cousin who was a member of KDPI.   The
    fax number for the solicitors was incorrect  as  it  omitted  the  last
    digit so it is not clear how the document  could  have  been  faxed  to
    them.

16. At 7.4.1 of the guidance it makes it absolutely clear that the document
    will never be sent to an appellant in person.  The fact that it went to
    his legal representatives (if that is in fact correct given the judge's
    concern that there was no receiving fax number and the fax sent had  an
    incorrect number on it)  makes  no  difference  because  the  document,
    according to the guidance, would only  ever  be  faxed  to  the  asylum
    administration in the country in question.  The KDPI in Paris would  be
    well aware of the UK's Home Office fax number.   The  findings  on  the
    judge on the lack of provenance were open to the judge on the  evidence
    before  her  at  the  hearing.   The  previous  hearing  was  adjourned
    specifically to obtain this evidence.

17. In reply Ms Walker submitted that the fact  that  the  letter  did  not
    mention the cousin is not conclusive because there  were  two  ways  in
    which the KDPI could have known about the appellant's cousin outside of
    the letter.  The two letters make it clear where they  came  from.   It
    was confirmed in the hearing that the  document  was  received  by  the
    legal representative.  It is difficult to see what the inconsistency is
    or that are being referred to at paragraphs 62  to  67.   It  does  not
    clearly state what they are.

Discussion

18. The judge set out the appellant's case from paragraphs 15 to 30.  These
    paragraphs are  fairly  detailed  and  set  out  the  elements  of  the
    appellant's account.   At  paragraph  52  in  relation  to  documentary
    evidence the judge indicated that  she  had  applied  the  guidance  in
    Tanveer Ahmed, that she  must  look  at  the  documents  in  the  round
    together with  the  rest  of  the  evidence  and  that  the  burden  of
    demonstrating the reliability of the documents rests on the  appellant.
    At paragraph 53 the judge set out that in making findings of  fact  she
    must consider the evidence in the round referring to Karanakaran v SSHD
    [2000] EWCA Civ 11 and that throughout the assessment  she  must  apply
    the lower standard of proof.

19. At paragraph 55 the judge commenced consideration  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.

20. She set out in paragraphs 59 to 61 the appellant's account of obtaining
    the membership letter and his attempts to obtain a letter from the main
    office in Kurdistan.

21. At paragraph 62 the judge set out:

         "62. There are inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence.  Having
             regard to the Country Information and Guidance, section 7, the
             organisation   has   members,   sympathisers   and    friends.
             Verification carried out by the KDPI through the Paris office,
             ask the party headquarters in KRI to investigate, and then the
             Paris office issues a letter of recommendation.

         63.  Given his evidence that no-one knew of his involvement  except
             his cousin and  the  four  persons  at  the  meetings,  it  is
             difficult to understand how the party in KRI would be able  to
             identify him as a  supporter,  without  his  cousin's  details
             being provided.  The letter requesting the information (in the
             rough translation the Tribunal was given by  the  interpreter)
             did not mention the cousin at all.

         64.  There is nothing on the document to show where this letter was
             sent, nor anything to show where the letter headed  KDPI  with
             the Paris address was sent.

         65.  In the absence of such information, and as  the  procedure  is
             not as set out in the Country Information and Guidance, I give
             this letter little weight.  I do not accept that  this  letter
             is reliable evidence supporting the appellant's case."

22. I do not accept that the judge's approach to this evidence was  flawed.
    I also do not  accept  that  the  judge  considered  this  evidence  in
    isolation or as the starting point. In fact the first issue the  judge,
    at paras 55-57, set out was the interview evidence regarding the arrest
    warrant. The analysis of the membership letter  must  be  read  in  the
    context of the proceedings. The appeal  was  adjourned  part  heard  in
    order for this document to be obtained. This  is  a  document  obtained
    considerably late in the day. The judge set  out  in  some  detail  the
    problems with the provenance of  the  document  and  why  she  attached
    little weight to it. I do not consider that this is  a  decision  where
    the judge has reached findings with regard to the document in isolation
    when the decision is considered as a whole.

23. The judge referred to  the  screening  interview  and  the  appellant's
    answer to the question if he had any additional documents that he might
    have. The answer was "my  membership,  a  letter  of  support  for  the
    opposition party".  The judge at [56] noted that the appellant did  not
    say that there was an arrest warrant outstanding, having described  the
    problem as his being as a supporter of the Kurdish Democratic Party and
    that the government had found out.  At [57] the judge noted that he did
    not say there was an arrest warrant in his asylum  interview  and  that
    the first mention of this was in his witness  statement  signed  on  15
    March 2017.  The judge noted that under  cross-examination  when  asked
    what he meant by 'I have my membership' he  denied  that  he  had  said
    this.

24. The judge then made findings on the arrest warrant issue:

         "66. Had there been a warrant outstanding for his arrest,  I  would
             have expected him to have declared this at an early  stage  in
             his asylum claim, rather than in the  statement  prepared  for
             the appeal hearing.

         67.  With these inconsistencies, I do not  accept  the  appellant's
             evidence that he was sought  by  Ettela'at  due  to  political
             activities."

25. It is clear at paragraph 67 what  the  inconsistencies  were  that  the
    judge was referring to. There were numerous  inconsistencies  regarding
    the provenance of the membership document and  failure  to  mention  an
    arrest warrant in interview. The judge was not focused  on  a  semantic
    point. A reference to the Iranian authorities being interested  in  him
    does not give rise to an inference that there is an arrest warrant.

26. However, I have concerns with the judge's findings below:

         "68. I agree with the submissions of Ms Ellis that there  seems  no
             reason why the PDKI would arrange meetings between Iraqis  and
             Iranians in Iran, rather than in  the  safety  of  Iraq.   The
             appellant had said  that  his  cousin  could  not  enter  Iran
             because of his membership of KDPI, but gave no explanation how
             the other two Iraqi men were able to do so."

27. It was argued before me  that  there  are  many  possible  reasons  why
    meetings may have been held in Iran. The judge records at paragraph  20
    the appellant's evidence of the men bringing  materials  from  Iraq  to
    Iran which would be a good reason as to why the meetings took place  in
    Iran. It was  argued  that  the  appellant  was  not  asked  in  cross-
    examination how the two men were able to pass from Iraq  to  Iran.   It
    does not appear from the decision  that  the  appellant  was  asked  to
    explain these matters. They appear be relevant to and form part of  the
    basis for the judge's rejection of the appellant's account.

28. The judge considered:

         "69. Further, there seems no reason why the appellant, if  in  fear
             of Ettela'at, did not cross the border to the safety of  Iraq,
             where he could join his wife and other family  members  rather
             than make the expensive, lengthy and difficult journey to  the
             United Kingdom."

29. The appellant's grounds argue that the judge  ignored  the  appellant's
    explanation which was that he would not have rights in Iraq, would  not
    be allowed to enter or to stay and the authorities might find it easier
    to find him across the border.  Whilst the judge  might  have  rejected
    those assertions she does not appear to have taken the explanation into
    consideration at all in  finding  that  there  is  no  reason  why  the
    appellant could not go to Iraq. This might not go to the  core  of  the
    judge's rejection of the appellant's account but  it  could  well  have
    been a  further  factor  the  judge  took  into  account  in  assessing
    credibility.

30. Given the requirement for anxious scrutiny of asylum claims  I  am  not
    confident that the judge has engaged sufficiently with the  appellant's
    account and whilst she might have rejected his explanations it  is  not
    clear that they have been considered.

31. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

32. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

33. I considered whether any findings could be preserved. I do not consider
    that it would be feasible to do so. I remit the case to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the case to be heard de-novo at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at Hatton Cross before any judge  other than Judge Wylie   pursuant  to
    section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA. A new hearing will be  fixed
    at the next available date.

Notice of Decision


There was a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  decision.  The
decision is set aside. The case is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal   at
Hatton Cross before any judge  other than Judge Wylie  pursuant  to  section
12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 18 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

