
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/01665/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 June 2017                           |  On 15 June 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                              mr akhtar sultan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 5  November  1984.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum  on  27  August  2015.
    The basis of his claim as  set  out  in  the  screening  interview  and
    substantive interview is that he had problems from 2009 because he is a
    Sunni Muslim and his girlfriend was a Shia Muslim.  He wished to  marry
    his girlfriend but her family were very opposed to  that  proposal  and
    threats were made to the Appellant on the telephone  between  June  and
    October 2009 following which  towards  the  end  of  the  year  he  was
    physically attacked in the street by his girlfriend's brother and  some
    of his friends which required stitches.   The  Appellant  continued  to
    receive telephone threats despite changing his  phone  number  and  his
    father arranged for him to leave the country.  It would not  have  been
    possible for him to relocate internally because his girlfriend's family
    were influential and had contacts with Shia organisations.

 2. The Appellant in fact came to the United Kingdom as a student  arriving
    in March 2010 and he applied for further leave as a  student  and  only
    made his asylum application when those applications were  unsuccessful.
    The Respondent refused his claim for  asylum  in  a  decision  dated  5
    January 2016 and the Appellant appealed  against  this  decision.   His
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot for hearing  on  23
    December 2016.  At the hearing there was no appearance  either  by  the
    Appellant or  a  representative  on  his  behalf.   The  judge's  clerk
    telephoned  the  Appellant's  solicitors  and  was  informed  that  the
    Appellant was not well and a letter would be faxed to the Tribunal.   A
    letter was duly faxed on 23 December 2016 which states:

         "Please note we  have  been  informed  that  our  client  has  been
         admitted to the hospital due to panic attack,  anxiety  and  severe
         stress.  We have been  provided  with  hospital  medical  documents
         whereby he is referred by a doctor to the rapid access  chest  pain
         clinic.  We have been instructed that our client will be unable  to
         attend the hearing today on 23 December 2016.  Please also note  we
         have no instructions to attend the hearing.  We therefore have been
         instructed to request to adjourn the hearing listed for 23 December
         2016 as our client still wishes to give oral evidence."

 3. Attached to the covering letter was a discharge summary from  Northwick
    Park Hospital dated 22 December 2016 which records that  the  Appellant
    had arrived or presented at the hospital at 15:26 on  22  December  and
    had been discharged at 18:07 on  the  same  day.   The  basis  for  his
    presentation was that he had left-sided chest pain  in  his  left  arm,
    however his ECG showed no dynamic changes or acute ischemia and it  was
    considered it was caused by stress and panic attacks.

 4.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot  considered  the  request  for  an
    adjournment at [3] and [4] of his decision and noted in fact that there
    had been a previous adjournment on 1 September 2016 essentially on  the
    same basis that the Appellant had attended A & E on 30 August 2016 with
    the presentation of chest pain and had been discharged.  The judge held
    at [4]:

         "After careful consideration and taking into account the  interests
         of justice and the provisions of the Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,  I
         refused the adjournment request for the following  reasons.   There
         is no evidence of any chronic medical condition.  It  appears  that
         the chest pain occurs shortly  before  a  court  hearing.   If  the
         hearing was adjourned again, there is nothing to reassure  me  that
         it would not happen again.  I also note that the  previous  episode
         had in fact occurred not on the hearing day but two days previously
         and had settled spontaneously after  20  minutes  so  it  does  not
         adequately explain the Appellant's failure to attend that  previous
         hearing.  On this occasion, the Appellant had  been  discharged  at
         6pm  on  the  day  preceding  the  hearing.   Again  there  was  no
         indication that he was unfit to attend on 23.1216.  I  can  see  no
         justification  for  adjourning  the  matter  again  and   have   no
         confidence that he would attend on any future date."

 5. The judge then proceeded to consider the asylum appeal and  to  dismiss
    it on the basis, inter alia,  that  at  [16]  the  Appellant's  account
    lacked detail and there was in inherent implausibility  in  his  story.
    At [17] he provided no corroboration for  his  claim  and  at  [18]  "I
    conclude that the Appellant's claim is wholly  unreliable.   I  do  not
    accept the core of his account.  I do not accept that he  received  any
    threats or that he was physically attacked and I do not accept that  he
    genuinely fears return."

 6. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  made
    in time.  The grounds in support of the  application  stated  that  the
    judge  failed  to  apply  the  relevant  Rule   governing   adjournment
    applications  and  wrongly   refused   the   adjournment   application.
    Reference was made to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC):

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

 7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Page on  28  April  2017  on  the  basis  that  the
    argument that  the  judge  unfairly  refused  the  application  for  an
    adjournment merited full argument.

Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    Appellant.   I  requested  my  clerk  to  telephone   the   Appellant's
    representatives, Pride Solicitors, to whom the hearing notice had  been
    sent and they produced a fax  dated  6  June  2017  which  provides  as
    follows:

         "We are writing regarding the above-mentioned appeal hearing listed
         for hearing.  Permission  was  granted  to  our  client.   We  have
         instructions by our client to  request  the  respected  Immigration
         Tribunal to proceed to determine the matter on the available bundle
         and the grounds submitted for permission to appeal.   We  contacted
         our client on 5 May 2017 but unfortunately we did not get  response
         by him.  We received another court direction notice on 22 May 2017.
          We updated our client but we did not get further instructions.  We
         do not have instructions to attend the hearing.  We are  submitting
         a copy of the  grounds  of  appeal  and  a  bundle  for  the  court
         records."

 9. Mr Tufan appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.   He  sought  to
    rely on the Rule 24 response dated 11 May 2017 which provides that  the
    judge used his discretion to refuse the Appellant an adjournment.   The
    judge had taken into consideration what had happened in respect of  the
    previous hearing and had come to  the  conclusion  that  that  was  not
    coincidental, which was a finding open to him and that  the  judge  had
    acted fairly.

10. Mr Tufan submitted with regard to Nwaigwe (op cit)  that  fairness  did
    not require an adjournment to be given in this case  in  light  of  the
    multiple failures by the Appellant to appear.  He also sought  to  rely
    on  Practice  Direction  9.4  of  the  Practice  Directions   for   the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier and  Upper  Tribunals
    dated 13 November 2014.  At [9] of the  Practice  Direction,  which  is
    concerned with adjournments, provides that any application which is not
    made at least one clear working day before  the  hearing  requires  the
    attendance of the party or a representative  seeking  the  adjournment.
    He submitted that in light  of  the  failure  by  the  Appellant  or  a
    representative to appear and in light of the history of this case  that
    the appeal should be dismissed.

Findings and Reasons

11. The Appellant's solicitors did not request that the hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal be adjourned but rather that it  be  determined  on  the
    basis of the papers.  There is an unfortunate history of non-appearance
    by both the Appellant and his representatives in the pursuance  of  his
    asylum appeal and I do take that into account when considering  whether
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot materially erred in law in failing  to
    adjourn the appeal that came before him on 23 December  2016.   I  have
    concluded that there is no material error of law in his decision.   The
    judge took full account of the history and the fact that there had been
    a previous application for an adjournment which  was  successful  on  1
    September 2016 based on the Appellant's attendance at A  and  E  on  30
    August 2016 with the presentation of chest pain.  The judge  took  into
    account the medical  evidence  submitted  to  him  in  the  form  of  a
    discharge summary from Northwick Park Hospital of 22 December 2016  and
    was entitled to find that whilst that provided an explanation  for  the
    fact that the Appellant had been suffering from panic attacks,  anxiety
    and stress it did not explain why he did not  attend  the  hearing  the
    following day.  I further find that the  judge  was  entitled  to  find
    that, in light of the particular history, there  was  no  justification
    for adjourning again and that he could  have  no  confidence  that  the
    Appellant would attend on any future date.  That unfortunately  remains
    the position at the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal.   For  whatever
    reason the Appellant appears unwilling to attend the Tribunal in  order
    to pursue his appeal.  In these circumstances, taking full  account  of
    the decision in Nwaigwe (op cit) I do not find that  fairness  demanded
    on the particular facts of this case that it was necessary  to  adjourn
    the appeal for the Appellant to give oral evidence.

12. Whilst the grounds of appeal seeking permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal did seek to challenge the substantive findings by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal permission to appeal was expressly not  granted  on  that
    basis and therefore the findings of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot
    stand.  I find no error of law in his  decision  and  consequently  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 14 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



