
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01740/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2019                                |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                 NATNAEL [Z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Masih of Counsel, instructed by Tann Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fox promulgated on 1 August 2018, brought with  permission  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle on 4 September 2018.


2.   The issue before the Upper Tribunal today is essentially  a  procedural
    issue and in the  circumstances  I  do  not  propose  to  rehearse  the
    personal  details  or  the  background  immigration  history   of   the
    Appellant.

3.   The Appellant failed  to  attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal listed on 22 June 2018.  Shortly prior  to  that  hearing  the
    Appellant's then representatives wrote to the Tribunal applying for  an
    adjournment.  I have before me two witness statements from a caseworker
    dated respectively 24 April 2019 and 1 May 2019.  The  deponent  speaks
    as to the circumstances  of  the  making  of  the  application  for  an
    adjournment and why it was made by way of letter sent  by  first  class
    post rather than by way of facsimile transmission.


4.   The Tribunal file - which was before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  -
    records the adjournment application letter as  being  received  by  the
    Tribunal only on the day before the  hearing.   The  evidence  suggests
    that the letter was posted on Friday 15 June 2018 and received  by  the
    Tribunal on the following Thursday, 21 June 2018.  In the circumstances
    the Tribunal file records that a decision was  made  not  to  grant  an
    adjournment, although necessarily the  Appellant  would  have  been  at
    liberty to pursue an application for an adjournment before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


5.   However, the Appellant did not attend  the  hearing,  and  neither  did
    anybody appear to represent his interests.  In the  circumstances,  and
    there being no apparent explanation for the non-attendance,  Judge  Fox
    proceeded to deal with the appeal on the basis of  submissions  only  -
    brief submissions were heard from the Respondent's  representative  who
    essentially relied upon the 'reasons for refusal' letter in the case.


6.   The Appellant's appeal was subsequently dismissed  on  all  grounds  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.


7.   The Appellant's challenge is one of procedural unfairness, premised  on
    an assertion that there had in  fact  been  a  communication  from  the
    Tribunal Service  to  the  Appellant's  representatives  ahead  of  the
    hearing indicating that the appeal was indeed  adjourned.   It  was  in
    reliance upon such communication that no  arrangements  were  made  for
    attendance or representation on 22 June 2018.  The  witness  statements
    from the caseworker is entirely consistent with this account and refers
    to telephone calls to the Tribunal's customer services.


8.   Mr Mills on behalf of the Respondent, having  had  the  opportunity  to
    consider the witness statements, indicated that  he  did  not  seek  to
    dispute  the  facts  alleged,  and  was  content  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant's representatives - for whatever  reason  -  had  received  a
    communication from the Tribunal that was understood  to  indicate  that
    the appeal had been adjourned.


9.   I do not propose to go behind that concession, and  accordingly  accept
    it.

10.  In the circumstances I find that the Appellant was given to  understand
    from the Tribunal Service that his appeal had been adjourned, and  that
    is  the  explanation  for  his   non-attendance.    The   circumstances
    constitute procedural unfairness, such that there is a  material  error
    of law. In consequence the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox is
    set aside.


11.  The decision in the appeal should now be remade before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox with all
    issues at large. Further to  discussions  with  the  representatives  I
    issue the following Directions:


                                 Directions

         (i) The  appeal  should  not  be  relisted  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal before 1 July 2019.

         (ii) All such evidence as the Appellant seeks to rely  upon  should
         be filed and served by 17  June  2019  in  a  consolidated  bundle,
         indexed and paginated.

         (iii) The Tribunal is to arrange for an interpreter in Amharic.


Notice of Decision

12.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated for material  error
    of law and is set aside.


13.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox with all
    issues at large.


14.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 14 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
