
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01724/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 26 August 2021                        |On: 3 September 2021          |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     GST
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was Microsoft Teams. A face to  face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
refusing his asylum and human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 27 July  1981.  He  claims  to
have arrived in the UK on 3 January 2008. He claimed  asylum  on  4  January
2008 but then absconded until 5 December 2008. His asylum claim was  refused
on 9 December 2011 and his appeal against that  decision  was  dismissed  by
the First-tier Tribunal on 9 February 2012. He  was  refused  permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal and he became appeal  rights  exhausted  on  24
May 2012. He made further submissions on 31 July 2013 which were refused  on
15 April 2015 and then further  submissions  on  19  June  2018  which  were
refused on 26 June 2018 as not amounting  to  a  fresh  claim.  Following  a
challenge to that latter decision in a judicial review claim the  respondent
agreed to withdraw the decision and make a new decision in  the  appellant's
claim, which she did on 28 January 2020. That decision  is  the  subject  of
these proceedings.

By way of background I refer back  to  the  appellant's  appeal  before  the
First-tier Tribunal on 24 January 2012, where his claim was set out  in  the
judge's decision promulgated on 9 February 2012. The appellant's  claim  was
that he had lived in Sudan between the ages of 4 and 13 on  account  of  the
war in Eritrea and to have been called up to do military service in  Eritrea
at the age of 19. He completed 2 weeks military service  and  then  went  to
university before  completing  his  military  service  by  working  for  the
government health department as  a  laboratory  technician  in  a  hospital,
supervising  3  graduates.  He  claimed  to  have  been  introduced  to  the
Pentecostal Christian religion by a doctor  at  the  hospital  and  to  have
become a Pentecostal Christian  in  2004.  He  married  in  April  2005.  In
December 2006 he attended at another health centre for an assessment with  3
graduates but one escaped and fled Eritrea and he was held  responsible  for
the escape and was accused of having helped him escape. He was  arrested  on
24 December 2006 and detained in prison where he was questioned and  beaten.
He managed to escape on 20 February 2007 and he walked  to  Sudan  where  he
stayed with an uncle before travelling to Libya, Italy, France and then  the
UK. He feared returning to Eritrea because he was Pentecostal Christian,  an
escapee from detention and someone who had exited the country illegally.

The judge, Judge Gordon, did not accept the appellant's  account  of  having
been detained and escaped, she did not accept his claim  to  have  converted
to Pentecostal Christianity and she did not accept that he had left  Eritrea
illegally. She concluded that he had completed his military service or  been
exempted from it and that it was very likely that he had left  Eritrea  with
an exit visa. She did not accept that he was at any risk on return  and  she
dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The respondent relied upon the judge's adverse findings in her  decision  of
28 January 2020 and rejected the appellant's claim to have converted to  the
Pentecostal Christian religion, to have deserted the army and to  have  left
Eritrea illegally. The respondent did not accept that  the  appellant  would
be viewed as a draft evader on return to Eritrea and did not accept that  he
was at risk on return. It was not accepted that  his  removal  would  breach
his human rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before  the
First-tier Tribunal on 27 October 2020 and was heard by Judge Sullivan.  The
appellant was not legally represented before  the  judge.  The  judge  heard
from the appellant as well as from his friend, MT and she  also  had  before
her an expert report from Professor Kibreab. The judge did not  accept  that
the appellant had converted to the Pentecostal Christian  religion  and  did
not accept that he would be at risk of persecution on religious  grounds  in
Eritrea. She did not accept that the appellant  had  told  the  truth  about
being arrested in December 2006 or about the circumstances of his  departure
from Eritrea and she did not accept his account of having been detained  and
of escaping from custody in February 2007. She was not  satisfied  that  the
appellant would be regarded in Eritrea as an escapee from prison custody  or
as a person who had fled Eritrea to avoid  national  service,  she  did  not
accept that he had left Eritrea illegally and she did  not  accept  that  he
would be at risk on return as a failed asylum seeker or on any other  basis.
She accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had erred in  her  treatment  of  the
expert evidence, by failing to consider relevant factors  and  applying  too
high a standard of proof;  that  she  had  taken  an  unlawful  approach  to
plausibility; and that she had erred in her approach to  section  8  of  the
Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.

Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal and  the  matter
came before me.

Mr Chakmakjian advised me that Mr Walker was in agreement that the  decision
contained a material error of law and had to be set aside,  in  relation  to
the challenge set out in the first part of ground 1. That challenge  related
to Judge Sullivan's decision at [23(e)]  whereby  she  declined  to  make  a
finding on a critical issue as a result of  not  having  a  previous  asylum
decision letter before her. That in turn related to [20] of the decision  of
9 February 2012 where Judge Gordon, in the earlier asylum  appeal,  rejected
as lacking in credibility the appellant's  account  of  having  walked  from
Eritrea to Sudan  in  light  of  country  information  relied  upon  by  the
respondent in the reasons for refusal  decision of  9  December  2011.  That
country information was  disputed  and  undermined  by  the  expert  country
report of Professor Kibreab, but Judge Sullivan, despite treating  Professor
Kibreab as an expert, declined to engage with the  matter  because  she  did
not have the 9 December 2011 reasons  for  refusal  letter  before  her.  Mr
Chakmakjian submitted that rather than declining to deal with  part  of  the
expert's report which challenged  a  critical  matter  relied  upon  by  the
respondent and the previous Tribunal, the judge ought to  have  requested  a
copy of the 9 December 2011 letter  so  that  the  matter  could  have  been
addressed. Mr Walker agreed with Mr Chakmakjian that  that  was  a  material
error which undermined Judge  Sullivan's  adverse  credibility  findings  in
relation to the appellant's journey from  Eritrea  and  which  infected  her
credibility findings as a whole.

Mr Walker agreed that, in light of  that  material  error,  and  considering
also that the appellant was  not  represented  before  Judge  Sullivan,  the
decision had to be set aside in its entirety and the matter remitted  for  a
completely  de  novo  hearing  before  another  judge,  with   no   findings
preserved.

In light of Mr Walker's concession, there is no need for me to set  out  any
detailed reasoning and I therefore set aside Judge  Sullivan's  decision  in
its entirety for the reasons given above and remit the matter to the  First-
tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing with no findings preserved.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard before any judge aside from Judge Sullivan.

      Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.





Signed:   S Kebede                                 Dated:      26 August
2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
