
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
pa/01974/2018

                                                pa/01963/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th June 2019                         |On 25th June 2019                  |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                           M W i (first appellant)
                            w i (second appellant)
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr I Khan, Counsel instructed by Westgate,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are father and daughter  and  citizens  of  Afghanistan.
    The first Appellant's spouse and two children (L, DOB 8th February 2001
    and T, DOB 6th August 2004) are dependants on the claim.  There is also
    a daughter who made a separate application which is not linked to  this
    appeal.

 2. Their appeals were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Black  in  a
    decision promulgated on 27th February  2019.   Grounds  of  application
    were made and permission to appeal was refused by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Murray in a decision dated 1st April 2019.   Those  grounds  were
    then renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  in  the  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McWilliam dated 7th May 2019 said the following: -

         It is arguable that the judge did not consider the  best  interests
         of the youngest children.  However, this is the only basis on which
         permission is granted.  The rest of the grounds are an  attempt  to
         reargue the case and a disagreement with the findings.   I  endorse
         the decision of FTT Judge Murray in this respect.

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me on the above date.

 4. Mr Khan appeared for the Appellants and submitted that there  had  been
    no assessment by the judge of the obligations arising under Section  55
    of the 2009 Act.  I was referred  to  the  Appellants'  bundle  and  in
    particular to page 8  in  paragraph  36,  where  it  was  said  by  the
    Appellant that he had been living in the UK with his  family  for  over
    five years and they had established a new  life.   His  daughters  were
    reluctant to return to Afghanistan.  They considered the United Kingdom
    as their home country.  The interference would  infringe  their  rights
    under Article 8 ECHR.  There was also further material for the  judge's
    consideration at pages 55, 56,  58  and  59.   In  particular  page  58
    referred to a letter in connection with the youngest  child  Tasal  who
    had an exceptional November report.

 5. Because the judge had failed to deal with  the  Section  55  point  the
    decision was not safe and it should be set aside and  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 6. For the Home Office Ms Jones said that the skeleton  argument  for  the
    Appellants produced at the hearing did not mention anything to do  with
    the best interests of the children.  There were no  witness  statements
    to support it.  Page 8 at paragraph 36 was not said to have any element
    in it considering the best interests of the  children,  which  was  the
    basis on which limited grounds had been given permission.  There was no
    error in law by the judge and the decision should stand.

 7. In response Mr Khan said that the Home Office's own guidance said  that
    Section 55 was an element that must be considered.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 Conclusions

 9. The judge's findings were clear enough (paragraph 20).  She found there
    was no agreement for the forced marriages of the  two  daughters.   She
    found there  had  been  no  Jirga.   She  found  that  the  Appellants'
    daughters faced no risk of arranged  forced  marriage  in  Afghanistan.
    She found that there was no risk  that  either  the  Appellant  or  his
    family would face retribution from the family of A or that they had the
    resources or interest to pursue them.  She did not  accept  that  there
    was any feud established or that the Appellant would face any dishonour
    from the tribe.  She found that the Appellant would  not  be  returning
    alone or as a single female.  She spoke Pashtu, was well-educated,  had
    a close and supportive family and an extended  family  in  Afghanistan.
    She could continue with  her  education  there.   There  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to her reintegration and she was able to move  to
    the UK from Pakistan with the support of her family.  She  was  now  an
    adult.  There was no evidence of  any  compelling  circumstances  which
    would justify her consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

10. She went on to dismiss the appeal.

11. There is a full refusal letter in  this  case  extending  to  some  100
    paragraphs.  In particular  there  is  a  section  headed  "Section  55
    Consideration".  The Home Office say they have considered the  need  to
    safeguard and promote  the  welfare  of  children  in  accordance  with
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act.  They took a number of factors into account
    and consideration was given  (paragraph  94)  to  the  children's  best
    interests.  In paragraph 95 the Home Office noted that it is a  general
    principle that children should be kept with  and  grow  up  with  their
    family in their own cultural identity where possible.  The  appropriate
    course of action was considered to be that the children  should  return
    to Afghanistan together with the Appellant.

12. The Grounds of Appeal lodged in response to the refusal letter made  no
    reference to the best interests of the children or  Section  55.   They
    refer in the final line that to return  the  Appellant  to  Afghanistan
    would breach Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR.

13. Before the First-tier Tribunal Counsel represented the  Appellants  and
    lodged a  skeleton  argument.   There  is  no  reference  to  the  best
    interests of the child under Section 55. The judge did not  record  the
    submissions made to her but it seems safe to conclude  that  there  was
    nothing further said about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  by
    Counsel who appeared for the Appellant.  It  might  have  been  thought
    that if this was a real issue that statements would  have  been  lodged
    and signed by the children but no statements have appeared.

14. In these circumstances it is difficult to see how the judge  has  erred
    in law in any way.  Were the issue to be a live  one  before  her  then
    Counsel for the Appellant would have presented an argument based on the
    school reports saying that they required to be carefully considered and
    that the best interests of the children lay in  remaining  in  the  UK.
    However, that argument was not made and it is difficult to see  how  it
    could have been made in the sense  that  it  is  clearly  in  the  best
    interests of the children that they stay with the Appellants and  their
    supporting family and also in the light of recent case law such  as  KO
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  It was not said the judge  was  wrong
    to conclude that there was no evidence of any compelling  circumstances
    which would justify her consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

15. The judge considered the issues that were put to her  and  was  plainly
    entitled to proceed as she did.   There  is  no  error  of  law.   This
    decision is therefore safe and must stand.







Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  This order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed    JG Macdonald                           Date 14th June 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald



