
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/01500/2019
                                                               PA/01502/2019
                                                               PA/01504/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 24th July 2019                             |On 07th August 2019          |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     BS
                                     AD
                                     MD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms G Wylie, a solicitor with Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first appellant is a citizen of Lebanon born  on  16th  July  1978.
    The second and third appellants were born respectively  on  5th  August
    2004 and 23rd November 2009.   The  second  and  third  appellants  are
    brother and sister and are the children of  the  first  appellant.   In
    this determination I shall refer to the first appellant as  being  "the
    appellant".

2.   The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  16th  September  2014
    with entry clearance as a visitor.  She was accompanied  by  her  three
    children including ZD who was born on 19th October 2000 and who is  now
    an adult and not, therefore, dependent on the appellant's appeal.

3.   The appellant originally claimed asylum on  18th  September  2014,  but
    that was refused by the respondent on 4th March  2015  and  her  appeal
    against that decision  was  dismissed  on  14th  July  2016  (reference
    AA/04814/2015).  However, the appellant presented  further  submissions
    to the respondent on 18th October 2016 and  again  on  18th  July  2017
    which were refused with no further right of appeal on 20th October 2016
    and 26th March  2018.   Further  submissions  were  then  made  on  3rd
    December 2018 which, although rejected, were accepted by the respondent
    as a fresh claim and form the basis of the subject matter of  a  appeal
    to the First Tier Tribunal.  The respondent's refusal letter was  dated
    23rd January 2017.

4.   The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Garratt
    sitting in Manchester.  He found that the fresh evidence which form the
    subject of the appellant's latest claim did not, for the reasons he set
    out in his determination, enable him to conclude that the appellant and
    her family were forced to leave Nigeria for the  reasons  she  claimed.
    He dismissed the appellant's appeals.

5.   The appellant, dissatisfied  with  the  outcome,  sought  and  obtained
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The basis of the asylum claim

6.   The appellant's claim is that her husband,  "J",  died  in  Nigeria  on
    18th February 2017 and documentation submitted to prove this event were
    considered by the respondent applying the guidance in Tanveer  Ahmed  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department* [2002] UKIAT  000349.   The
    respondent did not accept that the appellant's husband had died in  the
    manner claimed, because of inconsistencies.

7.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant relied  on
    documents  which  had  been  the  subject  of  experts'  reports.   The
    appellant relied  upon  a  police  report  from  Nigeria,  on  a  death
    certificate and on a declaration  of  family  registry  issued  by  the
    Lebanese authorities.  The judge considered the experts' reports in the
    round and concluded that the fresh  evidence  did  not  enable  him  to
    conclude that the appellant and her family had  been  forced  to  leave
    Nigeria, because of an attack or that the appellant's husband  had  now
    died.  He saw no reason to depart  from  cogently  argued  unfavourable
    findings of fact made previously by an earlier judge and concluded that
    if the appellant were returned to Lebanon with her  children,  who  are
    dependants on her claim, she would not be a lone woman who would be  at
    risk of serious harm as claimed and as detailed in  the  expert  report
    from Dr Joffe.  The judge was not satisfied that  the  appellant  would
    suffer  harm  and  dismissed  the  asylum  claim,  he   dismissed   the
    humanitarian protection claim and also dismissed the appellant's  human
    rights claims.

8.   The grounds of application for permission to appeal asserted:-

     - A failure by the judge to  give  sufficient  weight  to  the  expert
       evidence relied upon by the appellant to  prove  that  the  Nigerian
       police report, the death certificate of her husband and  the  family
       registration certificate were all genuine".

     -    At paragraph 40 of the  determination  the  judge  noted  that  Dr
       Amundsen had been supplied with a "diminished" copy of a document he
       examined, but that was, it was claimed, actually  incorrect  and  it
       was claimed tainted the judge's consideration  in  relation  to  the
       expert's independence and unbiased opinion.

     -    The judge notes various "errors"  in  the  police  report  and  he
       considers the expert's conclusion that the document  is  genuine  as
       "surprising".

     -    A Middle East and North African expert witness, Dr Fatah, examined
       the death certificate and  the  family  registration  documents  and
       concluded that both were likely to be genuine.

     - The judge erred  by  suggesting  that  Dr  Fatah  had  examined  the
       documents in copy form whereas in fact he examined the originals.

     - The judge noted various discrepancies in relation to the  documents,
       but Dr Fatah  acknowledged  these  and  nevertheless  considered  on
       balance that the documents hold the main characteristics of reliable
       similar documents issued by the Lebanese authorities.

     - It was asserted that the judge had erred in law by failing  to  give
       sufficient weight to Dr Fatah's  independence  and  unbiased  expert
       opinion.

9.   Ms Wylie expanded on her grounds and took me to various  parts  of  the
    judge's determination where, she claimed, he had erred.  The expert  Dr
    Fatah had not relied on copy documents, as the judge had  believed  and
    Dr Amundsen had not examined a "diminished" copy of  the  report.   For
    the respondent, Mr Tan suggested that the judge had not erred, but  set
    out various  anomalies  in  the  police  report.   Whether  the  report
    examined by Dr  Amundsen  was  a  diminished  report  or  not  was  not
    material, he suggested.  The judge noted that the expert had  found  an
    anomaly in the police report, in  that  the  telephone  number  in  the
    report was not viable.  The judge had considered the  experts'  reports
    in the round, along with other evidence as he was required to  do.   Dr
    Fatah himself noted an anomaly in the family registration document,  he
    noted that the appellant's husband's name had been crossed out  with  a
    red pen.  That  was  described  by  Dr  Fatah  as  being  "an  inherent
    weakness" of the document itself, nonetheless Dr Fatah  concluded  that
    the document  held  "the  main  characteristics  of  reliable,  similar
    documents issued by the Lebanese authorities".

10.  Mr Tan pointed out that the judge identified  various  anomalies,  some
    of which were not commented upon by Dr Amundsen in his report at  pages
    32 and 33 of the determination.  In closing, Ms Wylie asked me  to  set
    aside the determination and find it contained material errors  of  law.
    I reserved my determination.

11.  I think it important that I set out below  various  extracts  from  the
    determination which, is quite  detailed.   I  start  with  the  judge's
    consideration of the documentation at paragraphs 39 to 44:-

         "39. As to the claimed attack in Nigeria, the appellant produced  a
             police report with her further submissions of 26th March, 2018
             which has now been the subject of analysis by Dr Inge Amundsen
             whose report commences on page 191 of the bundle.  The  report
             is dated 12th September, 2018 and so it was not written  until
             after the respondent had  rejected  the  submissions  in  this
             respect made on 26th March, 2018.


         40.  The police report (page 287 of the bundle) was  only  examined
             in PDF format by the expert and he has supplied  a  diminished
             copy of the document he examined.  This is not as good a  copy
             as that appearing on page 287.   The  diminished  report  copy
             does not clearly show the parallel lines running down the left
             hand side of the  document  or  the  narrower  parallel  lines
             running across the top.  These lines are significant because I
             note that Dr  Amundsen  compared  the  appellant's  copy  with
             another Nigerian police document  which,  by  implication,  is
             thought to be authentic.  However the authentic  version  does
             not have the parallel lines across the top.   The  appellant's
             copy bears a date of 27th July, 2014 which is  not  positioned
             properly in the space provided at the  top  of  the  document.
             Further, it is not clear why the document,  if  produced  only
             about a week after the claimed attack, took so long to produce
             even though the appellant claims to have  had  it  in  Nigeria
             taking it with her to Lebanon.  If she took it  with  her  she
             clearly regarded it as important.


         41.  The police report appears to be addressed to an  'E.C.  Ogoji'
             stated to be the administrative manager  at  'SCN  Societe  de
             Compounage (Nig) Ltd'.  This is certainly not the name of  the
             appellant's husband who  is  referred  to  in  the  letter  as
             '[redacted]'.  There are also obvious grammatical and spelling
             errors in the letter including a  statement  that  '[redacted]
             went into a corona ...'.   Nevertheless,  in  that  respect  I
             accept that such  errors  might  appear  in  a  police  report
             written at  a  local  level.   None  of  these  matters  have,
             however, been referred to by Dr Amundsen who has described the
             police  report  as  'most  probably  genuine'.   I  find  this
             conclusion surprising not  only  because  of  the  absence  of
             reference to the matters to which I have referred but  because
             Dr Amundsen made investigations which revealed  the  telephone
             number in the report is 'not verifiable'.


         42.  It is also unclear how the expert  can  reach  the  conclusion
             that the letter was issued  by  the  stated  police  authority
             using 'proper official paper' when the  copy  police  document
             attached  to  the  report  is  clearly  a  photocopy  and  the
             'original' document examined was in PDF format.  Further,  the
             document used by Dr Amundsen for comparison purposes  is  not,
             actually, a police report but a press release drawn down  from
             the internet.   Its  provenance  as  a  reliable  document  is
             therefore suspect in any event.


         43.  In addition to my concerns about the quality  and  reliability
             of the expert report there are additional  inconsistencies  in
             its content which detract from its reliability at face  value.
             The report states that the incident took place at about  23.00
             hours when the appellant had earlier given evidence to say  it
             took place at 'about 7.30'.  The  appellant  had  also  stated
             that she was attacked when being driven in her  car  with  her
             husband and children but the police  report  infers  that  the
             attack took place at the  appellant's  home.   In  her  latest
             statement of 12th March, 2019 at  paragraph  5  the  appellant
             acknowledges but cannot  explain  why  there  are  differences
             between the content of the report and her account of events in
             Nigeria.


         44.  I  have  also  noted  that  the  appellant's  oldest  daughter
             [redacted] indicates in her statement  that  the  attack  took
             place in the family home which is similarly inconsistent  with
             the  content  of  the  claimed  police  report.   Despite  the
             supporting evidence of the daughter,  the  inconsistencies  in
             this report and the defects in the expert opinion lead  me  to
             conclude that the first judge  was  right  to  find  that  the
             attack did not take place.


         45.  I  now  turn  to  consider  the  supporting  evidence  of  the
             appellant's claim that her husband died in Nigeria as  claimed
             on a date in February, 2017.   The  death  certificate  and  a
             WhatsApp picture of the gravestone have  been  produced  along
             with a family registration document".


12.  At paragraphs 40 to 44 of the determination, the judge deals  with  the
    first expert's report and raises, as  Mr  Tan  pointed  out,  anomalies
    which Dr Amundsen has not considered.   It  is  not  clear  whether  Dr
    Amundsen was aware of the statement of the appellant's oldest  daughter
    ,or of the appellant's own statement as to the time and  place  of  the
    incident, but given these anomalies, I concluded  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to find as he did. He has examined carefully the report but he
    was required to look at the evidence in  the  round.   That  with  very
    great respect is what he did.

13.  At paragraphs 45 to 47 of the determination, he deals  with  the  death
    certificate and the family  registration  document.   I  set  this  out
    below:-

         "45. I  now  turn  to  consider  the  supporting  evidence  of  the
             appellant's claim that her husband died in Nigeria as  claimed
             on a date in February, 2017.   The  death  certificate  and  a
             WhatsApp picture of the gravestone have  been  produced  along
             with a family registration document.


         46.  The death certificate along with  the  declaration  of  family
             registration has been the subject of a  report  by  Dr  Fatah.
             Whilst examining the family registration document in copy form
             Dr Fatah noted  that  the  name  of  the  appellant's  husband
             [redacted] had been  crossed  out  with  a  red  line  with  a
             statement that he  died  on  18th  February,  2017  in  Lagos.
             Whilst the crossing out is according to an unnamed contact  of
             Dr Fatah's in Lebanon, a customary practice he states, 'it  is
             not possible to verify the strike through the  strike  through
             was made at the time of issue.  This is an  inherent  weakness
             of the document itself'.  Dr  Fatah  does  not  state  in  his
             conclusions that the document is genuine but  that  it  'holds
             the main characteristics of reliable, similar documents issued
             by the Lebanese authorities'.  I am not  satisfied  that  this
             expert report can assist me to conclude that the appellant has
             shown that her husband has actually died.   In  reaching  this
             conclusion I also take into consideration my further  comments
             about the death certificate and a picture  of  the  gravestone
             which follow.


         47.   Dr  Fatah  found  some  uncustomary  features  in  the  death
             certificate,  chiefly  the  identification  numbers   on   the
             document.  He concludes  that  the  document  holds  the  main
             characteristics of reliable, similar documents issued  by  the
             Lebanese authorities.  However, Dr Fatah is careful  to  state
             that no-one can confirm the authenticity of  documents  issued
             by the Lebanese authorities and  other  bodies  beyond  doubt.
             Significantly, there are other factors which have assisted  me
             to conclude that the death certificate cannot be relied  upon.
             The certificate is issued by the Lebanese General Consulate in
             Lagos,  Nigeria.   No  Nigerian  death  certificate  has  been
             produced.  The certificate itself states that it is based on a
             death certificate issued by the  Nigerian  local  authorities.
             If the Lebanese authorities at  the  consulate  inspected  the
             Nigerian death  certificate  then  I  am  surprised  that  the
             latter, or a copy, was not produced as first hand evidence  of
             the death.  In his report Dr Fatah  gives  no  explanation  of
             this unusual state of affairs but does observe, as I do,  that
             the death certificate does not refer  to  a  cause  of  death.
             This Dr Fatah comments is 'uncustomary'.  The  date  of  death
             given is 18th February, 2017 when the date  of  death  on  the
             gravestone as shown in the WhatsApp picture is 16th  February,
             2017.  I would expect both pieces of evidence to be consistent
             on  this  point.   The  name  on  the  death  certificate   is
             [redacted] but the name on translation on  the  gravestone  is
             [redacted but different].  I  would  also  have  expected  the
             official document to reflect the full name.  The appellant has
             acknowledged the discrepancy in dates but has  said  that  she
             cannot explain them".


14.   Given  what  the  experts  have  said  and  given  also  the   judge's
    consideration of all  the  evidence,  I  believe  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to find as he did in paragraph 48 that he could  not  conclude
    that the appellant and her family were forced to leave Nigeria  because
    of an attack, or that the appellant's husband had now died.

15.  I asked Ms Wylie if she could explain why, as the judge points  out  at
    paragraph 47 of the determination, that the certificate is based on the
    original death certificate issued by the Nigerian local authorities the
    original death certificate has not been produced and she said that  she
    could not explain.  The family  certificate  was  sent  to   her  by  a
    friend.  The judge actually said at paragraph 48:-

         "48. The fresh  evidence  which  has  formed  the  subject  of  the
             appellant's latest claim does not,  for  the  reasons  I  have
             given, enable me to conclude, even to the  lower  standard  of
             proof, that the appellant and her family were forced to  leave
             Nigeria because of an attack or that the  appellant's  husband
             has now died.  I bear in mind and accept that the first  judge
             found that the appellant did not have a dispute with  her  in-
             laws in Lebanon over arranged marriages for her daughters.   I
             can  see  no  reason  to  depart  from  the  cogently   argued
             unfavourable  credibility  findings  in  the   first   judge's
             decision.  This means that if the  appellant  is  returned  to
             Lebanon with her children who are dependants in her claim, she
             will not be a lone woman who would be at risk of serious  harm
             as claimed and as detailed in the expert report of  Dr  Joffe.
             Whilst Dr Joffe concludes  that  the  appellant's  claims  are
             consistent with the country situation that does not mean  that
             the  appellant  should  be  believed  when   the   significant
             inconsistencies in her evidence throughout do  not  show  that
             she is at real risk".

16.  I believe that the  judge's  treatment  of  the  experts'  reports  was
    scrupulously fair and very thorough.  He has, as Mr  Tan  pointed  out,
    expressed surprise at the conclusion of Dr  Amundsen,  because  of  the
    anomalies  that  the  judge  himself  has   found   and   because   the
    investigations made by the expert revealed that  the  police  telephone
    number in the report was not verifiable.  The appellant  has  not  been
    able to offer any explanation as to why the date of death given in  the
    documentation is  18th  February  2017,  whereas  the  picture  of  the
    gravestone shows the date of death being 16th February 2017.  Dr  Fatah
    himself identifies an inherent weakness in the death  certificate,  but
    given the judge's consideration of all the evidence  in  the  round,  I
    believe he was entitled to conclude as he did.

17.  The grounds assert that the judge failed to give sufficient  weight  to
    the expert evidence.  With very great respect, allegations that a judge
    fails to give "sufficient weight" or  gives  "too  much  weight"  to  a
    particular  piece  of  evidence  is  nothing   more   than   a   simple
    disagreement.  This judge did very carefully examine all  the  evidence
    and was entitled to conclude as he did.  The judge did  not  materially
    err  in  law  in  the  determination.   The  appellant's  appeals   are
    dismissed.


18.  An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

Dated 30 July 2019
