
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/01721/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 22nd December 2017                      |  On 20th February 2018        |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                    mr haetham hassan ahmed khalif kartt
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A N Janjua, instructed by   Morden Solicitors LLP
(Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant was born 14 November 1989 and is a  Palestinian  national
    born in Qatar. He appeals against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Loughridge dismissing his appeal against  the  refusal  of  his
    protection claim on human rights grounds on 10 May 2017.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the  UK  on  18  September  2015  and  claimed
    asylum on the basis that he was unable to return  to  Qatar  as  he  no
    longer had a sponsor and that he was unable to reside in Palestine.  At
    the commencement of  the  hearing,  the  judge  asked  the  Appellant's
    representative to  clarify  the  precise  issues  which  he  needed  to
    consider. It was explained that the only issue of risk to the Appellant
    was in relation to removal  to  the  Occupied  Palestinian  Territories
    (OPTs) in particular Gaza. Accordingly, this was an Article 3 claim  on
    the basis of the humanitarian situation in Gaza  rather  than  a  claim
    under the Refugee Convention.

3.   The judge concluded that the Appellant's case was an  unusual  one.  He
    refused to consider a  submission  that  the  Appellant  was  stateless
    because an application had not been made on that basis. The judge found
    that he needed to resolve the Article 3 claim in relation to  the  OPTs
    but not whether the Appellant would be permitted to enter and reside in
    Qatar or the OPTs.  He  found  that  those  issues  were  of  practical
    significance in terms of how the Respondent dealt with  the  Appellant,
    as well as in relation to any subsequent  claim  to  be  stateless.  He
    concluded that they were not issues he should resolve in the context of
    the asylum claim which had been put forward. The judge stated:  "Unless
    the Respondent is satisfied that the authorities in  Qatar  and/or  the
    OPTs will accept the Appellant, and process him in some way on arrival,
    and further in the case of the OPTs that  the  Appellant  can  actually
    make his way to those territories, no removal will take place.

4.   The judge heard submissions by the parties. There was no oral  evidence
    because it was accepted that the evidence in the Appellant's  statement
    was not challenged.  The judge made the following findings:

         "25. It should be remembered that  the  claim  under  consideration
         does not involve any assessment of  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
         expect the Appellant to be removed to somewhere he has never  lived
         and where he has no family contacts.  The sole issue is the  extent
         of any risk to him and, in broad terms, whether there is a risk  of
         serious harm. I am aware of the reference in Dr George's report  to
         children in Gaza dying of hyperthermia, but this type  of  risk  is
         not really relevant to the Appellant. I accept  that  his  life  in
         Gaza or the West Bank would not be at all  pleasant,  and  probably
         far less comfortable than in Qatar or Malaysia.  However, it is not
         a question of choosing where would be preferable and my  conclusion
         is that the risk of serious harm in the OPTs is at a low level."

         "26. For the above reasons I  find  that  on  the  balance  of  the
         evidence the Appellant has not established his claim of suffering a
         breach of his protected rights under Article  3  in  the  event  of
         removal to the OPTs."

5.   Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds that the judge erred  in
    his assessment of credibility  in  failing  to  determine  whether  the
    Appellant held a Palestinian passport.  Further  the  judge  failed  to
    take into account  the  expert  report,  background  material  and  the
    Appellant's witness statement, such that he had failed  to  direct  his
    mind to  the  relevant  issues  in  considering  the  risk  on  return.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro  on
    4 September 2017 on the basis that the grounds were arguable.

Submissions

6.   Mr Janjua relied on the grounds and submitted that  the  issue  in  the
    case  was  whether  the  Appellant  could  be  returned  to  Gaza.  The
    Appellant's expert report clearly  demonstrated  that  the  Appellant's
    passport meant that he was not able to enter the  OPTs.  The  Appellant
    held a passport starting with the prefix 000 which was  not  valid  for
    travel in and out of Palestine. The Appellant was not  entitled  to  go
    there. Mr Janjua accepted that statelessness was outside the  scope  of
    this appeal, but the judge in considering the risk  on  return,  should
    have made findings on whether the Appellant was entitled to  reside  in
    the OPTs and he failed to do so. This was  material  because  when  the
    judge came to consider risk  on  return,  he  failed  to  look  at  the
    Appellant's case in the round, including the fact  that  the  Appellant
    had no right to reside in the OPTs. The judge also failed to take  into
    account that the Appellant had disclosed in his asylum  interview  that
    he was not in good health, that he was taking sleeping tablets and  was
    suffering from lack of sleep. This had affected him psychologically and
    he had been seeing a psychologist.

7.    Mr  Janjua  accepted  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's mental health before the First-tier Tribunal and he did not
    know if the point was argued by the  Appellant's  then  representative.
    The point Mr Janjua made was that  the  judge,  in  assessing  risk  on
    return, had not only  failed  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
    ability to enter the OPTs,  but  had  not  considered  the  Appellant's
    evidence in the round. Had he done so he  would  have  found  that  the
    Appellant was at risk of treatment in breach of Article 3.

8.   Mr Tufan relied on paragraphs 3 and 18 of the decision in which it  was
    conceded by the Appellant's representative  that  the  only  issue  was
    whether the Appellant would be at risk of Article 3 treatment on return
    to Gaza.   He  submitted  that  there  was  no  need  to  consider  the
    Appellant's Palestinian passport. Mr Tufan relied on HS (Palestinian  -
    return to Gaza) Palestinian Territories GC [2011] UKUT 124 (IAC)  which
    states in the headnote:

         "(1) The Tribunal has jurisdiction  to  consider  practical  issues
             concerning the return of a Palestinian  family  to  Gaza.   GH
             [2005] EWCA Civ 1182 and HH  (Somalia)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  426
             applied.

         (2)  Palestinians from Gaza with passports (expired  passports  can
             be renewed via a straightforward procedure)  are  unlikely  to
             experience problems in obtaining  and,  if  necessary  getting
             extensions of, visas from the Egyptian  authorities  to  enter
             Egypt and cross into Gaza via the Rafah crossing.

         (3)  The conditions likely to be  experienced  by  Palestinians  in
             Egypt while awaiting crossing into Gaza are  not  such  as  to
             give rise to breach of their human rights.

         (4)  On the basis of the authorities: MA  [2008]  Imm  AR  617;  MT
             [2009] Imm AR 290 and SH [2009] Imm AR 306, it  would  not  be
             persecutory  or  in  breach  of   their   human   rights   for
             Palestinians to be refused entry to Gaza.

         (5)  The Tribunal does not  have  jurisdiction  to  decide  whether
             Israel has acted in breach of customary international  law  in
             respect of its treatment of Palestinians within  the  Occupied
             Palestinian Territories.

         (6)   The  conditions  in  Gaza  are  not  such  as  to  amount  to
             persecution or breach of the  human  rights  of  returnees  or
             place them in need of international protection."

    Mr Tufan submitted that the judge's failure to deal  with  whether  the
    Appellant had a right to reside in Gaza was not  a  material  error  of
    law.

9.   In response, Mr Janjua argued that it was clear from  paragraph  16  of
    the decision that the Appellant's  representative  submitted  that  the
    judge should look first and foremost at the expert report of Dr George.
    The Appellant had no right to reside in Gaza because his  passport  was
    not a full passport only a quasi  passport,  which  could  be  used  to
    travel to those countries that recognise it. Mr Janjua  submitted  that
    it was clear that the issue of whether the Appellant was able to reside
    in Gaza was argued before the First-tier Tribunal and the fact that  he
    had overlooked it amounted to a material error  of  law.  It  was  also
    clear from the Country Guidance case that the judge had jurisdiction to
    consider the practical issues concerning the return  of  a  Palestinian
    family to Gaza. Accordingly, the judge's conclusion that the  Appellant
    would not be at risk of Article 3 treatment on return was perverse.



Discussion and Conclusions

10.  The grounds contend that the judge failed  to  deal  with  whether  the
    Appellant  held  a  passport.  However,  it  would  appear   from   the
    submissions before me that the  Appellant  holds  a  valid  Palestinian
    passport and the  issue  argued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    whether the Appellant would be able to reside in Gaza on that  passport
    (paragraph 16 of the decision). The  judge  concluded  that  issues  of
    whether the Appellant could in practice be  removed  to  Qatar  or  the
    OPTs, and whether he was stateless, were not matters which fell  within
    the ambit of an  asylum  claim  (paragraph  27).  The  decision  of  HS
    predates the amendments to sections 82 and 84 of the 2002 Act.

11.  The Appellant's appeal was limited to an appeal against the refusal  of
    his protection claim and/or his human rights claim. The  Appellant  did
    not rely on the Refugee Convention or humanitarian protection. Nor  did
    he claim to be at risk of harm in Qatar. The  appeal  was  advanced  on
    Article 3 grounds only. It was submitted that the Appellant would be at
    risk of treatment in breach of Article 3 if returned to the OPTs.

12.  Credibility was not in issue in this appeal.  The  Appellant's  account
    was accepted as set out in his witness statement.  This is  clear  from
    paragraph 5 of the decision. The Appellant had not made an  application
    for leave to remain on the basis that  he  was  stateless  and  it  was
    accepted by the  Appellant's  representative  that  the  judge  had  no
    jurisdiction to consider this. The judge only had jurisdiction to  hear
    an appeal against the refusal of a protection claim, human rights claim
    or revocation of protection status.

13.  Whether the Appellant held a full or  quasi  Palestinian  passport  was
    not relevant to whether he would be at risk of serious harm  on  return
    to his country of nationality. His nationality was  not  disputed.  The
    Appellant's representative at the hearing agreed that  the  only  issue
    before the judge  was  whether  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    treatment in breach of Article 3 on return to the OPTs and particularly
    Gaza. The judge did not find that the Appellant  could  return  to  the
    OPTs. The judge found that the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  of
    serious harm or treatment in breach of Article 3 on return.  In  coming
    to this conclusion, the judge took into account the expert  report  and
    the background material at paragraphs 19, 20, 21,  24  and  25  of  the
    decision.

14.  The judge considered the humanitarian situation set out in  the  expert
    report of Dr George. He considered all relevant matters  and  concluded
    that the Appellant would not be at  risk  of  Article  3  treatment  on
    return to the OPTs. The judge's failure to make a  finding  on  whether
    the Appellant was entitled to reside in Gaza was not  material  because
    the issue was whether he would be at risk of harm on return. The  judge
    concluded that the Appellant was not at risk of serious harm or Article
    3 treatment in the OPTs. This conclusion was open to the judge  on  the
    evidence before him and he gave cogent reasons in his conclusions.

15.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's  decision  promulgated  on  10  May  2017  and  I  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 16 February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 16 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
