
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01726/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons          |
|                                          |Promulgated                 |
|On 21 December 2017                       |On 23 January 2018          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     HE
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shwenk, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson and
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. I make an  anonymity  direction  because  the  Appellant  has  made  a
      protection claim.



   2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Holt sitting at Manchester whereby his  protection
      claim had been dismissed.


   3. In a detailed and well set out  decision  the  Judge  dealt  with  the
      Appellant's claim that he had converted to Christianity before he  had
      left his home country of Iran. The Judge  concluded  at  paragraph  30
      that she was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  converted  to
      Christianity before he had left Iran.  She  also  concluded  that  the
      coincidence of the  House  Church  having  been  raided  just  as  the
      Appellant was about to leave Iran  was  simply  unbelievable.   Having
      come to that conclusion, the  Judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the
      Appellant's more recent activities and she noted  that  the  Appellant
      demonstrated quite  a  good  knowledge  of  the  bible  and  Christian
      doctrine. She also said that the Appellant had been able to persuade a
      Reverend from a Baptist Church to attend before her to give supporting
      evidence. She therefore held that the weight of the evidence suggested
      that the Appellant was a genuine and willing convert to Christianity.

   4. The Judge had considered various case law including Country  Guidance.
      She also applied the Supreme Court's decision in HJ (Iran) v Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31, [2011] 1 AC 596.  She
      had specifically referred to paragraph 82  of  the  judgment  of  Lord
      Rodgers,

           82 When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a well-
           founded fear of persecution because he is gay, the tribunal must
           first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he
           is gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential
           persecutors in his country of nationality. If so, the tribunal
           must then ask itself whether it is satisfied on the available
           evidence that gay people who lived openly would be liable to
           persecution in the applicant's country of nationality. If so,
           the tribunal must go on to consider what the individual
           applicant would do if he were returned to that country. If the
           applicant would in fact live openly and thereby be exposed to a
           real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded fear of
           persecution-even if he could avoid the risk by living
           "discreetly". If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that
           the applicant would in fact live discreetly and so avoid
           persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would do so. If
           the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose to live
           discreetly simply because that was how he himself would wish to
           live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to
           distress his parents or embarrass his friends, then his
           application should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do
           not amount to persecution and the Convention does not offer
           protection against them. Such a person has no well-founded fear
           of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing to do with
           any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of
           life which means that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted
           because he is gay. If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes
           that a material reason for the applicant living discreetly on
           his return would be a fear of the persecution which would follow
           if he were to live openly as a gay man, then, other things being
           equal, his application should be accepted. Such a person has a
           well-founded fear of persecution. To reject his application on
           the ground that he could avoid the persecution by living
           discreetly would be to defeat the very right which the
           Convention exists to protect-his right to live freely and openly
           as a gay man without fear of persecution. By admitting him to
           asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as a gay man
           without fear of persecution, the receiving state gives effect to
           that right by affording the applicant a surrogate for the
           protection from persecution which his country of nationality
           should have afforded him.



   5. Then the Judge concluded that in view of her  earlier  findings  about
      the untruths in respect of the conversion to Christianity in Iran  and
      about the "coincidence" in respect of the House Church  in  Iran  that
      the Iranian authorities could really only  ever  find  out  about  the
      Appellant's conversion if he told them.

   6. The Judge then said at paragraph 39 of her decision, "I therefore  ask
      myself would the appellant be likely to tell the authorities about his
      conversion or behave in such a  way  as  to  bring  himself  to  their
      attention  through  his  religious  behaviour?  Considering  all   the
      evidence about the appellant and his background, I find that there  is
      ample evidence in the way  that  the  appellant  came  to  the  United
      Kingdom and gave evidence about his background that I do not  find  to
      be remotely credible. I find this good evidence that he can  and  will
      dissemble when it suits him. I find he is confident  and  'streetwise'
      in behaving so as to promote his own private agenda. He has been  able
      to navigate French, Dutch and English culture without language  skills
      and with precarious immigration status." The  Judge  also  said  that,
      "...Linked to this is my noting that there is scant  evidence  of  the
      appellant  going  out  his  way  to  'evangelise'  other   people   or
      unnecessarily drawing attention to himself in a way likely to  attract
      the adverse attention of the Iranian regime".

   7. At the hearing before me, Mr Shwenk amplified the grounds  of  appeal.
      He submitted that the Judge had accepted the core  account  about  the
      Appellant's conversion to Christianity. The reference to the Appellant
      having to dissemble was fraught with difficulty. The Judge  had  found
      that the Appellant could lie about his conversion to Christianity. The
      reason the Appellant would lie is because he was a Christian. That was
      fraught with danger. The reason that the Appellant would lie would  be
      because the Appellant would fear adverse consequences.  There  was  no
      reason to hear any more evidence and I should allow the appeal.

   8. In his submissions Mr Bates said he agreed that the appeal concerned a
      narrow point, namely has HJ (Iran) been applied correctly?  The  Judge
      found that the Appellant was no  longer  loyal  to  Islam.  The  Judge
      rightly noted that she was forbidden  from  taking  into  account  the
      Appellant's  motivation  for  the  conversion  to   Christianity.   At
      paragraph 38 the Judge found that the  Appellant  could  live  openly.
      Perhaps paragraph 39 was not spelt out as clearly  as  it  could  have
      been, but the Judge was not saying that  there  was  no  fear  of  the
      authorities, but that Christianity is a difficult religion  to  follow
      in Iran. Harassment and dissembling is not persecution. There would be
      no unnecessary  difficulties.  That  would  not  therefore  amount  to
      persecution. HJ (Iran) requires the fear to be because of persecution.
      If the Appellant  chose  to  dissemble  then  it  would  be  for  non-
      persecutory reasons. The Appellant will not  evangelise.  He  will  be
      discreet  and  practice  his  religion  in  a  private  manner.  As  a
      consequence, no protection was required as the Appellant was  unlikely
      to draw the attention of the authorities in Iran.

   9. Despite the detailed and  well-prepared  decision  by  the  Judge  and
      despite Mr Bates' persuasive submissions, I conclude that there  is  a
      material error of law in the Judge's  decision.  I  do  so  with  some
      hesitation, but ultimately in my judgment  the  Judge  was  saying  at
      paragraph 39 of her decision that the Appellant could  lie  about  his
      conversion to Christianity. In my judgment, the only real reason  that
      the Appellant would  lie  about  his  conversion  would  be  to  avoid
      persecution and ill  treatment.  It  would  not  merely  be  to  avoid
      harassment. Although the death penalty for apostasy is rarely  carried
      out, there is no dispute that persecution of  a  serious  nature  does
      follow in apostasy cases in Iran.

  10. I have some sympathy for the Judge because the claim was multi-faceted
      with various issues arising out of what was alleged to  have  occurred
      in  Iran,  in  Europe  and  then  here  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but
      ultimately, I conclude that the expectation  of  the  Appellant  being
      able to lie his way out of difficulties (as he has apparently done  so
      many times before) went against the case law. The Judge dealt with the
      facts and the background and the evidence in a very  good  way.  There
      was specific reference to most of the relevant case law.

  11. The material error of law though is in respect of the  application  of
      HJ (Iran). Specific assistance as to the further interpretation of  HJ
      (Iran) was provided by the Supreme Court in RT (Zimbabwe) and others v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 38, [2013] 1 AC
      152. Lord Dyson with whom all of  the  other  Supreme  Court  Justices
      agreed said,


           26 The HJ (Iran) principle applies to any person
           who has political beliefs and is obliged to conceal them in
           order to avoid the persecution that he would suffer if he were
           to reveal them. Mr Swift accepted that such a person would have
           a "strong" case for Convention protection, but he stopped short
           of an unqualified acceptance of the point. In my view, there is
           no basis for such reticence. The joint judgment of Gummow and
           Hayne JJ in the Appellant S395/2002 case [2004] INLR 233
           contains a passage under the heading "'Discretion' and 'being
           discreet'" which includes the following, at para 80:


           "If an applicant holds political or religious beliefs that are
           not favoured in the country of nationality, the chance of
           adverse consequences befalling that applicant on return to that
           country would ordinarily increase if, on return, the applicant
           were to draw attention to the holding of the relevant belief.
           But it is no answer to a claim for protection as a refugee to
           say to an applicant that those adverse consequences could be
           avoided if the applicant were to hide the fact that he or she
           holds the beliefs in question. And to say to an applicant that
           he or she should be 'discreet' about such matters is simply to
           use gentler terms to convey the same meaning. The question to be
           considered in assessing whether the applicant's fear of
           persecution is well-founded is what may happen if the applicant
           returns to the country of nationality; it is not, could the
           applicant live in that country without attracting adverse
           consequences."


           27 I made much the same point in the HJ (Iran) case [2011] 1 AC
           596 , para 110:
           "If the price that a person must pay in order to avoid
           persecution is that he must conceal his race, religion,
           nationality, membership of a social group or political opinion,
           then he is being required to surrender the very protection that
           the Convention is intended to secure for him. The Convention
           would be failing in its purpose if it were to mean that a
           gay man does not have a well-founded fear of persecution because
           he would conceal the fact that he is a gay man in order to avoid
           persecution on return to his home country."


           28 In the context of religious belief, the United Nations High
           Commissioner for Refugees has said (in my view, rightly):
            " Applying the same standard as for other Convention grounds ,
           religious belief, identity  or way of life can be seen as so
           fundamental to human identity that one should not be compelled
           to hide, change or renounce this in order to avoid
           persecution": Guidelines on International Protection: Religion-
           Based Refugee Claims under article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention
           and/or Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees (2004), para
           13 (emphasis added).




  12. In my judgment it is not possible to uphold the  Judge's  decision  to
      dismiss the Appellant's appeal.  As  indicated  by  the  parties,  the
      appeal was on a narrow point. Having found a material error of law,  I
      remake the decision using the facts found by the Judge in  respect  of
      the genuine conversion to Christianity in this country. When  I  apply
      the decisions of the Supreme  Court  in  both  HJ  (Iran)  and  in  RT
      (Zimbabwe) I conclude that the only reason that  the  Appellant  would
      dissemble about his conversion to Christianity  would  be  to  protect
      himself from persecutory treatment. That ill treatment could  be  from
      the regime in Iran or non-state actors acting with relative  impunity.
      Although the Appellant would not evangelise, I do not see how he could
      live  discreetly  in  view  of  the  apparently  accepted   background
      material.

  13. I therefore allow the appeal on asylum grounds.




Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision contains a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.

I re-make the decision and I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed. A Mahmood                            23 12 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
