
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01462/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2017                            |On 16 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                  miss z  z
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Nollet, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Action
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Iran  born  on  7  September
    1985 who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of  the
    respondent dated 27 January 2017 to refuse the appellant's  asylum  and
    protection claim.   As  noted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Devittie,  who  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal   in   a   decision
    promulgated on 4 April 2017, the appellant had applied  for  a  student
    visa on 22 February 2009 which was refused with a right of appeal.   On
    21 April 2009 she made a further application for  a  Tier  4  (Student)
    Visa which was refused on 29 April 2009.  On 13 June 2012 she  made  an
    application for a family visit visa which she withdrew on 25 June 2012.
     On 18 December 2014 she applied for a student visa which  was  refused
    on 21 December 2014.  On 6 January  2015  she  applied  for  a  Tier  4
    (Student) visa which was voided on 7 January 2015.  On 29 July 2016 she
    arrived in the United Kingdom by plane and claimed asylum.

 2. The appellant appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  dismissal  of  her
    appeal on the following grounds (to the Upper Tribunal):-

    Ground 1 - erroneous approach to evidence in relation to previous  visa
    application;

    Ground 2 - erroneous approach to the medical evidence;

    Ground 3 - failure to make findings on  material  matters,  namely  A's
    claim of having joined a house church in Iran, her related  arrest  and
    detention and risk on return.

Error of Law

 3. Ground 1:  Ms Nollet submitted that the judge erred in his approach  to
    the appellant's previous visa and in basing  his  negative  credibility
    findings  on  the  fact  that  there  were  discrepancies  between  the
    appellant's claims in her  entry  clearance  applications  and  in  her
    asylum claim.  At [13(vi)] of the Decision and Reasons the judge  found
    that  the  appellant's  responses  were  generally  vague  and  it  was
    submitted that the judge failed to particularise what he  found  to  be
    vague in her evidence.  At [14] the judge found  that  the  appellant's
    explanation for the inconsistencies between her  previous  applications
    and her evidence several years later when she made the claim for asylum
    was  entirely   unsatisfactory   and   significantly   undermined   the
    credibility of her claim regarding  the  controlling,  Islamic-inspired
    and brutal behaviour of her father towards her.   Ms  Nollet  submitted
    that it was unclear how the evidence was so vague as to  undermine  the
    whole claim.

 4. At [16] it was submitted the judge noted erroneously that the appellant
    had spent two years at an  English  language  speaking  school  in  the
    United Kingdom, whereas she had spent two years in the  United  Kingdom
    from 2011 to 2013 and was not specifically asked how long  she  was  at
    the school.  Indeed it  was  noted  in  the  refusal  letter  that  the
    appellant did not assert that she could speak English and  nowhere  was
    it suggested in the Reasons for Refusal Letter that she did.  This  was
    not put to her at the hearing.

 5. Ground 2:   Ms Nollet submitted that the judge erred in her approach to
    the evidence, in particular the medical evidence and Ms  Nollet  relied
    on page A56 of the appellant's bundle, paragraph 6.4  of  the  expert's
    report, in that the scar was typical of this type  of  injury  and  she
    submitted that although the judge recorded that  an  accidental  cause,
    although possible, was less likely, the expert had said that  it  could
    not "be ruled out" and the error lay in the  judge's  approach  to  the
    level of consistency of the scarring.  At paragraph 7.1 of  the  expert
    report, at A56 of the appellant's bundle, the expert noted that overall
    the scars were typical of injuries caused in the manner  the  appellant
    describes.  However, I take into account that  the  judge  specifically
    recorded the expert's 'overall opinion' at [11]  of  the  Decision  and
    Reasons.

 6. Ground 3: It was submitted by Ms Nollet that although the judge  stated
    at [18] that he had regard to the evidence in the round, he had  failed
    to have regard to material evidence  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    claims to have joined a house church, in relation to her claims of  her
    arrest and detention and subsequently absconding from bail.  At [3(iv)]
    of the Decision and Reasons the judge recorded  the  appellant's  case,
    including that she fled her home and if returned to Iran she  would  be
    killed for converting to Christianity and fears that she  is  a  wanted
    person for failing  to  observe  the  conditions  of  her  release  and
    therefore it was submitted the  judge  was  aware  of  the  appellant's
    account.  It was submitted that the judge failed to resolve  a  dispute
    between the parties as to whether the appellant had been a member of  a
    house church and had been detained.  The  respondent  had  refused  the
    appellant's account including at paragraphs 28 and 29 of the refusal in
    relation to her claims as to being a member of a house  church  and  at
    paragraph 41 in  relation  to  her  claims  about  detention.   It  was
    submitted by Ms Nollett that the judge failed to have regard  to  these
    matters and failed to resolve the dispute, including that the appellant
    had responded to the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  in  the  witness
    statement, but this had not been resolved.

 7. It was further submitted that the appellant  had  been  asked  a  large
    number of questions, in the asylum interview, at [16]  in  relation  to
    her claims about the house church  and  at  [14]  in  relation  to  her
    detention,  whereas  she  had  not  been  asked  about   her   previous
    applications at all.  It was also submitted  that  although  the  judge
    made findings that the appellant's  evidence  was  generally  vague  in
    cross-examination in relation to her previous applications it  was  not
    identified what the difficulties were with  her  evidence  and  it  was
    submitted that the judge failed to take into account  the  totality  of
    the evidence.

 8. In relation to risk  on  return,  Ms  Nollet  relied  on  AB  &  Others
    (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257,  relying
    on the conclusions in that case from paragraphs 466 to  472.   Although
    it was  conceded  that  this  related  to  online  activity  Ms  Nollet
    submitted that in relation to the risk on return to Iran AB refers to a
    "pinch point of return".  Although a person returning  on  an  ordinary
    passport, after a short period of  time,  would  almost  certainly  not
    attract any particular attention at all,  where  a  person's  leave  to
    remain has elapsed and they might be travelling on a  special  passport
    there would be enhanced  interest  and  more  likely  the  authorities'
    interest could lead to  persecution;  it  was  found  in  AB  that  the
    authorities are not concerned with a person's motivation and it is  not
    relevant that the person had used the internet in an opportunistic way.
     Ms Nollet  submitted  that  this  was  analogous  to  the  appellant's
    circumstances.  Even if I was not with her in  relation  to  the  other
    claimed errors, taking the judge's decision at its highest, he ought to
    have considered risk on return,  given  that  the  judge  accepted  the
    pastor's evidence and accepted that she  attended  church  in  the  UK,
    albeit the judge found that her claim to be a Christian was  contrived.
    Ms Nollet submitted that she could not be asked to lie and  would  have
    to confirm that she did attend church in the UK.

Discussion

 9. It is not the case, reading the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as
    a whole, that the judge based his negative credibility findings  solely
    on the fact that there were several unsuccessful applications for leave
    to  enter  as  a  student,  which  contained  details  which   entirely
    contradicted the appellant's claim.

10. The First-tier Tribunal, at [14] of the Decision and Reasons, found the
    appellant's explanation for the inconsistencies  between  her  previous
    applications and her evidence several years later, when  she  made  the
    claim for asylum, entirely unsatisfactory.  The judge went on to  state
    that this undermined the credibility of the appellant's claim regarding
    the controlling, Islamic inspired and brutal behaviour  of  her  father
    towards her over the years.

11. The First-tier Tribunal went on to find, at [15],  that  the  appellant
    anchored her claim to have converted to Christianity on the strength of
    her father's conduct in general and in particular that  his  abuse  and
    controlling behaviour towards her was what led her to be  attracted  to
    Christianity.   However,  the  judge  found  that  the   unsatisfactory
    evidence the appellant had provided undermined her overall  credibility
    and  particularly  her  claim  that  she  was  a  genuine  convert   to
    Christianity.

12. Although the judge may have made a minor factual error in stating  that
    the appellant spent at least two yeas in an English  language  speaking
    school in the United Kingdom such is not material; it was not  disputed
    that she had spent time as a young teenager in the UK or that there was
    any error in the judge's findings that there was an indication  in  her
    application form that she was willing to be interviewed in the  English
    language.  The judge was entitled to reach the conclusion that he  did,
    that the appellant was not credible in her attempt to distance  herself
    entirely from the information contained in her  previous  applications.
    There was no material error in that approach.

13. The judge took into account, in  assessing  credibility,  that  between
    2009 and 2015 the appellant had made a concerted effort  to  get  entry
    clearance to the UK which did not succeed, the  last  such  application
    being shortly before her entry to the UK by unlawful means.  The  judge
    then took into consideration in the round, as a  separate  matter  from
    the contradictions between her applications and her evidence, the  fact
    that  the  appellant's  poor  immigration  history  gave  rise  to  the
    possibility the appellant, having again failed to gain lawful entry  to
    the United Kingdom, eventually resorted  to  formulating  a  claim  for
    asylum on entering the country illegally.

14. Although it was asserted that the judge's claim  that  the  appellant's
    evidence about her previous applications was "generally vague" was  not
    particularised, that is not borne  out  by  a  proper  reading  of  the
    decisions.  The judge went on to state "in most instances  she  claimed
    not to recall what had happened".  This must be read in the context  of
    the judge's recording, at [6(i-vi)], of the appellant's oral  evidence.
    For example, at [6(i)], the appellant is recorded as stating  that  she
    did  not  know  what  was  contained  in  the  application  after   its
    completion, that she did not complete the first application and she did
    not look at the form.  At [6(ii)] she was  recorded  as  not  recalling
    what documents she had  submitted,  at  [6(iii)]  she  is  recorded  as
    stating that she had not completed the application as she did not  read
    or write English and that she did "not  know  about  the  course".   At
    [6(iv)] she was recorded as stating she could not recall if  she  asked
    her uncle about a subsequent application and claimed that she  had  not
    discussed any details of the application nor provided  any  information
    and that she could not recall if she had  provided  any  documents  and
    that  she  had  not  assisted  her  cousin  in  preparing  one  of  the
    applications.  Her response at [6(vi)] was recorded in relation to  her
    cousin including specific details about an individual called Shafi whom
    it was indicated on her application was her spouse, whereas she  stated
    at the hearing that this individual was  her  online  tutor.   She  was
    unable to adequately explain why Shafi would  have  misrepresented  the
    facts by stating that they were living together when they were not  and
    she was recorded as stating that she  did  not  know  how  "he  got  it
    wrong".

15. The judge was entitled therefore to reach the findings he did  for  the
    reasons he gave, that the appellant's  responses  in  cross-examination
    were generally vague and that she  claimed  she  did  not  recall  what
    happened.  It was a matter for the judge what weight he attached to the
    evidence  and  it  was  open  to  him  to  find  these  answers  to  be
    unsatisfactory and that they significantly undermined  the  appellant's
    credibility, considered in the context of all  the  evidence  including
    her claims about her father and the fact that this  is  what  attracted
    her to Christianity, and in the context of the judge's  concerns  about
    her credibility  in  general,  including  ultimately  entering  the  UK
    illegally and claiming asylum.

16. It is  not  the  case  that  the  judge  considered  these  matters  in
    isolation.  As already noted the judge  set  the  medical  evidence  in
    considerable detail.  Any error in misdescribing the scar in  her  back
    as consistent rather than typical of a scar from  boiling  tea  is  not
    material.  The judge took all the medical evidence  into  consideration
    including recording the expert's conclusions at [11]  of  the  Decision
    and Reasons that the  overall  opinion  of  the  expert  was  that  the
    appellant's scars were typical of scars that  would  result  from  ones
    caused in the manner the appellant describes.  The  judge  went  on  at
    [18] to weigh the medical evidence and the evidence of the  pastor  who
    supported  the  appellant's  claim   in   relation   to   her   claimed
    Christianity.  Again there was no error in the  judge's  approach  that
    the medical evidence did not rule out an accidental cause for  scarring
    and that although the judge did not doubt the bona fides of the  pastor
    of the church and that the appellant's responses  to  questions  tested
    her knowledge of Christianity to a satisfactory level, having regard to
    all of the evidence in the round and the  "unsatisfactory  features  of
    her evidence" the judge was satisfied that this was of such force  that
    the appellant had failed to demonstrate to the lower standard that  she
    was a genuine Christian convert and was satisfied that  her  attendance
    at church and Bible lessons were contrived.

17. It is implicit in these findings therefore that the judge  did  resolve
    the conflicts in the evidence against  the  appellant;  the  judge  was
    evidently not satisfied that the appellant had been a member of a house
    church or that she had been detained and escaped.  The judge found  her
    credibility to be fundamentally undermined for the reasons he gave.

18. In relation to risk  on  return  the  appellant's  reliance  on  AB  is
    misconceived as this relates to internet activity.  Even if  this  were
    not the case, the appellant when asked on return to Iran, will  not  be
    required to lie as her answer can go no further than to  say  that  she
    was not a genuine Christian, as this is what has been found to  be  the
    case, and that she had submitted a contrived claim for asylum.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


As the First-tier Tribunal made  an  anonymity  direction  I  continue  that
order:


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  8 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson








TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and no fee award is made.

Signed                                  Date:  8 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


