
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01714/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 March 2018                               |On 27th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     ee
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Qureshi, Counsel, instructed by Synthesis
                  Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born in  1985.   She  seeks  to
    appeal against the decision of the respondent dated  21  January  2016,
    refusing to grant  her  asylum  and  other  protection  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

2.   The appellant contends that she is at risk on return from  the  actions
    of her husband and from her own father and brothers.   Further,  having
    now given birth to a small son and without other support she would be a
    lone woman returning to Pakistan and at risk of ostracism  and/or  ill-
    treatment under the country guidance case of SM  &  MH  (lone  woman  -
    ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067.

3.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom in January 2013 as  a  special
    visitor, for medical  treatment,  and  thereafter  remained  unlawfully
    until she was apprehended in 2014.  On 1  September  2015  she  claimed
    asylum which was refused by the decision now under challenge.

4.   Her appeal  was  originally  heard  and  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a decision of 3 October  2016.   An  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against that decision resulted in a finding in her  favour  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray, that  there  had  been  a  material
    error of law in that decision.  Thus the matter  was  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.

5.   That  hearing  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Spicer  on  1
    November 2017, resulting once again in her appeal being dismissed.

6.   It was the case as advanced on behalf of the appellant at that  hearing
    that in 2003 she had entered into an arranged marriage with a Mr SA,  a
    much older man than she.  It was an abusive relationship.  It ended  in
    divorce at the instigation of the appellant.

7.   Thereafter the appellant formed a relationship with a MA  who  was  the
    brother of SA.  Having become pregnant in or around  October  2010  she
    underwent a termination for fear that her situation would become  known
    to her family.  Unfortunately, news of her action spread to her family.
     The appellant did not know what happened to MA and fled to the  United
    Kingdom in January 2013 because of the risk to her life at the hands of
    her brothers, father and ex-husband.

8.   Whilst in the United Kingdom  the  appellant  entered  into  a  further
    relationship with   TA and has become pregnant.  She has given birth to
    a daughter.   TA is a Pakistani national who does  not  have  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  They meet  regularly  but  do  not  live
    together as a couple.

9.   The Judge in the determination considers the basis of  claim  in  great
    detail.  Though the marriage to SA was accepted as was the divorce,  it
    was the finding of the Judge that there was no basis upon which the ex-
    husband would bear ill-will towards the appellant and the evidence that
    he does so was not found to be credible.

10.  It was noted that the appellant had made an application to come to  the
    United Kingdom for medical treatment.  It was an application  supported
    by her father and she was to be accompanied by her mother.  It was  not
    accepted that she had fled her family for safety and it was  a  finding
    of the Immigration Judge that,  far  from  being  in  danger  from  her
    family, she had received constant support from it.

11.  The Judge considered the relationship with MA and did not find that  it
    had taken place nor  had  indeed  the  claimed  termination.   Overall,
    therefore, the Judge did not accept that there was any basis upon which
    the appellant should fear return and indeed the finding was  that  upon
    return she would be supported by her family.

12.   The  Judge  however  considered  the  alternative,  namely  that   the
    appellant could not return home and looked at the guidance in SM  &  MH
    (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067 and found that  the
    appellant would be eligible for help from the Choices Programme and  in
    particular could return to one of the  other  cities  in  Pakistan,  in
    particular Karachi.  It was noted the  appellant  remained  in  contact
    with TA and it was considered that he would be able to be supportive of
    her return both with help and financial support.

13.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that the Judge had given inadequate  consideration  to  the  background
    evidence as to risk of lone females with a child born out  of  wedlock,
    returning to Pakistan without family support and had failed  to  assess
    whether  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to   the   appellant's
    reintegration.  As to the adverse credibility findings, such were found
    simply to be argumentative.

14.  Thus the  matter  comes  before  me  in  pursuance  of  that  grant  of
    permission.

15.  Ms Qureshi relies upon the grounds of appeal as  submitted,  contending
    that the appellant would  be  at  risk  on  return  by  reason  of  her
    pregnancy.  She submits that the appellant ticks all  the  risk  factor
    boxes as set out in the case of SM.  She contends that  the  background
    country information does not support the Judge's  assumption  that  the
    appellant's father would accept her into the family  home  and  protect
    her.   In  the  event  it  is  contended  that  the  analysis  of   SM,
    particularly on the basis that the appellant would return  to  Pakistan
    as a lone woman, is fundamentally flawed and inadequate.

16.  Mr Walker, on behalf of the respondent, invites me to find  that  there
    is no error of approach, particularly in relation to the credibility of
    the account itself.  Although evidence has been presented to show  that
    there would be a lack of support from family in Pakistan  were  she  to
    return, there was evidence as the  Judge has indicated, that there  was
    a pattern of consistent support throughout the difficult  circumstances
    of her divorce.  There was no reason without  further  indication  that
    she would be at risk thereby.

17.  In terms of her return as a lone woman he submits that it was  entirely
    open to the Judge to note the nature of the relationship that  she  was
    having with TA did not exclude thereby his  support  of  her.   In  the
    event he submits the Judge had properly looked at the guidance in SM  &
    MH.

18.  At the heart of the appellant's claim is of course  her  fear  of  ill-
    treatment at the hands of her family were she  to  return  to  Pakistan
    with her small child.  Her ex-husband had very little to  do  with  her
    for many years after the divorce and indeed had little contact with her
    before.  The Judge found that he would have had no continuing  interest
    in her, adverse or not.  He also noted the appellant indicated that she
    remained in contact with her mother and that in those circumstances  it
    would have been entirely  possible  for  the  appellant  to  gauge  the
    attitude of her father and other family members to  her  situation  and
    circumstances, but no evidence has been presented as to that matter.

19.  Rather, reliance has been placed  upon  the  generality  of  background
    evidence rather than obtaining clear evidence from her  own  particular
    family one way or the other.

20.  It is fundamental to the determination that the basis  upon  which  the
    appellant has sought to come to the United Kingdom was not accepted and
    her  credibility  fundamentally  found  to  be  undermined.   In  those
    circumstances it is entirely appropriate to expect  there  to  be  some
    evidence as to the likelihood of family support or not.

21.  In terms of internal relocation as an alternative, there is some  merit
    in the contention that consideration of  return,  particularly  with  a
    young child, was inadequate, particularly  when  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant so far as TA was concerned was  that  although  there  was  a
    relationship it was not yet a committed one.  If such were to have been
    a case relying upon  internal  relocation  then  I  would  have  little
    hesitation in indicating that that matter should have  been  considered
    or reconsidered in greater detail.  However, that  is  the  alternative
    position adopted by the  Judge,  the  primary  one  being,  as  I  have
    indicated, that the appellant can return to her supportive family, even
    with a child out of wedlock.  The burden is upon the appellant to  show
    to the contrary, albeit to the lower standard, particularly  given  the
    circumstances of a significant delay in her making her  asylum  appeal.
    The Judge has given clear reasons for finding  that  her  claim  lacked
    credibility and that the circumstances of her having come to the United
    Kingdom spoke more eloquently of full family support than the contrary.

22.   In  those  circumstances  the  appellant's  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal shall be dismissed.  The findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    shall therefore stand, namely that the asylum claim is dismissed as  is
    that in respect of humanitarian protection or Article 8 ECHR.  Further,
    the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the
First tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal on all grounds is upheld.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                 [pic]                 Date 26th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD







