
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    PA/01849/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided, without a hearing, under    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|rule 34                              |                                     |
|                                     |On 30 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    A E W
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION and REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Grenada, now  aged  43.   On  18  January
    2018, the SSHD found that he was not entitled to asylum or humanitarian
    protection and maintained her decision to deport him.  He  appealed  to
    the FtT.  Judge Gaskell dismissed his appeal by a decision  promulgated
    on 3 February 2020.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT on 4 grounds, which
    in summary are as follows:

         (1)  error in finding the appellant not  entitled  to  humanitarian
         protection, because (i) there was no evidence that  the  individual
         (V) whom he feared was no longer alive or living in  Grenada;  (ii)
         Grenada is very small and has a population just over  100,000;  and
         (iii) there was no consideration of evidence that Grenada does  not
         have a military, and its police force is limited;

         (2)  error in taking the appellant's daughter C  to  be  an  adult,
         when she was 14 at the date of the hearing, and just 15 at the date
         of decision;

         (3)  incorrect approach to paragraph 398 of the rules - looking for
         very compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions, rather
         than aggregating all relevant matters; and

         (4)  reaching  no  conclusion  on  very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration into Grenada - the appellant's 25 years from age 17  in
         the UK, never having worked there, and having no family left there,
         were such circumstances.

 3. By a decision dated 11 and issued on 13 March  2020  FtT  Judge  Holmes
    granted permission, in these terms: ...

         It is arguable that the judge made a material error of fact  as  to
         the age of a child ... all of the arguments in relation to  article
         8(2) may be pursued.

         If there was an error of approach to  section  72  it  was  in  the
         appellant's favour.  Moreover the judge's comments about  the  lack
         of evidence concerning V's presence on the island, or his  appetite
         for any form of revenge ... given the passage of time were accurate
           Even if the appellant had been absent from the island since 1984,
         that was not the case in relation to his sister or his  grandmother
         and there was no evidence of pursuit of revenge against either.

 4. By a note and directions dated 3 and issued on  29  April  I  took  the
    provisional view that it would be appropriate to  determine  without  a
    hearing whether the making of the decision  of  the  FtT  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law and, if so, whether it  should  be
    set aside.

 5. In a response dated 13 May 2020, the appellant  submits  that  the  FtT
    made a material error about  the  age  of  the  child,  such  that  its
    decision should be set aside; that there should be a hearing to  decide
    those issues, by electronic means if necessary; and seeks "a  full  re-
    hearing before the FtT", with updating oral  and  written  evidence  on
    family matters.

 6. In a response dated 15 May 2020, the SSHD concedes that  the  error  on
    the age of C "materially affected the  proportionality  assessment  via
    the  application  of  the  unduly  harsh  test  and   very   compelling
    circumstances" and "does not object to that  portion  of  the  decision
    being set aside for remaking"; submits that there was no error  on  the
    protection claim; concedes material error in the  decision  on  whether
    the exceptions to deportation were established; and suggests  retention
    of the case "within the UT for remaking in due course,  limited  to  an
    assessment of s117C(4-6)".

 7. There is no reply from the appellant on the file.

 8. In all the circumstances, and in light of the concession by  the  SSHD,
    it is appropriate, consistently with rules 2 and 34, to decide on error
    of law, and on setting aside, without a hearing.

 9. The grant of permission did not extend to the findings  on  protection.
    In  any  event,  those  grounds  are  only  disagreement.   The   FtT's
    conclusions on protection disclose no legal error, and are preserved.

10. The FtT's error about the age of  the  child  is  so  material  to  the
    article 8 outcome as to amount to error on a point of law.   The  FtT's
    conclusions  in  terms  of  paragraph  398  of  the   rules,   and   of
    proportionality, are set aside.  (The error does  not  apparently  have
    anything to do with "very significant  obstacles  to  integration  into
    Grenada"; but to avoid any unnecessary complication, that aspect of the
    article 8 consideration is not excluded from fresh consideration.)

11. There is a presumption in favour of the UT remaking  the  decision,  as
    sought by the SSHD.  However, although the  remaking  is  limited,  the
    extent of the new evidence which the appellant is likely  to  tender  -
    see [4] of his submissions - and of the re-hearing  is  such  that  the
    course he seeks is preferable.  Under s.12 of the 2002 Act and Practice
    Statement 7.2, the case is remitted to the FtT  for  a  fresh  hearing,
    limited as above.

12. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Gaskell.

13. The date of this decision is to be taken as the date it  is  issued  to
    parties.

14. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which remains in place.


     [pic]
     UT Judge Macleman Date: 20 July 2020




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.
