
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals Number: PA/01779/2016
                                                               PA/01929/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th January 2018               |On 26th January 2018               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     AS
                                     IF
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Neil Kilcoyne &
                    Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. These appeals are brought against a decision by Judge  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Debra Clapham dismissing appeals on protection and human
      rights grounds.


   2. The appellants are nationals of Pakistan.  They claim they are at risk
      of persecution or serious harm in Pakistan because they are gay.   The
      appellants state that they are in a relationship with each other.   In
      addition, the first appellant claims to be at risk in Pakistan because
      of his involvement in a family dispute over land.


   3. The judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not find the evidence of  the
      appellants to be credible and was not satisfied that they are partners
      in a same sex relationship.


   4. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal.  At  paragraph
      4 of the grant it was pointed out that the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal appeared to  have  based  her  credibility  findings  on  her
      general assessment that the appellants' evidence was  "vague,  evasive
      and confusing."   The  judge  arguably  failed  to  give  examples  or
      specific reasons as to why aspects of the evidence were not  credible.
      The judge arguably did not give adequate reasons for  her  credibility
      findings and,  in  particular,  did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for
      rejecting the evidence of supporting witnesses.


   5. At the hearing before me Mr Caskie founded upon  paragraph  4  of  the
      grant of permission.  He pointed out that the Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal  heard  the  evidence  of  four  witnesses  altogether.   The
      findings made at paragraphs 117-128 of the decision were  vitiated  by
      errors.  The Judge had made one  positive  finding,  namely  that  the
      Secretary of State had not shown that the first appellant's TOIEC test
      result was obtained by fraud.  Mr Caskie nevertheless  submitted  that
      these were appeals in which remittal  would  be  appropriate  with  no
      findings preserved.


   6. Mr Matthews very properly did not seek to have the decision upheld.


   7. I am satisfied that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law
      by failing to  give  adequate  reasons  for  her  adverse  credibility
      findings.  Her decision is set aside.  The proper course, as Mr Caskie
      submitted, is for  the  appeals  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to be reheard before  a  different  judge  with  no  findings
      preserved.


      Conclusions


   8. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error of law.


   9. The decision is set aside.


  10. The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with  no  findings
      preserved  for  the  decision  to  be  re-made  before  a  differently
      constituted Tribunal.


      Anonymity


      No direction for anonymity was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As
      the appeals are to be reheard I consider  it  appropriate  to  make  a
      direction for anonymity to preserve the positions of the parties until
      the appeals are decided.  Unless or until a tribunal or court  directs
      otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
      identify the appellants  or  any  members  of  their  families.   This
      direction applies to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to
      comply with this direction may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans 25th January 2018

