
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01549/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24th January 2018                  |On 26th January 2018                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                    [M H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan (instructed by Morgan Dias Immigration
                  Consultants Ltd.)
For the Respondent:    Miss R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, in relation to  a  Decision  and  Reasons  of  Judge  Chana
    following a hearing at Bradford on 14th October 2016.   In  a  Decision
    and Reasons promulgated on 27th February 2017 the appeal was  dismissed
    on all grounds.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who claimed asylum on the basis that
    he would be at risk on account of his  father's  links  to  the  Ba'ath
    party and from ISIS.

 3. It was accepted by the Secretary of State that the Appellant  would  be
    at risk in his home area which was and remains a contested  area.   The
    single issue was internal relocation.

 4. The Judge found that the Appellant could relocate safely  to  the  IKR,
    that he could travel direct from Istanbul to Erbil and that his lack of
    documents was not a problem.

 5. All three findings are in error.  There was no consideration of how the
    Appellant could be accepted in the IKR, the evidence that the Appellant
    could travel direct from Turkey  was  not  evidenced  and  indeed  Miss
    Petterson confirmed that that route was not what the Secretary of State
    mooted (which was via  Baghdad).  Further  the  lack  of  documentation
    arguably should have been considered in detail and in the light of  the
    current Country Guidance case of AA (Article 15C) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT
    00544 (IAC).

 6. Miss Patterson accepted that the Decision and Reasons  was  tainted  by
    those material errors of law and should be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the  Decision
and Reasons is set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
for a full rehearing on the issue of Internal Relocation by a  Judge,  other
than Judge Chana, at the Bradford hearing centre.

As the Upper Tribunal are hearing a Country Guidance case on return  to  the
IKR in February 2018, the matter should not be listed until  that  has  been
promulgated.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 24th January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



