
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01563/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 November 2018                           |On 16 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    Z M F
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTON MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Bass of Asylum Justice.
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the anonymity direction deemed necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Richards-Clarke promulgated on 27 June 2018, which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 1 July 1984 and is a national of  Iraq.  On  17
January 2018 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  Richards-Clarke  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  27  July  2018
Judge Haria gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. The grounds assert that the Judge erred in failing  to  follow  the
      country guidance in law in


           a. AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 (11 July 2017)
           b. AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG  [2018]  UKUT
           00212


      The grounds  also  disagree  with  the  Judge's  findings  as  to  the
      appellant's credibility


      3. In an otherwise  well-reasoned  determination  the  Judge  arguably
      erred in law in failing to follow the latest country  guidance.  There
      is an arguable error of law.


      4. All grounds may be argued

The Hearing

5. Mr Diwnycz,  for  the  respondent,  immediately  conceded  that,  as  the
decision neither contains findings about the whereabouts of the  appellant's
family nor about  the  availability  to  the  appellant  of  CSID  or  other
documentation, the decision contains  a  material  error  of  law.  Both  Mr
Diwnycz and Mr Bass asked me to set the decision aside and remit  this  case
to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Analysis

6. The accepted facts in this case are that the appellant is an  Iraqi  Kurd
from IKR. In AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 the Court of  Appeal  held
(amending the 2015 Country Guidance by consent) that a CSID was  not  simply
a return document.  It was feasible that someone could  acquire  a  passport
or a laissez-passer without possessing or being able to obtain a CSID.


7. In AAH (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT  212
section C of the guidance given in AA [2017] is supplemented  with  guidance
about the factors to consider when considering whether it  is  possible  for
the returnee to obtain a CSID or obtain it within a reasonable  time  frame.
Section E of the country guidance is replaced - the new guidance  explaining
that all returns are currently to Baghdad but a returnee of  Kurdish  origin
in possession of a valid CSID  or  passport  can  journey  by  land  or  air
practically and affordably without real risk and  without  relocation  being
unduly harsh.  Domestic flights to the IKR cannot be boarded without  either
a CSID or a valid passport and if the returnee has neither, there is a  real
risk of his being detained at a checkpoint if  he  travels  by  land  (other
ways  of  verifying  identity  at   checkpoints   such   as   calling   upon
"connections" were discussed).

8. The Judge makes no reference at all to the country  guidance  cases.  The
Judge makes no findings about whether or not the  appellant  has  family  or
other support in IKR. The Judge makes no findings about the availability  of
a CSID or other documents. The Judge's consideration of internal  relocation
and  humanitarian  protection  is,  at  best,   superficial.   The   Judge's
conclusion at [30] is inadequately reasoned.

9. In R and Others v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982 the Court of  Appeal  endorsed
Practice Direction 18.4 which states that any failure  to  follow  a  clear,
apparently applicable country guidance case or  to  show  why  it  does  not
apply to the case in question is likely to  be  regarded  as  a  ground  for
review or appeal on a point of law.   The  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  it
represented a failure to take a material matter into account.

10. The decision is tainted by material errors of law. I  set  the  decision
aside.

11. I consider whether I can substitute my own  decision  but  find  that  I
cannot because further fact-finding is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

12. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25 September 2012 a case may be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

14. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Newport  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Richards-Clarke.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 27 June 2018. The appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed
                       Date 9 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



