
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01099/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2016                 |15 September 2016                    |
|Given orally at the hearing          |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     UJW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Seehra, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I have decided to set  aside  the  determination  in  this  case.   The
    appellant, who is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 12 July 1966  appeals
    with permission against a determination  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Maxwell, promulgated on 27 July 2016 in which he dismissed his
    appeal against the refusal of asylum.

2.   The appellant's application  was  based  on  his  fear  of  persecution
    because he was a gay man but not only that he was a gay man but because
     he had been picked up by the police and  detained  by  them  and  ill-
    treated and that that would happen to him again on return because there
    was still outstanding proceedings  against  him.   In  that  regard  he
    referred to a letter from a Sri Lankan Attorney-at-Law called  Mr  A  A
    Seneviratne who had made enquiries of  the  local  court  and  produced
    relevant documentary  evidence.   The  judge,  without  notice  to  the
    parties, in his  determination  stated  that  he  did  not  accept  the
    certificate from the Attorney-at-Law or his details and went on to  say
    that he was placing weight on the fact that there was no evidence  from
    the Sri Lankan High  Commission  here  that  Mr  A  A  Seneviratne  was
    qualified to act  as an Attorney-at Law   and that this could therefore
    be a genuine letter.  The Judge did not, as one  would  have  expected,
    refer to the determination in Tanveer Ahmed and view the  documentation
    from the Attorney-at-Law within the relevant context.  What he did  was
    that he said he disregarded it and the reason  he  disregarded  it  was
    based on evidence which was not before  the  court  and  to  which  the
    appellant's representative's attention had  not  been  drawn.   That  I
    consider is a clear error of law.

3.   Secondly, he makes a finding that the appellant's encounter with a  gay
    man had taken place "in full view" on the beach and that, he found, was
    lacking in credibility. But that was not the evidence that  was  before
    him.  The evidence before him was that the encounter  had  taken  place
    behind the beach or in the undergrowth onto  which  the  beach  backed.
    That is a totally different matter.  That again I consider is an  error
    of law.

4.   The judge did refer  to  relevant  country  guidance  but  the  country
    guidance is somewhat nuanced because although it states that a gay  man
    would, generally,  not have any problems it does  indicate  that  there
    can be risks of detention and so on and that  therefore  it  cannot  be
    said that the appellant's fear, if he has been picked up by the police,
    is clearly unfounded.  These are matters of fact,  and I consider  that
    they need to be looked at again by a judge in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and I consider that this is a case which meets the Senior President  of
    the Tribunal's direction regarding remittals and I remit this appeal to
    the First-tier for a hearing afresh.  The  only  finding  that  I  will
    preserve is that the appellant is a gay man.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed only to the extent that it is remitted to  the  First-
tier tribunal for a hearing afresh.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy           15 September 2016
