
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01406/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2021 via Skype for    |On 12 April 2021                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                  AA (iraq)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Michaels, Counsel, instructed by Shawstone
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.


The documents that I was referred to were  primarily  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal, the grounds of appeal  and  the  supporting  documents,
the contents of which I have recorded.


The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly in their remote form.


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born in  January  1969.  He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S Khan promulgated on
    22  April  2020  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 27 January 2020 to refuse his asylum and  humanitarian
    protection claim.

 2. The focus of this appeal is whether it was  unfair  for  the  judge  to
    refuse the appellant's application  to  adjourn  the  proceedings,  and
    whether she failed to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.  2
    of 2010 and take other necessary steps  arising  from  the  appellant's
    vulnerability.

Factual background

 3. The appellant claimed asylum on the basis of the  risk  he  claimed  to
    face from having provided assistance to Western allies in  Iraq  during
    the war and in the years that followed. Specifically, he claims to have
    worked for a company which  provided  housing,  food  and  clothes  for
    American  troops.   Subsequently,  he  worked  as  a  professor  at   a
    university.  He  claims  that  militia  groups  in  Iraq  attempted  to
    assassinate him by running him over. He  fears  returning  to  Iraq  on
    account of being targeted by the militia  upon  his  return.   He  also
    claimed to have manifested anti-regime views, which would place him  at
    risk from the Government of Iraq.

 4. The appellant experiences  a  number  of  mental  and  physical  health
    conditions. He experiences lower back pain and depression. He had  been
    referred to  an  organisation  called  iCope  and  had  been  receiving
    counselling. At the time of the hearing before the judge, there  was  a
    letter  from  the  appellant's  GP  which  stated  the  appellant   was
    experiencing  depression  as  a  result  of  his  unsettled  situation,
    including his incomplete studies, his  separation  from  his  wife  and
    children, and his shared accommodation with other refugees. He had been
    prescribed with medication and was awaiting treatment for CBT.

 5. The respondent considered the appellant's claim to be speculative.   He
    had not been targeted by the militia personally and had  been  able  to
    live in Iraq unhindered for  a number of  years.   The  appellant  also
    claimed to have anti-regime views.  The respondent rejected  that  limb
    of his account.

 6. In  her  decision,  having  recounted  the  respective  cases  for  the
    appellant and respondent,  the  judge  gave  reasons  for  refusing  an
    adjournment request made by the appellant at the outset of the hearing.
    Ms  Michaels,  who  also  appeared  before  me,  had  applied  for   an
    adjournment in order to obtain a psychiatric report. It was relevant to
    the appellant's  mental  health  and  any  Article  3  claim,  she  had
    submitted. The judge refused the application, giving these  reasons  in
    her decision:

         "27. I considered the [adjournment] application carefully.  I  took
         account of all the information the appellant gave in support of the
         adjournment request and I  considered  whether  the  refusal  would
         deprive the appellant of  a  fair  hearing  (Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
         fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  (IAC)).   I  decided  to  refuse  the
         adjournment request. I  informed  Ms  Michaels  that  I  had  taken
         account of the medical evidence that had been  filed  already  [as]
         that was sufficient for me to arrive at a  just  decision  in  this
         case. I would take account of the [iCope] letter, the  counsellor's
         letter and the medical notes already filed.

         28   In light of the  medical  information  filed,  I  informed  Ms
         Michaels I was prepared to treat  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable
         witness  following  the  joint  presidential  guidance  on   child,
         vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant [sic]. I  invited  her  to
         make submissions on what special measures I should adopt. She asked
         me to simply take account of the appellant's vulnerability  in  any
         questions that the appellant was asked, to have regular  breaks  if
         the appellant so required them and to take account  of  it  in  the
         assessment of the appellant's evidence I agreed to those  measures.
         I noted there is no  representative  from  the  respondent  so  the
         questions the appellant would face were limited."

 7. The judge's substantive reasoning commences at [30] with an outline  of
    the appellant's mental  health  conditions.   The  judge  outlined  the
    medical materials that had been provided as  part  of  the  appellant's
    case, and  stated  at  [34]  that,  having  already  indicated  to  the
    appellant that she would treat him as a vulnerable witness,  she  would
    undertake her credibility assessment in light of the  medical  evidence
    and the appellant's vulnerability.

 8. At [35],  the  judge  noted  that,  although  the  appellant  had  been
    dependent on his wife's asylum  claim  which  had  been  brought  on  a
    similar factual matrix, and that claim had been refused and  an  appeal
    dismissed, she did not have a copy  of  that  decision,  and  so  would
    consider the appellant's account afresh.

 9. The judge considered the issue of delay. The appellant had  arrived  in
    this country as a student in January 2014. His wife claimed  asylum  in
    October 2014, with  the  appellant  as  her  dependent.  The  appellant
    separated from his wife in May 2019  and  claimed  asylum  in  his  own
    capacity on 2 August 2019. Although the appellant only  claimed  asylum
    after having been served with removal papers, the judge  did  not  hold
    that against him for reasons that  have  not  been  challenged  by  the
    respondent [36]. However, the delay in the  appellant  claiming  asylum
    following his arrival here was a factor which  harms  credibility,  she
    found [37]. The appellant had claimed not to have  received  the  right
    advice about when to claim asylum and sought to attribute the delay  to
    that factor. The judge rejected that explanation. The delay  in  making
    the claim impacted the appellant's credibility.

10. The judge accepted the appellant's  account  to  have  worked  for  the
    company he claimed were his employers in Iraq,  although  rejected  his
    account to have provided interpretation for half  of  his  role.  There
    were some inconsistencies in the appellant's case. At [43],  the  judge
    did not take issue with those factors, on account  of  the  appellant's
    vulnerability.

11. At [46], the judge found the appellant  had  not  demonstrated  he  was
    specifically targeted by militia groups. He had not been  able  to  say
    who they were yet claimed there was more than one group targeting  him;
    the judge considered the appellant to be speculating. The appellant had
    been able to continue with his life in  Iraq.  The  militia  must  have
    known where he lived,  on  the  appellant's  case,  yet  they  had  not
    contacted him or sought to harm him in any way, other than the  claimed
    attempts to run him over, which were fewer than 10,  and  all  happened
    before the appellant relocated internally within Iraq, at  which  point
    they stopped. The judge did not accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
    perceived as a collaborator, nor that he had been targeted  by  militia
    while in Iraq.

12. The second limb of the appellant's asylum  claim  was  that  he  feared
    being persecuted on  account  of  his  political  opinion  against  the
    government of Iraq. There were  a  series  of  social  media  documents
    before the judge, which  she  described  as  unclear  [49].  There  was
    nothing in those posts to confirm that they  were  public,  they  dated
    from 2015, and there was nothing to show  they  were  recent.  WhatsApp
    messages provided by the appellant  took  things  no  further.  As  the
    respondent noted, the appellant had been unable to articulate  how  his
    feelings towards  the  Iraqi  regime  grew  and  developed.  The  judge
    accepted that the appellant had been vague about his  political  views.
    He sought to explain his failure to mention  certain  features  of  his
    case in the "preliminary information questionnaire" as being the  fault
    of his former solicitors,  yet he had made no complaint  against  them.
    Even accounting for his vulnerability,  that  harmed  his  credibility.
    See [54].

13. The judge dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

14. There are two grounds of appeal.

15. First, that the judge failed to apply the correct test  of  whether  to
    adjourn the hearing, namely whether to refuse to do  so  would  deprive
    the appellant of his right to a fair  hearing.  Alternatively,  if  the
    judge applied the correct test, she reached a conclusion that  was  not
    rationally open to her on the evidence and was insufficiently reasoned.

16. The second ground of appeal is that the judge  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to the appellant as a vulnerable witness, in light of his
    health conditions.

17. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  in
    these terms:

         "The First-tier Tribunal directs itself properly as to the test for
         an adjournment at paragraph 27 and accepts that the appellant is  a
         vulnerable witness, and correctly agrees to consider  this  in  the
         assessment of his evidence at 28 of the decision, with a repeat  of
         this assessment following a summary of the medical evidence in  the
         bundle at paragraph 34 of the decision.

         However I find that it is arguable that  the  decision  to  proceed
         with the appeal and not adjourn the hearing to  obtain  a  detailed
         psychiatric evidence was insufficiently reasoned  to  be  fair  and
         lawful, and as a  result  it  is  arguable  that  evidence  of  the
         appellant's vulnerability was not brought into play when  assessing
         his credibility."



Submissions

18. The appellant made further submissions in writing on  6  October  2020,
    enclosing a report of a Dr  K.  Balasubramaniam;  the  respondent  made
    written submissions on 8 October 2020.

19. In developing her grounds of appeal, and in her written submissions, Ms
    Michaels highlighted the main question to be addressed when considering
    an application  to  adjourn:  would  refusing  to  do  so  deprive  the
    appellant of a fair hearing?  In refusing to grant the adjournment, the
    judge did not explain how, by not adjourning, the appellant would enjoy
    a fair hearing.  A  funding  application  had  been  made  and  it  was
    irrational  for  the  judge  to  refuse  the  adjournment.   There  was
    insufficient material in the bundle to enable the  judge  to  determine
    the appeal; fairness required a short adjournment to be granted.

20. Ms Michaels referred to the report of Dr Balasubramaniam which, by  the
    time she made her written submissions in support of the Upper  Tribunal
    proceedings, was available.  It diagnosed the  appellant  as  suffering
    from a mixed anxiety and depressive order. He experienced  a  range  of
    symptoms including poor concentration. The causal factors included  the
    difficulties he  experienced  in  Iraq  by  being  intimidated  by  the
    militia, the loss of his job and income, separation from his  wife  and
    children, and his unresolved asylum proceedings in  this  jurisdiction.
    The appellant had capacity, concluded the report.  Attempts  to  remove
    the appellant from the UK would be likely to  worsen  his  anxiety  and
    depressive order and increase the risk of suicide.

21. In turn, Ms Michaels submits that the judge failed properly  to  assess
    the question of the appellant's vulnerability. In so failing,  she  did
    not apply the Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note  No.  2  of  2010,  in
    particular  in  relation  to  that  guidance's  exhortation   to   take
    vulnerability into account when assessing an individual's  credibility.
    Without the psychiatric report, the judge was unable to have a full and
    proper picture of the appellant's mental health  conditions.   Pursuant
    to AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1123, it was an error of law for the judge to fail  to  follow
    the presidential guidance note when assessing credibility.

22. The Secretary of State submitted that the  judge  applied  the  correct
    test, and that the decision not to  adjourn  the  proceedings  did  not
    impact the outcome of the proceedings.  It  is  hard  to  see  how  the
    report would have made  a  difference.   The  judge  had  a  number  of
    materials before her concerning the appellant's  mental  health,  which
    did not take matters any further than Dr Balasubramaniam's report would
    have done.  As far as Article 3 was concerned, the report was silent as
    to the appellant's likely health needs and access  to  healthcare  upon
    his return.   The  judge  took  the  appellant's  vulnerabilities  into
    account throughout her decision, and reached a conclusion that was open
    to her, having ensured the appellant was able to enjoy a fair hearing.



Legal framework

23. The test governing whether to adjourn is not in dispute.   In  Nwaigwe,
    the Presidential panel stated as follows:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

24. At [8], the then President said:

         "The cardinal rule... is expressed in  uncompromising  language  in
         the decision of the Court of Appeal in SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284, at [13]:

             'First, when considering whether the immigration  Judge  ought
             to  have  granted   an   adjournment,   the   test   was   not
             irrationality.  The test was  not  whether  his  decision  was
             properly  open  to  him  or  was  Wednesbury  unreasonable  or
             perverse.  The test and sole test was whether it was unfair'."
             (Emphasis original)

25. Concerning the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of  2010,  in  AM
    (Afghanistan) the then Senior President held, at [30]:

         "To assist parties and tribunals a Practice  Direction  'First-tier
         and  Upper  Tribunal  Child,   Vulnerable   Adult   and   Sensitive
         Witnesses',  was  issued  by  the  Senior  President,  Sir   Robert
         Carnwath, with the agreement of the Lord Chancellor on  30  October
         2008. In addition, joint Presidential Guidance Note No  2  of  2010
         was issued by the then President of UTIAC, Blake J and  the  acting
         President of the FtT (IAC), Judge Arfon-Jones. The  directions  and
         guidance  contained  in  them  are  to  be  followed  and  for  the
         convenience of practitioners, they are annexed  to  this  judgment.
         Failure to follow them will most likely  be  a  material  error  of
         law."

Discussion

26. In relation to Ground 1 concerning the decision  not  to  adjourn,  the
    judge  applied  the  correct  test,  took  into  account  all  relevant
    considerations, and reached a decision that was rationally open to  her
    on  the  materials  before  her.    The   subsequent   report   of   Dr
    Balasubramaniam added little to what the judge, in effect, accepted  as
    being the appellant's mental health conditions.

27. As Judge Lindsley noted when granting permission to appeal,  the  judge
    did apply the correct test, namely whether the appellant would enjoy  a
    fair hearing in the absence of an adjournment.  So much is  clear  from
    [27] of the judge's decision where she considered whether, in the event
    she did not adjourn, the appellant would be deprived of a fair hearing.
     That was plainly the correct test.  The judge cited  Nwaigwe,  further
    demonstrating that she was aware of the relevant principles.  She  then
    added, in the same paragraph, that she considered the materials already
    filed to have enabled her to arrive at a just decision.  Those were the
    very considerations the  judge  was  required  to,  and  did  in  fact,
    address.

28.  The  gravamen  of  Ms  Michaels'  submissions  under  Ground  1  is  a
    rationality  challenge;  the  judge  reached  a   decision   that   was
    irrational, or that no reasonable judge could have reached.   There  is
    no merit to this submission.

29. The judge had before her  a  number  of  documents  pertaining  to  the
    appellant's mental health conditions.  She outlined those documents  at
    [25] and analysed  them  at  [30]  to  [33].   She  accepted  that  the
    appellant suffered  from  depression  as  a  result  of  his  unsettled
    situation, his incomplete studies, his separation  from  his  wife  and
    children and from living in shared accommodation with 'other' refugees.
     She recorded the anti-depressant medication that he was  taking.   She
    noted at [31] a letter from Penny Smith, a counsellor at Refugee Action
    Kingston.  The letter outlines the appellant's  fear  at  returning  to
    Iraq due to the danger he believed he would be in, is poor  sleep,  his
    anxiety, the nightmares he experiences, and his  morbid  dread  of  the
    future. The judge also had access to a letter from the relevant  mental
    health NHS trust outlining the appellant's  mental  health  conditions.
    The letter recorded that the appellant experienced  poor  concentration
    and was experiencing daily suicidal thoughts.  She also  had  a  letter
    from iCope, a psychological therapy service,  and  the  appellant's  GP
    notes.  As I have set out above, the judge considered  those  materials
    in depth at [30] to [33].

30. The report of Dr Balasubramaniam  adds  little,  if  anything,  to  the
    details  that  were  already  before  the  judge.   I  accept  that  it
    consolidates the different conditions experienced by the appellant into
    a  single  medical  analysis.   However,  its  operative  analysis  and
    conclusions merely underline what was stated in the  materials  already
    before the judge.  Significantly, the judge took the appellant's mental
    health conditions into consideration at several key  junctures  in  the
    appeal, in addition to what she stated at [27] and [28]  which  I  will
    not repeat here.  They are worth quoting in full:

         "I have already indicated to the appellant  that  I  was  going  to
         treat him as a vulnerable  witness.  I  have  made  my  credibility
         assessment in light of the medical  evidence  and  the  appellant's
         vulnerability." [34]

         "the decision letter takes issue with the frequency  the  appellant
         interpreted for  his  wife's  cousin.  However,  in  light  of  the
         appellant's vulnerability I do not hold  this  point  against  him.
         Likewise,  the  point  about  inconsistency  with   the   screening
         interview do [sic] not undermine  the  appellant's  credibility  in
         light of his vulnerability." [43]

         "I have assessed  the  appellant's  evidence  carefully  and  taken
         account of the appellant's vulnerabilities." [46]

         "I take account of the appellant's vulnerability and note that  the
         screening interview is  not  a  time  when  the  appellant  can  be
         expected to give details [sic] answers. I  therefore  do  not  hold
         this point against his credibility[.]" [52]

31. This tribunal now has the benefit  of  seeing  the  medical  report  in
    respect of which the appellant sought the adjournment.  It  would  have
    added nothing  to  the  judge's  analysis  which,  as  set  out  above,
    accommodated the appellant's  vulnerability  at  multiple  points.   Dr
    Balasubramaniam's report does not  feature  any  analysis  or  findings
    which could rationally have affected the  judge's  conclusions.   As  I
    pointed out to Ms Michaels at the hearing, its  conclusions  could  not
    possibly merit a finding that the appellant's removal would be contrary
    to his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR; Ms Michaels made no  attempt
    to demonstrate that it demonstrates that that threshold was  met.   The
    report notes the varying causes which lay behind the appellant's mental
    health conditions, which corresponded with the materials already before
    the judge.  Nothing in the report is capable of demonstrating that  the
    core credibility of the appellant's account should have been  accepted,
    and nor could it; the most it could have done was to require the  judge
    to calibrate her credibility assessment by reference to the appellant's
    vulnerabilities, which she did, at multiple points in her decision. The
    appellant enjoyed a fair hearing.  It was not necessary for  the  judge
    to have adjourned.  Her decision not to adjourn was sound.

32. There is no merit to this ground of appeal.

33. Similarly, in relation to Ground 2,  the  judge  took  the  appellant's
    vulnerability into account throughout her analysis, as I have set  out.
    The respondent was not represented in the proceedings before the First-
    tier Tribunal, with the effect that there was no  invasive  questioning
    or  inappropriate  cross-examination.  Indeed,  Ms  Michaels  makes  no
    specific complaint about the conduct of the hearing and there can be no
    suggestion  that  the  judge  failed  properly   to   make   reasonable
    adjustments  or  take  other  steps  to  accommodate  the   appellant's
    vulnerability.

34. The judge calibrated her operative analysis of the case by reference to
    the appellant's vulnerability, as set out above.  There is nothing more
    that the judge reasonably could have been expected  to  do.  Certainly,
    nothing in the report of Dr Balasubramaniam highlights any  steps  that
    the judge should have, but did not, take.

35. There is no merit to Ground 2.

Conclusion

36. The appellant enjoyed a fair hearing.  An adjournment  would  not  have
    added to her analysis in material terms, in light of the medical report
    of which we now have the benefit.   He  was  treated  as  a  vulnerable
    appellant and the judge correctly approached her reasoning on the basis
    that some allowances for his vulnerability had to  be  made.   That  an
    appellant is vulnerable does not pave  the  way  for  an  appeal  being
    allowed.  It simply means that reasonable  adjustments  are  necessary,
    both during the hearing, and during the  analysis  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.  That is precisely what  the  judge  did  on  this  occasion.
    There was no error of law.

37. This appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

38. In light of the contents of this decision, to guard  against  the  risk
    that it may expose the appellant to a risk he does not  currently  face
    in the event it were to fall into the wrong hands (and bearing in  mind
    that it will be published online), I grant the appellant anonymity.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Khan did not involve the making of an error of law.

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 30 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


