
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01261/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On:  23rd January 2017               |On: 25th January 2017                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     ZE
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sharif, Fountain Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Ethiopia born in  1997.   On  the  20th
    October 2016 the First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal  on  protection
    grounds. The Secretary of State now has permission  to  appeal  against
    that decision.

    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    The Appeal

 3. The Respondent had advanced an  account  of  having  been  involved  in
    opposition politics in Ethiopia, and  to  have  attracted  the  adverse
    attention  of  the  authorities   as   a   result.   This   claim   was
    comprehensively rejected by the First-tier Tribunal,  which  found  his
    account to be vague, inconsistent and weakened by his failure to  claim
    asylum in at least two safe countries  before  he  reached  the  United
    Kingdom. The Tribunal rejected the claim that the Respondent had joined
    an opposition organisation.

 4. The Tribunal did however accept that the Respondent had been on a  boat
    carrying an estimated 800 migrants across the Mediterranean from Libya.
    This boat had sunk, with the loss of  virtually  all  those  on  board,
    including  the  Respondent's  brother.  The  BBC  had  interviewed  the
    survivors, including the Respondent, and this had been broadcast.    It
    was further accepted that the Respondent  had,  to  a  limited  extent,
    been involved in political activities against the Ethiopian  government
    since  he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He   had   attended   a
    demonstration outside the Foreign Office in London, and at  that  event
    had been interviewed by 'ESAT', described as a media group organised by
    opposition groups. It was said that a film of this interview  had  been
    uploaded to YouTube. The Tribunal does not appear to have  taken  issue
    with the latter claim, but  since  the  interview  itself  was  neither
    translated nor transcribed, the  contents  of  the  interview  was  not
    evidence that the Tribunal was  able  to  take  into  account.   Having
    regard to the sur place claim the Tribunal said the following:

         "127. I have found that the appellant does  not  have  a  political
         profile in Ethiopia. I do not know how, if the Ethiopian government
         had access to the ESAT recording, it would be able to identify  the
         appellant. I refer again to my findings at paragraph 119 about  the
         failure to disclose the claimed evidence until the hearing, and the
         failure to produce the claimed letter. I note the appellant's claim
         to have left Ethiopia illegally, not challenged by the  respondent,
         but I have not been referred to  any  material  concerning  illegal
         exit, and consequences on return.

         128. However, giving the appellant the benefit of the  doubt,  even
         though I consider that he has no political profile in Ethiopia, and
         that he has acted in  bad  faith  in  relation  to  his  sur  place
         activities, I am prepared to find that there is a risk that he will
         face persecution on return by voicing his opposition to the regime.
         I cannot be sure that it has not  come  to  the  attention  of  the
         Ethiopian authorities, and that  he  would  not  be  recognised  on
         return"

 5. Any ambiguity about the nature of the finding at 128  is  dispelled  by
    the  conclusion reached at 129: "I am satisfied on  the  evidence,  for
    the reasons set out  above,  that  there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the appellant will be at risk of persecution on  return
    because of his sur place activities".  I therefore read the "by voicing
    his opposition" at 128 to be a reference to the voicing  already  done,
    in London, rather than voicing to  come,  in  Addis.  That  reading  is
    consistent with the overall findings of the  Tribunal,  to  the  effect
    that the Respondent has no genuine political convictions that have  led
    him into opposition against the present regime in Ethiopia.

 6. Mr Bates submitted before me that the findings at 128 are flawed. There
    was no evidential foundation upon  which  the  Tribunal  could  base  a
    finding of real risk. Absent any evidence, the Tribunal had applied too
    low a standard of proof.

 7. Mr Rashid submitted that taken  in  the  round,  the  findings  of  the
    Tribunal were sustainable. He  pointed  to  the  evidence  recorded  at
    paragraph 126, that the Ethiopian government had  passed  a  'dangerous
    cybercrime law' which criminalised an array of  online  activity.  This
    demonstrated that the Government were interested in the  activities  of
    opposition activists and that the real risk was made out.

    My Findings

 8. What was the sur place activity that gave rise to the real risk of harm
    in this case?

 9. Paragraphs 127 and 128 suggest that the focus for the  Judge's  concern
    was not the single attendance at a demonstration, but rather it was the
    film broadcast by ESAT. I say this because of the concluding phrase: "I
    cannot be sure that it has not come to the attention of  the  Ethiopian
    authorities...". This would appear to be a reference to that recording,
    since it is preceded, at 127, by: "I  do  not  know  if  the  Ethiopian
    government has access to the ESAT recording...".  Mr Bates submits that
    the Tribunal had no  business  assessing  risk  on  the  basis  of  the
    interview since the evidence itself had been expressly excluded on  the
    grounds that it was only available in Amharic and  no  translation  had
    been provided.  In fact, the view taken by the Tribunal does not appear
    to have been as clean cut as that. Paragraph 87 records a concession by
    the Appellant's representative that the Tribunal would not be  able  to
    take the contents of the interview into account,  but  the  video  clip
    also depicted the Appellant on the aforementioned demonstration at  the
    foreign office, an image that needed no translation.

10. Having regard to that material, was the Tribunal entitled to  conclude,
    on the lower standard of proof, that there was a  real  risk  that  the
    Ethiopian authorities would know about it, and persecute the  Appellant
    as a result a) of his attendance at that one  demonstration  and/or  b)
    his appearance on a video on YouTube apparently endorsing the  protest?



11. The parties before me were unable to point to any relevant findings  in
    any of the three relatively elderly country guidance cases (dating from
    2011, 2007 and 2004) before the First-tier Tribunal.  The November 2013
    Operational  Guidance  Note  did   however   offer   some   assistance.
    Paragraphs 3.18.13 - 3.18.15 record  that  the  only  internet  service
    provider in Ethiopia is  state  run,  and  that  this  facilitates  the
    government blocking of certain  websites  deemed  to  carry  opposition
    content. The government has passed legislation enabling it to  restrict
    internet access, including the blocking of broadcasts by  international
    news outlets such  as  Al  Jazeera  and  the  Economist.  Although  not
    expressly mentioned in the determination, this is consistent  with  the
    information reported at paragraph 126, and published by the 'Electronic
    Frontier  Foundation'.  The  OGN  contains   further   evidence   about
    surveillance. The US State Department,  amongst  others,  is  cited  as
    confirming that there is  harassment  and  intimidation  of  government
    critics, which includes "monitoring and interference" in the activities
    of opposition groups [at 3.16.7]. The OGN also  contains  reference  to
    tapping of telephones [3.16.9].   Mr Rashid  suggested,  with  I  think
    some justification, that  as  a  matter  of  logic,  if  the  Ethiopian
    authorities are blocking certain  websites,  and  specific  content  on
    others,  it  stands  to  reason  that  they  have  viewed  the  content
    themselves.    This  in  itself  would  suggest  some   monitoring   of
    opposition activities on the internet.   This conclusion  is  supported
    by the following information at page 213  of  the  Respondent's  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal:

         "In 2013 Citizen Lab, a Canadian research centre at the  University
         of Toronto,  identified  25  countries,  including  Ethiopia,  that
         hosted servers linked to FinFisher surveillance software. According
         to the report, 'FinFisher gained notoriety because it has been used
         in targeted attacks against human rights campaigners and opposition
         activists in countries with questionable human rights  records'.  A
         'FinSpy' campaign in the country allegedly used pictures of  Ginbot
         7, an Ethiopian opposition group,  as  bait  to  infect  users.  In
         addition to its domestic activities, the government  used  'FinSpy'
         to monitor the online activities of Ethiopians living abroad".

    (my emphasis)

12. Having had regard to that evidence, all before the First-tier Tribunal,
    I conclude that it was entitled to conclude that there was a real  risk
    that the video of the Respondent attending  an  opposition  protest  in
    London would come to the attention of the Ethiopian authorities.

13. As to whether that might be sufficient to present a real risk of  harm,
    Mr Bates is correct to point to the  absence  of  evidence  as  to  the
    arrest and ill-treatment of opposition activists returning from abroad.
    It has however never been put in issue that the  Ethiopian  authorities
    have a dismal record on human rights and that  the  regime  is  growing
    ever more repressive.  The November 2013 OGN  cited  the  UN  Committee
    Against Torture conclusion that  torture  against  political  opponents
    frequently occurs [for instance at 2.2.8] and is described  by  Amnesty
    International as "widespread". The  repressive  actions  taken  by  the
    state are such that there are now  "almost  no  domestic  human  rights
    organisations functioning" [at 2.2.14].   I am satisfied  that  against
    that clear  picture  of  human  rights  violations  against  opposition
    activists,  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  conclude,  to  the  lower
    standard, that the risk was made out.

14. It follows that I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal. I should add
    that the decision of Judge Gladstone, based on the narrow premise  that
    it  was,  finds  further  support  in  the  latest  country  background
    information. In the Country Information and Guidance Note December 2016
    'Ethiopia: Opposition to the Government' at 10.2.8 it is reported  that
    on the 9th October 2016, only two days after this appeal was heard, the
    government of Ethiopia declared a state of emergency. Section  1  lists
    the prohibited activity. Article 1 (Communication  Instigating  Protest
    and Unrest) states that it is prohibited to share  information  on  the
    internet, radio TV or social media that "will  create  misunderstanding
    between people or unrest".   I  am  satisfied  that  the  promotion  of
    opposition activities in London would very likely be caught within this
    wide net.

    Decisions

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law such that it should be set aside.

16. There is an order for anonymity.


      [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           23rd January 2017

