
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01189/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 October 2016                             |On 12 October 2016            |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     KR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms D Qureshi, instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This appeal arises from the decision of the respondent, dated 8 December
   2015, to refuse the appellant's application for asylum. The appellant's
   ensuing appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") was dismissed. The
   appellant now appeals against the decision of the FtT, which was made by
   Judge Grant and promulgated on 4 July 2016.


2. The appellant, who is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 15 June 1991,
   entered the UK in September 2014 on a student visa. He did not pursue a
   course of study and his leave was curtailed. He applied for asylum in
   July 2015.

The appellant's claim

3. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that he fears the Sri
   Lankan authorities because of his involvement with (or perceived
   involvement with) the LTTE and that the authorities have an ongoing
   interest in him because of his father.


4. He claims that his father, with whom he states he has not had contact
   since 2001, was a fighter for the LTTE and a member since 1995. He claims
   that he was detained by the authorities in 2004, 2005 and 2007 and
   questioned about his father. Each of these detentions was for a single
   day.


5. The appellant gave an account of undergoing training with the LTTE
   (against his wishes) in 2009 and then undertaking surveillance activity
   for them for about 6 weeks. He claims to have escaped from the area under
   LTTE control to avoid further involvement. Thereafter he surrendered to
   the military and was detained for three days for questioning and then
   imprisoned for a month. He does not claim to have suffered torture during
   this period of imprisonment, although he was subjected to mis-treatment.
   Following his release he resumed his studies.


6. He claims that in 2013 he participated in pro Tamil activities and
   protests including a protest at the Commonwealth Conference in November
   2013 where he held a placard in front of The British Prime Minister about
   missing persons.


7. He claims that he was imprisoned by the army in 2014 for two months,
   during which time he was subjected to torture. The appellant has
   significant scarring which he states is due to the torture he suffered in
   2014. During this period of imprisonment, he claims to have been asked
   about his activities and those of his father. The asylum interview record
   makes multiple references to questioning about the appellant's father
   during the 2014 imprisonment. For example:

         Answer to Question 201. They asked me whether I was in the LTTE
         earlier and about the activities of my father.
         Answer to Question 206. When I denied my father's presence in the
         LTTE they asked me if any of my father's friends were there.

8. In the appellant's witness statement he states at paragraph 14 that,
   during the 2014 incarceration, he would repeatedly be asked about the
   activities of his father as well as his own affiliations with the LTTE.


9. According to the appellant's account, he was released following the
   intervention of the Red Cross. He left Sri Lanka in 2014 using his own
   passport, having obtained a visa to enter the UK as a student.

Medical evidence adduced by the appellant

10. In support of his appeal before the First-Tier Tribunal, the appellant
   adduced a report prepared by Dr Joanna MacKenzie, who is a qualified GP
   (qualifying in 2009) with some training and experience in psychiatry. The
   report is based on five appointments and a total of ten hours spent with
   the appellant. In the preface to the report Dr MacKenzie refers to having
   undertaken specific training in relation to evaluation of scars and the
   physical and psychological effects of torture. However, her curriculum
   vitae appended to the report does not list any such training and no
   explanation has been given as to how her qualification as a GP gives her
   the necessary expertise, particularly in respect of analysing scars.


11. In the report, at paragraph 98, Dr MacKenzie states that once the
   original injury has healed it is not possible to date the injury.
   Accordingly, her report is of no assistance in ascertaining when the
   appellant suffered his physical injuries; that is, whether they occurred
   in 2014, as claimed, or at an earlier time.


12. Following a detailed review of the appellant's lesions, Dr MacKenzie
   concluded that it was highly unlikely they were self inflicted and that
   the appellant's attribution for the lesions is the most likely cause. In
   respect of his psychological state, she concluded that he suffers from
   symptoms of PTSD and that the symptoms were "those expected or typical
   reactions to extreme stress within the cultural and social context"
   (paragraph 139). Dr MacKenzie concludes her report, at paragraph 142, by
   stating that "the clinical picture does not suggest a false allegation of
   torture".

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

13. The appellant's appeal was heard by FtT Judge Grant. The judge found
   the appellant to not be credible. He found the appellant's account of
   being trained by, and acting as a look out for, the LTTE in 2009 not
   credible in light of the background information about the conflict at
   that time. He also considered it not credible that the appellant would be
   trained to undertake surveillance at a time when the LTTE needed more
   fighters.


14. The judge also did not accept the appellant was detained and tortured
   in 2014. The judge's reasons for so finding were that there were no
   grounds for the authorities to be interested in the appellant six years
   after the war ended, the appellant's delay in seeking asylum were "not
   the actions of a genuine refugee" and he left Sri Lanka in 2014 using his
   own passport.


15. The judge has considered the appellant's injuries in various parts of
   the decision. In paragraph 10 he states that "the appellant has suffered
   some injuries but not torture as claimed". In paragraph 11 the judge
   states that the appellant "has not disclosed how he truly came by the
   scars on his back..." At paragraph 18 the judge stated, in respect of the
   appellant's scars:

         "I do not know how they [the appellant's scars] were caused but I
         reject his claim that they were caused by torture. It is equally
         possible and a matter not explored by the doctor who looked at his
         back that the appellant suffered injuries during the general
         fighting and chaos of the last months of the civil war...If the
         appellant had genuinely been tortured as claimed in 2014 he would
         have required medical treatment upon release and yet he has adduced
         no hospital records or medical evidence from Sri Lanka..."

Grounds of appeal and submissions

16. The grounds of appeal contend that the judge erred in four ways.
   Firstly, it is argued that the judge failed to take into account, or
   consider, the appellant's father's involvement with the LTTE. Secondly,
   the grounds maintain that the judge failed to engage with the medical
   report about the appellant's injuries. Thirdly, the grounds take issue
   with the judge's basis for rejecting the appellant's claimed 2014
   detention. Fourthly, it is argued that the judge failed to give proper
   consideration to the appellant's post conflict political activities.

17. Ms Qureshi, on behalf of the appellant, elaborated on the grounds. Ms
   Fijiwala argued that criticising the judge for failing to consider the
   father's involvement in the LTTE was misconceived because that was not
   the appellant's case. The appellant's account of the 2014 detention
   indicates the primary interest of the authorities was the appellant's
   activities, not his father. In respect of the medical report, Ms Fijiwala
   argued that this was given proper regard. It was for the judge to form a
   view, based on the totality of the evidence, as to whether the
   appellant's claim to have suffered torture in 2014 was credible and that
   is what the judge did. The judge has assessed this case in light of the
   country guidance GJ and Others [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and reached a
   decision that was open to her.

Consideration

18. Having considered the submissions of Ms Qureshi and Ms Fijiwala, and
   reviewed afresh the evidence that was before the FtT, I find that the
   judge made two material errors of law which undermine the decision.


19. The first error concerns the appellant's scars. At paragraph 18 the
   judge rejected the appellant's claim that they were caused by torture and
   found it "equally possible" they were due to "the general fighting and
   chaos"  in the last months of civil war. At paragraph 11 the judge stated
   that it is more likely than not that the appellant "was injured at some
   point during his A level studies" rather than by torture. It is unclear
   what is meant by stating the scars are due to "general fighting" but,
   read as a whole, it appears the judge is rejecting the notion that they
   were intentionally inflicted wounds, either through torture, self
   infliction or by proxy, and suggesting the injuries were instead caused
   by something not specifically targeting the appellant.


20. This is inconsistent with the medical evidence before the judge. Dr
   MacKenzie's report makes it clear that, in her view, the appellant's
   scarring, which take the form of cigarette burns and long linear burns
   from a heated implement, were intentionally inflicted, and most likely
   the result of torture.


21. The judge was not obliged to accept Dr MacKenzie's opinion, and there
   may have been good reasons for not doing so, but if there were such
   reasons none are apparent from the decision. Dr MacKenzie's report is
   comprehensive, clear and addresses one of the central issues in the
   appellant's account. If the judge decided to reject this evidence she
   needed to give reasons and the absence of any such reasons in the
   decision amounts to an error of law.


22. The second error of law concerns the judge's failure to consider the
   appellant's claims about the interest of the authorities in his father.
   The appellant's case is that despite not having seen his father since
   2001 and not being aware of his father's whereabouts or role in relation
   to Tamil separatism, the authorities have on multiple occasions, most
   recently in 2014, subjected him to questioning about his father.

23. It may be that the judge rejected the appellant's claims about his
   father but there is no reasoning or explanation for this in the decision.
    It is notable that the respondent, in her reasons for refusal letter,
   addressed in detail (and rejected) the appellant's account about his
   father (see paragraphs 42-46 under the heading "Your father's involvement
   with the LTTE").  No such assessment is present in the decision of the
   FtT.


24. The absence of any consideration of the appellant's father is material
   because the appellant's claims about his father are relevant to the
   plausibility of his account of being arrested in 2014. One of the reasons
   the appellant's account of being detained and arrested in 2014 was
   rejected was that the judge did not consider there any reasons for him to
   be perceived as a threat by the Sri Lankan authorities. It is
   understandable how this conclusion was reached. The appellant's own
   evidence was that his involvement with the LTTE was at a low level and
   his post conflict activism has been limited. As such, there would not
   seem to be a real risk of him falling into one of the risk categories
   identified in GJ. In particular, his profile does not appear to be such
   that he would be perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka
   as a single state because of a role (or perceived role) in relation to
   post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal of
   hostilities within Sri Lanka. However, it is the appellant's case that he
   does not know the role and profile of his father and it may be that his
   father is of such interest to the authorities that it places him at risk.
   The absence of any consideration of, or findings regarding, the
   appellant's father amounts to a material error of law.
25. Both parties submitted that if I found there to be an error of law the
   appeal should be remitted to the FtT. I agree. The errors of law I have
   indentified undermine the credibility findings and consequently I
   consider that it will be necessary for a judge rehearing this appeal to
   consider all of the evidence again without any of the findings being
   preserved. Having regard to Section 7 of the President's Practice
   Statement, it is my view that the level of fact finding required means
   this case should be remitted to the FtT.

Decision

a. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
   such that it should be set aside in its entirety and the appeal heard
   afresh.


b. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh
   before a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Grant.


|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 11 October 2016               |




