
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01147/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13th November 2017                 |On 1st December 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                  mr M.A.H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tettey of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made. As this is a protection claim, it is
appropriate to make such a direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born [ ] 1967.  He arrived  in
    the UK on 22nd March 2011 as a  dependant  of  a  student  (his  wife).
    Their son also entered as his wife's dependant.

 2. On 24th April 2012, shortly before the expiry of her current  leave  to
    remain, the Appellant's wife made an application for further  leave  to
    remain as a student.  That application was refused by the Respondent on
    7th November 2012.

 3. On 11th December 2012 following refusal of his wife's  application  for
    leave, the Appellant claimed asylum naming his  wife  and  son  as  his
    dependants.

 4.   The   Respondent   refused   the    Appellant's    application    for
    asylum/humanitarian protection on 23rd  January  2017.   The  Appellant
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal

 5. In a decision promulgated on 23rd March 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hussain dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 6. The judge noted that in summary the Appellant's claim is that he feared
    being returned to Sri Lanka because he feared a man  known  as  Colonel
    Karuna.  The Appellant's claim is that he was a serving naval commander
    in the Sri Lankan Navy.  He saw and witnessed atrocities carried out by
    Colonel Karuna who at that time was complicit with the Government.   He
    reported matters to his superior officer and was informed  that  action
    would be taken against Karuna.  However a year after  he  had  reported
    these matters, the Appellant  was  arrested  on  false  allegations  of
    embezzlement of Government funds.

 7. He said that he was held  in  detention  for  eighteen  months  without
    charge.  At the conclusion of the eighteen months he was  released  and
    informed that he was suspended from duty pending a court martial.

 8. He returned home but had been there only one day when he was awoken  in
    the night.  He saw Colonel Karuna who had sent armed men to  kill  him.
    He managed to escape  and  spent  a  year  hiding  upcountry.   In  the
    meantime his wife applied for a student visa to come to the UK,  naming
    the Appellant and their son as her dependants.  The Appellant  and  his
    family travelled to the UK entering on 22nd March 2011.  His claim  for
    asylum was not made until 21 months after he arrived in the UK.

 9. Judge Hussain found that he comprehensively disbelieved the Appellant's
    account.  He found therefore that he could not be  satisfied,  even  to
    the lower standard of proof, that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka.  Accordingly he dismissed the appeal.

10. The Appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  against  the  FtT's
    decision.  The First-tier Tribunal refused permission but the Appellant
    renewed  his  application  before  the  UT.   On  27th  September  2017
    permission was granted by UTJ O'Connor in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the FtT erred  in  its  consideration  of  the
         credibility of the Appellant's evidence, for the reasons set out in
         the lengthy grounds.  Whilst individually the  errors  may  not  be
         material, when taken cumulatively it is arguable  that  absent  the
         making of such errors the  FtT  could  have  come  to  a  different
         conclusion."

11. Thus the matter comes  before  me  to  decide  initially,  whether  the
    decision of the FtT discloses such error of law requiring it to be  set
    aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

12. The Grounds of Appeal assert that the Tribunal judge:

       . failed to provide adequate reasoning for  the  adverse  credibility
         findings made against the Appellant

       . failed to have proper regard to the established  facts  before  him
         and made a material misdirection by omitting to properly apply  the
         country background material and country guidance cases

       . misdirected himself in relation to GJ and others  (post  civil  war
         returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) on the  basis  that
         the Appellant is a naval officer  who  abandoned  his  post  during
         conflict and would therefore inevitably be questioned and  detained
         on return

       . did not keep in mind the inordinate  delay  by  the  Respondent  in
         dealing with the Appellant's claim

    Cumulatively it is  said,  these  matters  make  the  judge's  decision
    unsafe.

13. Mr Tettey's submissions closely  followed  the  points  raised  in  the
    grounds.  He addressed me at length,  saying  initially  that  the  FtT
    erred by omitting to have proper regard to an  established  fact,  this
    being the Appellant's rank as a senior naval officer.   The  Respondent
    had accepted the Appellant's rank.

14. Following on from this the judge omitted to provide adequate  reasoning
    for  an  adverse  credibility  finding  against  the   Appellant.    In
    particular, Judge Hussain made a finding concerning  the  contradictory
    nature  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  regarding  his   treatment   in
    detention.  The judge uses that finding  as  a  reason  for  making  an
    adverse credibility finding about the Appellant's  time  in  detention.
    Mr Tettey stated that the contradiction is as follows: on the one  hand
    the Appellant said he was detained but not ill-treated in detention; on
    the other hand the Appellant said he was  detained  and  threatened  in
    detention but the threats did not manifest.  Mr Tettey's  argument  ran
    on that it is  wholly  unsustainable  to  suggest  that  such  evidence
    demonstrates a contradiction. It was this point which had led the judge
    to form his conclusion that the Appellant's testimony of  his  time  in
    detention was not credible.

15. Following on from  that  point  Mr  Tettey  said  that  the  judge  had
    misdirected himself by failing to properly apply the country background
    material.  The judge made an adverse credibility  finding  against  the
    Appellant on the basis that the Appellant was not credible when  giving
    his account of being detained for eighteen months without  trial.   The
    judge had based his finding on one source of evidence  namely  the  Sri
    Lankan Naval Act which says that detention of  naval  officers  without
    charge is permitted for a period of seven days only.   Mr  Tettey  said
    that it is well  established  over  many  years  of  jurisprudence  and
    country guidance cases that the Sri Lankan Security Forces consistently
    omit to apply the rule of law.

16. The next point at issue is that the judge failed to recognise that  the
    Karuna faction has consistently been involved in conflict and  politics
    in Sri Lanka and that the faction has at various times been opposed  to
    the Sri Lankan Government and at other times supported it.  He accepted
    that the background documents  show  that  Karuna  himself  is  now  in
    custody awaiting trial on various serious matters.   The  detention  or
    release at any time of General Karuna did not negate the  human  rights
    abuses carried out by members  of  his  faction  and  his  paramilitary
    organisation and the Appellant  would  still  be  at  risk  from  these
    people.

17. Mr Tettey then submitted  that  FtTJ  Hussain  misdirected  himself  in
    relation to the case of GJ and Others.  The guidance in that case  very
    clearly identified a mechanism for return and  the  process  of  return
    includes identifying the returned individual at the  point  of  return.
    He submitted that the Appellant was a naval officer who  abandoned  his
    post during conflict.  He would inevitably be questioned, detained  and
    ill-treated as part of the identification process on return.

18. Finally it was said that there has been an inordinate  and  unexplained
    delay in the Respondent dealing with the Appellant's case.  At no stage
    has an explanation for the delay been given.  The FtT omitted  to  deal
    with this matter.  No findings are made as to the disadvantage  to  the
    Appellant, of the impact that such a delay has on his ability to recall
    or gather evidence, nor the fairness  of  permitting  the  Respondent's
    decision to stand.  Therefore taking all these  matters  together,  the
    decision should be set aside and remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing.

19. A Rule 24  response  was  filed  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   Mrs
    Pettersen's submission relied upon the summary contained in the Rule 24
    response.  She submitted that the judge had taken into account all  the
    evidence which was before him and emphasised that the judge was correct
    to find a contradiction in the Appellant's interview  notes  concerning
    his time in detention.  She went on to say that in any event  this  was
    only one piece of evidence considered by the judge. He  had  looked  at
    the evidence in the round as he was obliged to do and  had  made  clear
    findings that the Appellant's testimony was not credible.

20. She emphasised that part of the judge's reasoning clearly hinged on the
    Appellant's own account that he had come to the UK  in  order  to  seek
    protection yet had made no claim  to  asylum  until  nearly  twenty-one
    months  after  his  entry.   That  greatly  affected  the   Appellant's
    credibility not least because his reasons for failing to claim promptly
    simply did not ring true.  In the circumstances there were no  material
    errors in the FtT's decision.  The findings were wholly sustainable and
    the grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement with the  decision.
    The decision should stand.

21. Mr Tettey responded briefly reemphasising that the Appellant  had  left
    Sri Lanka at a time when Sri Lanka was in a state of conflict and would
    therefore be at risk on return as a naval commander who  had  left  his
    post.  At the end of submissions I reserved my decision  which  I  now
    give with my reasons.

Consideration

22. In my consideration I shall deal with the matters in the order set  out
    in the renewed grounds for permission to appeal.  I do this bearing  in
    mind that permission was granted on the basis that whilst  individually
    the errors complained of may not be material when taken cumulatively it
    is arguable that absent the making of  such  claimed  errors,  the  FtT
    could have come to a different conclusion.  I also remind  myself  that
    when analysing a decision which contains adverse  credibility  findings
    which are the subject of a challenge, it is important to remember  that
    the FtTJ saw and heard evidence from the Appellant which  I have  not,
    and that a judge is only required to give sufficient reasons to explain
    his decision, which  in  this  case  was  to  find  the  Appellant  not
    credible.

23. The first point of challenge made by Mr Tettey turns on [11]  and  [12]
    of the decision.  The judge is criticised for his  adverse  credibility
    finding against the Appellant regarding  his  treatment  in  detention.
    The grounds assert that the alleged contradiction is as follows: on the
    one hand the Appellant said he was  detained  but  not  ill-treated  in
    detention; on the other hand the Appellant said  he  was  detained  and
    threatened in detention, but the threats did not manifest.  Mr Tettey's
    submission is that there is no contradiction in this.  It is  simply  a
    question of the wording used.  The Appellant's claim, he said, is  that
    he was not mistreated in the sense of being  tortured  physically,  but
    rather he received threats which did not manifest.

24. I have looked carefully at  the  Appellant's  responses  in  interview.
    This is a matter that was raised in the Respondent's refusal letter and
    the judge clearly compared (AIR 34/35) with (AIR 53).  At  AIR  53  the
    Appellant is noted as saying, "when I was in the detention centre  many
    attempts were made to kill me and I received threats saying they  would
    kill me."  It is clear from a reading of the decision  that  the  judge
    took  care  to  identify  this  as  a  material  inconsistency  in  the
    Appellant's narrative.  It is a serious matter to say that  an  attempt
    has been made on one's life.  The Appellant was not saying  that  there
    had been just one attempt, he was clearly saying that there  were  many
    attempts.  There  has  never  been  any  satisfactory  explanation  put
    forward why the Appellant gave the response that he did at AIR 53.

25. On the contrary by  the  time  of  his  witness  statement  dated  24th
    February 2017 that point seems to have been sidelined  altogether.   At
    [10] of this statement the Appellant simply  says  about  his  time  in
    detention that he was forced to work very hard and, "there were threats
    to my life whilst I was detained, but I  was  not  actually  physically
    attacked in detention."  No explanation is given for  his  response  at
    AIR 53.  I find no merit therefore in Mr Tettey's  assertion  that  the
    judge has erred in his consideration of this point.  I find that on the
    evidence before him, the judge was entitled to find that the  Appellant
    had given inconsistent evidence about his treatment in detention.

26. This brings me onto the next point raised by Mr Tettey which  was  that
    the judge materially misdirected  himself  by  omitting  to  apply  the
    country background material when making an adverse credibility  finding
    against the Appellant on the  basis  of  his  claimed  eighteen  months
    detention without trial. The judge disbelieved this  claim  because  he
    preferred the evidence of one background source which stated  that  the
    Sri Lankan Naval Act permits the detention of  naval  officers  without
    charge for a period of seven days only.  Mr Tettey's criticism is  that
    the Appellant is from Sri Lanka and that it is  well  established  over
    many years  of  jurisprudence  that  the  Sri  Lankan  Security  Forces
    consistently omit to apply the rule of law.   The  judge's  reason  for
    finding against the Appellant  on  this  point  is  that  he  finds  it
    implausible that the navy disregarded the Act.  It is quite right  that
    as Mr Tettey points out, the military do disregard abuses  relating  to
    time in detention.  However as in all cases the weight to  be  attached
    to a particular piece of evidence is a  matter  for  the  trial  judge.
    This one point has to be looked at in the context of  the  claim  as  a
    whole, including what is set out in [9] through to [14]  including  the
    evidence, or rather lack of it, relating to the arrest warrant.

27. The surrounding evidence  shows  that  the  judge  noted  that  by  the
    Appellant's own account he had reported General Karuna's activities  to
    Admiral Karamnagada,  his  superior  officer.   Yet  according  to  the
    Appellant it was Admiral Karamnagada who had him arrested.   The  judge
    took into account that when the Appellant left Sri Lanka,  despite  his
    assertion that the security forces had visited and searched his  house,
    he was able to bring with him documents which together read as  a  C.V.
    of his service time in Sri Lanka.   What  he  did  not  bring  was  the
    warrant which he says Admiral Karamnagada had issued for his detention.
     He said he was given the warrant but did not bring this document  with
    him.  His explanation for failing to bring a document which would  have
    been of great assistance to him was found by the judge to be less  than
    satisfactory.  The judge therefore had  good  reason  for  finding  the
    Appellant's account of his detention unsatisfactory.

28. The judge's lack of belief in the Appellant's account was reinforced by
    the narrative concerning his claimed escape from General  Karuna's  men
    in July 2010.  The judge found  it  lacking  in  credibility  that  the
    Appellant dressed only in his shorts would be able to outrun and escape
    from ten to twelve armed men descending upon him in the middle  of  the
    night.  The judge found the Appellant's narrative implausible and I see
    no reason to interfere with that finding.

29. The most telling point of the Appellant's credibility  however  is  the
    fact that he entered the United Kingdom on 22nd March 2010,  in  order,
    he said, to escape his problems in Sri  Lanka.   Yet  he  only  claimed
    asylum 21 months after entry, at the time that his  wife's  application
    for further leave was  refused.   His  explanation  for  his  delay  in
    claiming was that he did not know about  claiming  asylum  and  thought
    that he would remain here and be safe pending a change of Government in
    Sri Lanka. The FtT Judge properly took this into account when assessing
    the general credibility of the Appellant and found the  explanation  to
    be lacking.  I find I agree with both Mrs  Pettersen  and  the  judge's
    assessment on this point. The Appellant is  an  educated  man  who  has
    attained a high rank in the Sri Lankan Navy. To say  he  did  not  know
    about claiming asylum when he now says the whole purpose of his  flight
    was to seek protection undermines his credibility.   I  see  no  reason
    therefore to disagree with that finding made by the judge.

30. Mr Tettey argued that as a high ranking naval officer, and someone  who
    has claimed asylum, the Appellant is bound to be on  a  watch  or  stop
    list and thus at risk on return to Sri Lanka.  He  pleads  the  country
    guidance case of GJ and Others in support of this.  The difficulty  for
    this Appellant is that asylum claims are fact sensitive.  They  require
    the foundation of credible evidence of the circumstances pertaining  to
    a  claim.   In  the  Appellant's  case,  the  judge   found   that   he
    comprehensively disbelieved the Appellant's claim.

31. Mr Tettey submitted that the Appellant  would  be  at  risk  on  return
    simply on account of his being a serving naval officer who has  claimed
    asylum.  This point was addressed by the FtTJ at [33]  and  [34].   The
    judge found that there was no credible evidence that the Appellant  was
    of interest to the authorities.  He came to this conclusion  by  taking
    into account that the Appellant was able to leave Sri Lanka on his  own
    passport and after passing through the numerous checkpoints  along  the
    road to Colombo  airport.   Moreover,  the  Appellant  has  simply  not
    established any foundation for being on a watch list,  because  he  has
    been found to be not credible about his real reasons  for  leaving  Sri
    Lanka.  I see no reason to interfere with the FtTJ's findings.

32. The final point raised by Mr Tettey asserted that the FtTJ  omitted  to
    deal with the matter of there having been an inordinate and unexplained
    delay in the Appellant's case.  He said that the judge made no findings
    about the disadvantage to the Appellant that the impact of such a delay
    would have on his ability to recall or gather evidence.   It  is  right
    that there was no explanation from the Respondent on why it  had  taken
    her more than four years to make a decision.  Equally however there was
    nothing to show that the Appellant has in some regard  been  unlawfully
    disadvantaged.  I see no evidence that the Appellant raised any concern
    with the Respondent over the delay.  I  note  that  the  Appellant  was
    interviewed fairly soon after making his claim and therefore any impact
    which it is said the delay has had on his ability to recall evidence is
    limited.

33. The FtTJ noted that a  further  feature  of  the  Appellant's  concerns
    appears to revolve around the ability or otherwise of his son to attend
    university in the UK.  The judge made a finding that  even  there,  the
    Appellant gave unsatisfactory testimony. He said that his  son  can  no
    longer speak Sinhalese and thus would not be able to attend  university
    in Sri Lanka. The judge  found  this  improbable.  He  noted  that  the
    Appellant's son spoke Sinhalese only up to the age of  12  years.  Both
    parents are Sinhalese speakers and certainly  for  the  FtT  hearing  a
    Sinhalese interpreter was requested for the Appellant.  The judge found
    for proper reasons that the Appellant's  claim  that  his  son  can  no
    longer speak that language was not credible.  The Appellant  also  said
    that universities in Sri Lanka  would  not  accept  his  son's  English
    qualifications.  I see no evidential foundation for that  claim  and  I
    find the judge was correct therefore to place no weight on this.

34. In conclusion  therefore  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    entitled to conclude that the Appellant had not  met  the  requirements
    for  the  forms  of  international  protection  that  he   relied   on.
    Accordingly I find no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The
decision  to  dismiss  the   Appellant's   appeal   on   asylum/humanitarian
protection/human rights grounds stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     30 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

