
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01865/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 22 March 2021                    |On: 8 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     HL
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee, instructed by Davjunnel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of China, born on 15  September  1994.  She
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's  decision
      to refuse her asylum and human rights claim.

   3. The appellant claims to have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  May
      2009. She claimed asylum on 18 April 2017 on the  basis  of  being  at
      risk on return as a result of having no papers and of having converted
      to Christianity. She claimed that  her  grandparents,  with  whom  she
      lived, had converted to Christianity when she was 7 years of  age  and
      that she had become Christian herself. The appellant claimed that  her
      grandparents died when she was  13  years  old  and  she  stayed  with
      neighbours until the age of 15 when  she  was  trafficked  to  the  UK
      through Malaysia, leaving China in March 2009.

   4. On 8 March 2018 a referral was made to the National Referral Mechanism
      in order for a Competent Authority to make a decision  as  to  whether
      the appellant fell  within  the  definition  of  a  victim  of  modern
      slavery. A positive decision was made in that regard on 3 April 2018.

   5. The respondent  nevertheless  refused  the  appellant's  claim  on  11
      February 2020 on the grounds that her account of having  converted  to
      Christianity was rejected and that she would not be at  risk  on  that
      basis in any event, that she was  not  at  risk  by  reason  of  being
      undocumented and that her removal to China would not breach her  human
      rights. The respondent noted that the appellant had had a child but it
      was considered that it was in the child's  best  interests  to  remain
      with her and that was not a reason for her to be able to remain in the
      UK.

   6. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by  Judge  Cole
      in the First-tier Tribunal on 8 October 2020. The appellant's evidence
      before the judge was that she had been  abandoned  by  her  biological
      parents and had been taken in by an elderly couple whom she called her
      grandparents. She had no documentation and her grandfather had had  to
      give gifts to the headmaster of the school to get  her  admitted.  Her
      grandparents were Christians and took her to  church  in  China.  They
      died when she was 13  years  old.  When  she  was  15  years  old  the
      neighbours, who had helped her after her grandparents died, passed her
      on to a man who took her to Malaysia, Ireland and then  the  UK  where
      she was held  in  an  apartment  with  other  girls  and  forced  into
      prostitution. She escaped, was re-captured and then escaped again  and
      was befriended by a  Chinese  woman  who  helped  her.   She  met  her
      partner, started a relationship and had  a  child.  She  feared  being
      seriously harmed by the traffickers if she was returned to China.

   7. The main issue before the judge was the risk to  the  appellant  as  a
      result of being trafficked to the UK and the question of her  lack  of
      documentation. The judge heard from an expert, Dr Elena Consiglio, who
      gave evidence via video-link from Italy. The expert gave evidence that
      the appellant would not be excluded from the "hukou" system and  would
      be  required  to  go  to  the  place  where  she  had  her   permanent
      registration in order to obtain a certificate from the police  and  so
      that she could apply to relocate in China. The expert opined  that  it
      would be very difficult to get a hukou  registration  if  not  already
      registered,  that  she  would  not  be  recognised  as  a  victim   of
      trafficking and that she would be at risk of being  re-trafficked  and
      of coming to the attention of the  same  criminal  network  which  had
      previously trafficked her, as she had not paid her dues.

   8. The judge heard from the appellant and her  partner.  The  appellant's
      partner had come to the UK in 2010 to study but had  been  refused  an
      extension to his visa in 2016, had been refused administrative  review
      of that decision and had made an unsuccessful judicial  review  claim,
      following which he had been advised by his  solicitor  that  the  best
      course for them both would be for the appellant to claim  asylum.  The
      judge, having regard to the fact that the appellant had been found  to
      be a victim of modern slavery, proceeded on the basis that the account
      of being forced to  work  as  a  prostitute  and  having  escaped  was
      accepted. The judge found, however, that the delay  in  the  appellant
      claiming asylum and the timing of her claim, following the refusal  of
      her  partner's  administrative  review  application,  undermined   her
      credibility and suggested that  she  was  not  genuinely  in  fear  of
      persecution. The judge considered that the appellant's claim based  on
      Christianity  had  been  manufactured.  As  for  the  issue   of   the
      appellant's documentation,  the  judge  concluded  that  the  evidence
      suggested that she did in fact  have  hukou  registration.  The  judge
      considered  that  the  appellant's   account   of   being   trafficked
      demonstrated a sophisticated organised  gang  and  accepted  that  she
      still owed a debt to the traffickers and was accordingly  at  risk  of
      punishment from them in her home  area,  although  not  of  being  re-
      trafficked. The judge found, however, that the appellant could  safely
      relocate to another part of China.

   9. As to whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  and  her
      family to relocate within China, the judge found that the  appellant's
      partner would be able to find a job and accommodation in another  part
      of the country but acknowledged that it would  be  more  difficult  to
      relocate with the appellant and their child.  The  judge  found,  with
      reference to the country guidance in HC & RC (Trafficked women)  China
      CG [2009] UKAIT 00027, that the appellant and her child  could  obtain
      registration, but that even if there were problems  in  doing  so  she
      would not end up in a marginalised and  poor  and  deprived  situation
      because  her  partner  would  be  able  to  support  her.  The   judge
      accordingly concluded that internal  relocation  to  another  part  of
      China would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for the appellant  and
      her family and that she did not therefore qualify  as  a  refugee.  He
      found that her removal would  not  breach  her  human  rights  and  he
      dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

  10. Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      on the grounds that  the  judge  erred  by  preferring  the  out-dated
      country guidance in HC & RC over the evidence of the  country  expert,
      in regard to whether she could relocate to another part of  China  and
      obtain hukou registration without first returning to  her  home  area;
      and that the judge erred by finding that it would  be  reasonable  for
      her and her daughter to relocate outside her  home  area  without  the
      correct documentation, as an illegal immigrant.

  11. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 25 November 2020.
      The matter then came before me for a hearing,  by  way  of  skype  for
      business.

Hearing and submissions

  12. Mr Mukherjee submitted, in relation to the question of  the  appellant
      being required to return to her  home  area  in  order  to  obtain  an
      identity card under the hukou system, that the judge's reliance on the
      case of HC & RC was  misplaced  in  the  light  of  the  more  current
      evidence and that the judge had erred by rejecting the expert evidence
      without giving proper reasons. The Tribunal's finding in  relation  to
      that question, at [53] of HC & RC, was based upon a Refugee  Board  of
      Canada report from February 2005 which in turn was based upon evidence
      dating back a few years. Even in that case the evidence was unclear as
      to whether someone without a hukou card would have to go back to their
      home area. The judge erred by relying on old country  guidance  rather
      than  the  current  expert  evidence  and  at  [77]  made  speculative
      assumptions about the situation in China being  more  liberalised.  As
      for the second ground, the judge erred in  law  by  finding  that  the
      appellant could relocate without going back to her home area and  live
      illegally, supported by her partner, when that  was  contrary  to  the
      Refugee Convention. That fall-back position was unsustainable in law.

  13. Mr Tan submitted that the guidance in HC & RC was still applicable and
      a parallel could be drawn between  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
      that case and the appellant in this case. The findings in HC & RC were
      not solely based on the Refugee Board of Canada report,  but  also  on
      expert evidence, and  those  findings  were  confirmed  in  subsequent
      cases, in AX (family planning scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT 97 and  QH
      (Christians - risk )(China) CG [2014] UKUT 86. Mr Tan  submitted  that
      the reality was that 20 million people lived in China  without  formal
      documentation and so that was something the appellant would be able to
      do in the alternative.

  14. Mr Mukherjee submitted that the country guidance was outdated and that
      the issue needed to be looked at again.

Discussion and conclusions

  15. In the case of SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
      [2012] EWCA Civ 940 the Court of Appeal held that:
  1. "The system of Country  Guidance  determinations  enables  appropriate
     resources, in terms of the  representations  of  the  parties  to  the
     Country Guidance appeal, expert and factual evidence and the personnel
     and time of the Tribunal,  to  be  applied  to  the  determination  of
     conditions in, and therefore the risks of return for persons  such  as
     the appellants in the Country  Guidance  appeal  to,  the  country  in
     question. The procedure is aimed at arriving at  a  reliable  (in  the
     sense of accurate) determination.
  1. It is for these reasons, as well as the desirability  of  consistency,
     that decision makers and tribunal judges are required to take  Country
     Guidance determinations into account, and to follow them  unless  very
     strong grounds supported by cogent evidence,  are  adduced  justifying
     their not doing so."
  16. It is the appellant's case, in asserting that the judge's decision was
      not a sustainable one, that there were strong  grounds  for  departing
      from the previous country guidance in HC & RC in relation to the issue
      of relocation and the hukou system. Those strong grounds were that the
      country guidance relied on outdated information and evidence and  that
      there was fresh expert evidence confirming that a person such  as  the
      appellant would have to return to her home area, where she would be at
      risk, in order to obtain a hukou book and a residence  identity  card.
      However, it seems to me that  the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
      follow the country guidance, having given careful consideration to the
      expert report and provided cogent reasons for preferring  the  country
      guidance to the expert evidence.

  17. The Upper Tribunal, in HC & RC, considered various pieces of  evidence
      including expert evidence given  in  a  previous  case  together  with
      several human rights reports and provided reasons  for  rejecting  the
      evidence of the expert before  them,  Dr  Sheehan,  whose  views  were
      similar to those of Dr Consiglio in the appeal before Judge  Cole,  in
      relation to the issues of internal relocation and registration. As far
      as I can see from her report, Dr Consiglio did not refer in  the  body
      of her report to any evidence of  specific  changes  which  had  taken
      place in China to displace the findings reached by the Tribunal in  HC
      & RC and did not address the Tribunal's contrary findings in HC &  RC,
      but simply presented a different  view.  It  is  also  relevant  that,
      whilst Dr Consiglio confirmed in her oral evidence at the hearing that
      she was aware that the appellant had a partner and would be  returning
      to China with her and that her report was prepared on that  basis,  as
      recorded at [32] of the judge's decision, the report does  not  appear
      to take that into account. Indeed, [65] of her report, at page  58  of
      the appeal bundle, refers to the appellant being without  the  support
      of family and considers her circumstances on that basis. On that basis
      alone the report did not provide  a  reliable  source  of  information
      about the appellant's ability to relocate. Accordingly, it seems to me
      that the judge was perfectly entitled to rely on the country  guidance
      in forming his conclusions on internal relocation.

  18. Indeed, as Mr Tan submitted, the  Upper  Tribunal's  guidance  on  the
      hukou system and the ability to relocate in China was fortified in the
      later decisions in AX (China) and QH (China), in which conclusions  on
      the relevant issue were set out at [191(14)]  of  the  former  and  at
      [137(4)(vi)] of the latter. Judge Cole's decision was consistent  with
      the decisions reached in those cases, where reference was made to  the
      relaxation in the hukou system and the  ability  of  Chinese  internal
      migrants to move around without having to return to the original hukou
      area. Contrary to the assertions made by Mr  Mukherjee,  there  is  no
      suggestion that the decisions advocate unlawful  residence  in  China,
      but rather an alternative form of residence.

  19. For all of these reasons it seems to me that the judge  was  perfectly
      entitled to conclude as he did and to dismiss the appeal on the  basis
      that he did. I do not consider that the grounds disclose errors of law
      in the judge's decision and I uphold the decision.



DECISION

  20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.




   Anonymity


   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.






Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  23 March 2021





