
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01575/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 October 2017                    |On 3 November 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                    M r a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Clarke, instructed by Fadiga & co, solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 21 March 2017 dismissing his appeal against the
    respondent's decision of 27 January 2017 refusing his  application  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 19 March 1990.  On  his  own
    account, he left Iran in November or December 2015 travelling  overland
    to Turkey where he stayed for four days. He then  travelled  to  Greece
    staying for 10 days and then across Europe to France. He  attempted  to
    enter the UK on 14 May 2016 but was removed. Undeterred, he returned to
    the UK by boat on 31 July 2016 and claimed asylum.

3.   The basis of his claim  was  a  fear  of  persecution  because  he  had
    converted to Christianity. His account can  briefly  be  summarised  as
    follows. He was born into a  Shia  Muslim  family  but  they  were  not
    religious. He did not comply with religious requirements and there  was
    an occasion when he was beaten after being found drunk at a checkpoint.
    He did his military service for 18 months in 2008-9.  His  family  then
    asked the family of a Muslim girl he knew for her hand in marriage  but
    this was rejected as the appellant was not religious. This led  to  him
    becoming depressed.

4.   He was then contacted by a friend, M, he had not  seen  for  six  years
    who insisted that he visit him at his house. This was on 24 July  2015.
    M was kind and they discussed the rejection of his marriage proposal. M
    told him to forgive the girl and he spoke  of  the  love  of  God.  The
    appellant noticed a Bible on his kitchen table and started to  read  it
    and he liked what he read. He asked if he could borrow it  and  M  said
    that he would get him his own copy. Two weeks later on 7 August 2015  M
    gave him a Bible and as a present and later took him to a house church.
    He attended weekly on Fridays but could not go to the Alpha classes  on
    Wednesdays as he was working.

5.   The appellant stopped attending the church when M  called  him  to  say
    that one of his friends at the church had been arrested.  He  told  the
    appellant to collect anything incriminating from his home and  go  into
    hiding. He did so and called his father who was very upset. His  father
    called him two days later saying that M had  been  arrested  and  after
    another two days, he called again saying that the  Etelaat  had  raided
    the family home, had found the Bible in the appellant's room and his ID
    card and had arrested his twin brother. The  appellant  left  Iran  the
    same day with the assistance of an agent.

6.   The appellant claimed asylum on arrival in the UK but for  the  reasons
    set out in the decision letter dated 27 January  2017,  the  respondent
    was not satisfied that he had converted from Islam to  Christianity  in
    Iran, that the authorities there had developed any adverse interest  in
    him or that removing him to Iran would be in breach of either article 3
    or 8 of the ECHR. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

7.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and a witness  from  a
    church he attends in the UK. For the reasons she gave in [19]  -  [33],
    she was not satisfied that the appellant had converted  from  Islam  to
    Christianity or that he had any serious  intention  of  doing  so.  Her
    findings are summarised in [32]-[33]:

           "32.    I have to be satisfied to the  lower  standard  of  proof
           that this appellant is a Christian convert. I do  not  find  that
           this appellant was interested in  Christianity  in  Iran  to  the
           extent that he decided he would  study  the  Bible  or  become  a
           convert. I do not find that he was interested in religion to  any
           great extent. I do not accept  that  he  fled  Iran  because  his
           friends were arrested or because he thought he would be arrested.
           I do not accept that the family home was [raided] or that  either
           [R] or [A] was detained by the authorities. It follows  that  the
           appellant does not leave Iran because of any convention reason.


           33.     I do accept that this appellant has been attending church
           in the UK. It seems to me more likely than not that he  is  doing
           so to bolster his claim. I am not persuaded by his oral  evidence
           or that of his witness that he is attending Alpha classes with  a
           view to conversion. The documentary evidence he  has  adduced  in
           support of his claim is woefully inadequate."


8.   The judge went on to consider, if she was wrong and the  appellant  was
    now intent on becoming a Christian, whether he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Iran. For the reasons given in [35] - [41],  she  found  that
    the appellant, even if interested in converting, would not do  anything
    more than attend meetings at house churches and would not  be  at  real
    risk from the authorities in Iran. She also found  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk on return as a failed asylum seeker or as  someone
    who had left the country illegally.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

9.   In the grounds of appeal, it is argued that the judge erred in  law  as
    follows. Firstly, she erred at [20] as she accepted that the  appellant
    had been consistent as to the core of his  account  but  had  not  been
    clear or consistent in the details. It is argued that in the  light  of
    Chiver (1997) INLR 212 this is a material error because it goes to  the
    credibility of the appellant's case and having accepted the core of the
    account, it was perverse  to  find  that  he  had  not  been  clear  or
    consistent in the details. Secondly, the judge erred  by  carrying  out
    her own research on the internet referred to  at  [30].   Any  relevant
    questions could have been asked of the witness from the church and,  in
    any event, the representatives were not made aware that the judge  will
    be doing any such research.

10.  Thirdly, at [31] the judge wrongly drew an adverse inference  from  the
    fact that the appellant had not been baptised when  the  evidence  from
    the witness from the church was that baptism came after the  completion
    of the Alpha course and as he had not completed the  course,  he  could
    not be baptised. Fourthly, it is argued that the judge did not properly
    assess the country guidance decisions referred to at  the  hearing  and
    failed to take into account  credible  background  country  information
    identified in ground 4 supporting an argument that the appellant  would
    be at risk on return. Fifthly, it is argued that the  judge  fell  into
    error in her overall consideration of the claim and that  the  decision
    refusing permission to appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  was  materially
    flawed.

11.  Ms Clarke adopted her grounds. She submitted that the  judge  had  been
    wrong to carry out her own research on the internet as any  information
    she sought could have been provided by the witness from the church. She
    further argued that the judge had been wrong to infer from the  website
    that the church was not active and that had clouded her  assessment  of
    the appellant's evidence. She further argued that the judge  had  given
    undue weight to the fact that the appellant had not been  baptised  and
    had failed to assess that issue in context.

12.  Mr Deller indicated that he  had  concerns  about  the  safety  of  the
    judge's findings of fact. He conceded  that  the  judge  had  erred  by
    carrying out an internet search when there had been no need  to  do  so
    and had further  erred  by  drawing  an  unwarranted  conclusion  about
    whether the church  the  appellant  attended  was  active  or  not.  He
    accepted that there was substance in the fourth ground that  the  judge
    had failed to  take  into  account  recent  background  evidence  about
    circumstances facing Christian converts in Iran. For these reasons,  he
    did not seek to resist the appeal.

The Error of Law

13.  I accept that this concession is correctly  made  and,  accordingly,  I
    find that the judge erred in law as  submitted  by  Ms  Clarke  and  in
    particular as set out in grounds 2,  3  and  4.   Both  representatives
    accepted, and I agree, that in these circumstances the decision  should
    be set aside and the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a full rehearing.

Decision

14.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full  rehearing
    by a different judge.




Signed:       H J E Latter                   Date: 30 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter







