
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01454/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Employment Tribunals       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th February 2018                          |On 2nd March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [B S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Harrison (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E. M. M. Smith, promulgated  on  21st  March  2017,  following  a
    hearing at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent, on 13th March 2017.   In  the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on [  ]  1992.
    He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary of  State,
    dated 24th January 2017,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that from the age of 14 years, he realised  he
    was gay, and thereafter entered into a relationship with  a  boy  named
    Herish at school and had sex with that boy.   After  that  relationship
    had ended, in 2009 he was caught by staff hugging  and  kissing  a  boy
    called Mustafa, as he attempted to pull Mustafa's trousers down,  which
    resulted in his expulsion from the school.  His father became aware  of
    this and banned him from leaving the house.  The Appellant was required
    to accompany his father to their shop and to live and to remain  there.
    After some three years, his father began to allow him to leave the shop
    on his own to build furniture for customers.  In 2015,  he  met  a  man
    called Omed, who was married, but notwithstanding this, a  relationship
    developed between the two of them, and after six  weeks  they  began  a
    sexual relationship.  After a year the Appellant's father and  brothers
    found out and questioned Omed and threatened  to  kill  him.   At  that
    stage Omed encouraged the Appellant to leave Iraq  and  on  5th  August
    2016 the Appellant left Iraq.  He arrived in  the  UK  on  16th  August
    2016.  His screening interview took place on 17th August 2016, and  his
    SEF interview was on 14th January  2017.   The  Respondent  issued  her
    refusal letter on 24th January 2017.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not find the Appellant to  be  credible  in  the  account
    given (see paragraphs 16 to 21).  It was not credible that if an act as
    serious  as  pulling  another  boy's  trousers  down,  which  had  been
    witnessed by other staff, would not have resulted in the incident being
    reported to the Authorities.  The Appellant could not  explain  why  he
    had not been reported.  The judge held that,  "that  assault  had  been
    witnessed  by  staff"  with  respect  to  the  Appellant's  "homosexual
    tendencies" and it was "quite incredible" that the Authorities that had
    not been informed (para 18).

 5. Second, the Appellant also gave inconsistent accounts.  His account  in
    his SEF interview (question 85) was very different from the account  he
    gave in his screening interview.  In the first account,  the  Appellant
    stated that the school simply told him to leave and to go and  get  his
    father, but the Appellant did not return thereafter to school.  In  the
    second account he states that he did return to school with  his  father
    and goes into some detail as to what happened (paragraph 19).

 6. Third, the judge held that the Appellant's claim  in  relation  to  the
    relationship with Omed was also lacking in credibility because  it  was
    not credible, given the watchful eye kept on him by his family, that he
    was able to develop a relationship with Omed  without  alerting  Omed's
    family or his own about this.  Even less  credible  was  the  statement
    that he met with Omed in the shop and in other  public  places  without
    being found out.  (Paragraph 20).

 7. Finally, although two witnesses attended  on  the  Appellant's  behalf,
    namely, a Mr [H], and  a  Mr  [O],  both  could  only  say  that  their
    knowledge of the Appellant's homosexual tendencies was  one  which  was
    imparted to them by the Appellant himself (paragraph 23).

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to give adequate
    reasons for findings on material matters.  The  judge  also  failed  to
    give the Appellant the benefit of the doubt.  She  placed  too  high  a
    standard of proof on him.  The Appellant had applied for asylum on  the
    basis of his homosexuality.

 9. On 20th September 2017, the Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal
    on the basis that although the Grounds of  Appeal  amount  to  "lengthy
    disagreements with the decision" it was arguable that the judge  failed
    to  give  reasons  for  rejecting  the  explanations  provided  by  the
    Appellant "in his witness statement".

10. On 11th October 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that
    this was an attempt to re-litigate the matter  because  the  judge  had
    given perfectly credible reasons at paragraphs 16 to 25  for  rejecting
    the Appellant's claim that he was a homosexual.  In fact, the Appellant
    appeared to be incredulous that part of his claim  had  been  rejected.
    In his witness statement he states that he was  "very  surprised"  when
    parts of the AIR and SCR were read back to him.  He appeared  to  think
    that there was nothing  contradictory  in  his  answers.   Second,  the
    suggestion that the reason  why  the  school  did  not  tell  Mustafa's
    parents that the boy had been assaulted at school by the Appellant  was
    that this "would lead to killing and bloodshed", but  this  explanation
    was entirely speculative for the motives of the school.   In  fact,  at
    the hearing, the Appellant had said that he was not sure why the school
    had not reported the issue.  The judge had found that the  failure  was
    not credible as reporting it would have protected Mustafa's  reputation
    and avoided any accusation that the school condoned what  was  regarded
    as a serious offence.

The Hearing

11. At the hearing before me  on  7th  February  2018,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr  T  Mahmood,  of  Counsel,  and  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr C Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer.
    Mr Mahmood submitted that insofar as there were any inconsistencies  in
    the Appellant's oral account given at the  hearing,  these  could  have
    been dispelled with had the judge given regard to the written  evidence
    in the witness statement.  I pointed out to  Mr  Mahmood  that  it  did
    appear to be the case that the grounds of application  themselves  made
    no reference to a failure by the judge to have regard to  what  was  in
    the witness statements, and after some reflection, Mr Mahmood  properly
    accepted, that that was indeed the case.

12.  For  his  part  Mr  Harrison  relied  upon  the  Rule   24   response.
    Essentially, he submitted that this was a  case  involving  the  weight
    that the judge should give to various parts of the evidence.  That  was
    a matter that was entirely within the discretion  of  the  judge.   The
    judge did not see it fit to give weight to the witness  statement  over
    and above that which the Appellant had himself stated by  way  of  oral
    evidence at the hearing.  The two witnesses who attended on  behalf  of
    the Appellant were only able to say that they had no personal knowledge
    of the Appellant's sexuality.  One of them indeed, was a failed  asylum
    seeker, who had been found on appeal not to be a creditworthy  witness.
    The Appellant could have called more witnesses.  The witnesses were not
    barred from giving evidence about the material matters.

13. In reply, Mr Mahmood submitted that there were two  witness  statements
    on behalf of the two witnesses attending.  The witness statements  were
    important.   The  Appellant's  own  witness  statement  explained   why
    Mustafa's family were not  informed.   This  was  in  order  to  "avoid
    bloodshed".

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

15. First, the grounds  of  application  place  no  reliance  upon  witness
    statement evidence as having been excluded or overlooked by Judge E. M.
    M. Smith.

16. Second, insofar as the witness statements do  provide  an  explanation,
    for example, as to why the assault on Mustafa was not reported,  either
    to his parents, or to the Authorities, on the basis  that  this  "would
    lead to killing and bloodshed", this  was  a  matter  which  the  judge
    considered to be speculative.  Indeed, the judge gave  two  very  clear
    reasons.  First, that it would  have  protected  Mustafa's  reputation.
    Second, that the school would have had to report it for fear they would
    have been accused of condoning such serious acts (see paragraph 18).

17. Accordingly, there is nothing in the point that the  witness  statement
    evidence was not taken into account.

18. Finally, and in any event, the judge gave ample other reasons  for  why
    the claim was lacking in credibility  in  any  event.   For  all  these
    reasons, this application cannot succeed.

Notice of Decision

19. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

20. No anonymity direction is made.

21. I dismiss the appeal.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th February 2018


