
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01769/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                   |On 11 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    Z A H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ball, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Miller (the judge), promulgated on 26  August  2016,  in
    which he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  That appeal was  against
    the Respondent's decision of 9 February 2016 refusing  the  Appellant's
    protection and human rights claims.

 2. The essence of the Appellant's claim was as follows.  He  had  been  in
    this country studying for a period of time after which he  returned  to
    Afghanistan in order  to  re-establish  himself  there.   In  his  home
    village in the Nangarhar province he heard the local Imam speaking  out
    against the West and took exception to this.  He expressed his views to
    some relatives outside the mosque, however these views  were  overheard
    by others. A week later he stood up in the mosque and defended himself.
    As a result of this the Appellant asserted  that  he  was  individually
    targeted by extremists.  This ultimately led to him fleeing the country
    and returning to the United Kingdom in 2015.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge rejected the Appellant's account of  having  been  threatened
    and targeted as a result of expressing his views.   Under  the  section
    entitled 'My conclusions', in paragraph 34 the judge states:

         "Ill-treatment does  not  cross  the  threshold  of  severity  into
         persecution, even taken cumulatively, unless there are particularly
         strong and credible elements.  The test of persecution is and  must
         be kept at a high and demanding level."

    In support of this the judge cites the well-known decision of the House
    of Lords in Horvath.

 4. In paragraph 35 the judge goes on to state adverse credibility findings
    in subparagraphs (i) to (v).  In essence it  would  be  appropriate  to
    describe these as plausibility issues rather  than  inconsistencies  as
    such.  In particular the judge found  it  to  be  implausible  that  an
    intelligent and educated  person  such  as  the  Appellant  would  have
    allowed himself to have been overheard expressing  controversial  views
    outside the mosque in his home village, or subsequently standing up  in
    the mosque.  He did not accept that  the  Appellant  would  have  stood
    himself out, as it were, in the presence of others given  the  security
    issues in Afghanistan.  In turn the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant was directly threatened.  He finds that a letter said to come
    from the Taliban was not reliable  and  that  witness  statements  from
    others provided very late in the day carried little if any weight.

 5. In paragraph 39 the judge goes on to find that even  if  the  Appellant
    had been credible there was no reason in his view as  to  why  he  [the
    Appellant] could not live in Kabul by way of relocation.  Reference  is
    made to the Respondent's Country Information Guidance document of  July
    2016.  The asylum claim failed and the judge concluded that in light of
    that the Article 3 claim would also fail.

 6. In respect of Article 8 the judge states that on the facts as found  by
    him there would be no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant
    reintegrating into life in Afghanistan.  Thus the appeal was dismissed.







The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. There are effectively three grounds of appeal.   Ground  1  relates  in
    particular to what is said in paragraph 34 of the judge's decision.  It
    is asserted that the judge has applied too high a standard of proof  in
    respect of his assessment of credibility.  Within ground 1 it  is  also
    said (paragraphs 18 and 19) that  the  judge  had  overlooked  material
    evidence from the Appellant, which went to the issue  of  why  he  said
    what he did in his home village.

 8. Ground 2 relates to the judge's dismissal of the Article  3  claim  but
    more particularly in respect of a failure to consider Article 15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive.  It is said that this element of the  case
    was argued before the judge and should have been dealt with in  detail.



 9. Ground 3 relates to an alleged inadequacy  in  the  assessment  of  the
    Article 8 claim.

10. Permission to appeal was granted in somewhat tentative terms by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 15 September 2016.




The hearing before me

11. Mr Ball initially focused on paragraphs 18 and 19  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal, and referred me to one of the Appellant's witness statements at
    pages 95 to 96 of the bundle that I have now marked AB1.  Therein,  the
    Appellant asseted that he was used  to  speaking  freely  and  that  he
    though he was safe because of the familial ties to the village. Mr Ball
    submitted that the judge simply did not  take  this  relevant  evidence
    into account.  The evidence was relevant because it went to explain why
    the Appellant might have expressed his views as he claimed to have done
    in his home village.  Given that the judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant would have said what he said, the evidence was material.   Mr
    Ball also relied  on  what  he  described  as  a  misdirection  in  law
    contained at paragraph 34 of the judge's decision.  Mr  Ball  submitted
    that too high a threshold to the assessment of credibility had in  fact
    been applied.

12. In respect of Article 15(c) Mr Ball relied on passages from  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines 2016.  In fairness to him, given that he had not represented
    the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  he  could  not  say
    precisely what had or  had  not  been  argued  before  the  judge,  nor
    precisely what country information had been  specifcally  referred  to.
    There are a number of bundles on my file  and  I  have  to  say  it  is
    somewhat unclear as to what in fact was  used  at  the  hearing  below,
    although I am guided to an  extent  by  paragraph  15  of  the  judge's
    decision.  Mr Ball directed me to the skeleton  argument  and  extracts
    from country information that were before the judge and he argued  that
    the evidence disclosed that there had been a rise in civilian deaths in
    Kabul since the decision in AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00163 (IAC) was decided back in 2012.  Mr Ball submitted that  the
    first limb of the  Article  15(c)  assessment  was  at  least  arguably
    satisfied.  In  respect  of  the  second  limb  of  the  Article  15(c)
    assessment, it again was arguable that the Appellant's  own  background
    (notwithstanding the adverse credibility findings of the  judge)  would
    have created a risk profile for him should he relocate  to  Kabul.   Mr
    Ball suggested that the judge should have considered the issue and  his
    failure to do so was, all things considered, material.

13. In respect of the Article 8 ground Mr Ball did not abandon it but  made
    no submissions upon it.

14. In respect of the Article 8 point Mr Singh submitted that the Appellant
    simply could not have succeeded on this basis if the  protection  claim
    had failed.

15. On the credibility issue he submitted that Mr Ball's interpretation  of
    paragraph 34 was wrong and I was referred to paragraphs 3 to 5  of  the
    judge's decision.  Mr Singh  pointed  out  that  at  the  beginning  of
    paragraph 35 the judge had stated that he had taken  all  the  evidence
    into account.  It was clear enough that  the  judge  had  had  all  the
    relevant information in his mind when making the credibility assessment
    and that a judge is not bound to refer to each and every element of the
    evidence when reaching a decision.

16. On the Article 15(c) issue Mr Singh submitted that none of the evidence
    showed that there was a sufficiently serious level of violence in Kabul
    for the first limb of Article 15(c) to be satisfied.  In respect of the
    Appellant's own particular  circumstances  it  was  said  that  he  had
    stopped working for the United States company back in 2009 and that his
    case before the First-tier Tribunal had not been put on the basis  that
    his history would in itself create a risk to him  in  Kabul  or  indeed
    anywhere else.

17. In reply Mr Ball reiterated his point that paragraph 11 of the  witness
    statement at pages 95 to 96 of AB1 was relevant and  should  have  been
    factored in.  In respect of Article 15(c) he  again  accepted  that  he
    could not comment with precision as to what was or was not said  before
    the judge but the information should have been looked at in  detail  in
    any event.

18. Both representatives were agreed that if I were to find that there were
    material errors of law in  respect  of  the  credibility  findings  the
    appeal would have to be remitted.  If however any errors of law related
    solely to the Article 15(c) argument the matter could  be  retained  in
    the Upper Tribunal and that  the  appeal  should  be  adjourned  for  a
    resumed hearing in due course so that updated country information could
    be provided.



My decision on error of law

19. I conclude that there are no material errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

20. Dealing first with the credibility issue, in my view, and with  respect
    to Mr Ball, he has misinterpreted what the judge is in truth saying  at
    paragraph 34 of his decision.  The judge is not indicating  there  that
    he was applying too high a standard  of  proof  to  the  assessment  of
    credibility.  Rather he is simply setting out his own formulation as to
    what constitutes persecution for the purposes  of  a  claim  under  the
    Refugee Convention.  The well-known decision in  Horvath  is  cited  in
    support of his proposition and having regard  to  well-known  materials
    such as the UNHCR's handbook, Professor Hathaway's seminal work on  the
    law of refugees and indeed Article 9 of the Qualification Directive, it
    is right to say that treatment must reach a serious level in order  for
    persecution to be shown. Secondly, and taking the judge's decision as a
    whole, I refer back to paragraphs 3 to 5 of his decision.  In paragraph
    3 the judge clearly directs himself correctly to the lower standard  of
    proof applicable in asylum appeals, and at paragraph  4  he  reiterates
    that the same  standard  applies  to  humanitarian  protection  claims.
    Taking these two points together I conclude  that  the  judge  has  not
    misdirected  himself  in  law  and  this  element  of  the  Appellant's
    challenge fails.

21. Turning to the adverse credibility findings themselves as  set  out  in
    paragraph 35 of the decision, I note firstly that the judge  has  quite
    properly stated that he has considered all of the evidence before  him.
    He makes this statement immediately prior to setting  out  his  adverse
    findings and for  my  part  I  would  be  cautious  to  disregard  this
    statement when assessing what follows.  Before me Mr Ball accepted that
    he had no criticisms of what the judge  says  in  paragraph  35(i)  and
    (ii).  He was right to do so.  These points were perfectly open to  the
    judge based upon the evidence before him.  To that effect it  was  open
    to the judge to find that the Appellant was intelligent, well-educated,
    and would have been very well aware of  the  risk  of  saying  anything
    untoward in or around a mosque.  This is  the  context  in  which  what
    follows must be viewed.

22. In paragraph 35(iii) and (iv)  the  judge  finds  that  it  was  simply
    implausible that the Appellant would have expressed controversial views
    with anyone other than those whom he knew very well, in particular  his
    cousin and uncle.  On the face of it, it was open to the judge to  find
    that the Appellant simply would not have allowed himself  to  speak  in
    such a way that there was a possibility of others overhearing  what  he
    was saying, giving the consequences to the Appellant if  this  in  fact
    occurred.  The judge was also, on the face of the account, entitled  to
    find that the Appellant would not have placed  himself  at  what  would
    appear to be significant risk by standing up openly  and  taking  issue
    with what the Imam had been saying.

23. Before I consider the issue of the 'overlooked'  evidence,  I  turn  to
    paragraph 35(v).  Here the judge makes an additional  adverse  finding,
    namely that it was implausible that the Appellant would have sought  to
    argue with armed men following the  matters  arising  in  the  previous
    subparagraphs.   I  note  that  this  particular  point  has  not  been
    expressly challenged in the grounds or before me.

24. I now turn to the evidence of the Appellant contained at  paragraph  11
    of his witness statement at pages 95 to 96 of AB1.  The  statement  was
    presumably prepared in preparation for the appeal before the judge.  In
    a response to the reasons for refusal letter, the Appellant  states  as
    follows:

         "I was expressing what I had seen  for  myself.   It  was  my  home
         village in my homeland.  I  never  thought  that  the  consequences
         would be that great.  I am used to  talking  in  a  straightforward
         manner.  It seems normal for me to speak in this way but for others
         it was a big issue.  My mindset had totally changed.   It  was  not
         very difficult for me to change my mindset as I had spent the  most
         productive years of my life in the UK from the age of 23 which  has
         affected me a lot.  I did not target them (others in the  audience)
         directly.  My audience were people from my village, my  cousin  and
         uncle.  They have people everywhere.  This is an example of that as
         they were informed what villagers say about them.  (By they I  take
         it to mean the Taliban).  I never imagined that the  village  where
         my dad and granddad had lived would be harmful to me as  I  was  so
         confident but I was wrong."

25. This evidence forms the central basis for Mr Ball's submission that the
    judge had materially erred  in  failing  to  have  regard  to  relevant
    matters when assessing credibility.  With respect to Mr  Ball  and  his
    concerted efforts on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  I  disagree  for  the
    following reasons.

26. First, as mentioned already the judge has specifically said that he had
    had regard to all evidence in the case,  and  this  would  include  the
    evidence contained in the statement prepared for  the  appeal.   In  my
    view and on a proper and holistic reading of the  judge's  decision  he
    has indeed taken this part of the  evidence  into  account  albeit  the
    particular expression and source of it has not been set out  in  terms.
    What the judge is effectively saying in paragraph 35(i) to (iv) is that
    in light of the Appellant's circumstances  and  his  knowledge  of  the
    prevailing situation in Afghanistan it was simply implausible, even  on
    the lower standard of proof, that he would have placed himself at  such
    risk by speaking or by expressing  controversial  views.   Implicit  in
    this in my view is a clear rejection of the purported explanation  made
    by the  Appellant  in  the  appeal  statement.   In  other  words,  the
    Appellant was seeking to say that it was quite understandable  for  him
    to have said what he said and where he said it whereas  the  judge  has
    concluded on the evidence as a whole this simply would  not  have  been
    the case.

27. Second, it is true that a judge does not have to have  regard  to  each
    and every aspect of the evidence when reaching a decision.

28. Third, in any event I do not see that even if there was  a  failure  to
    have specific regard to this evidence it could have made  any  material
    difference. The judge's concerns on credibility were not confined to  a
    single incident alleged to have occurred by the Appellant but  several,
    namely his conversation outside the mosque, speaking  up  against  what
    the Imam had been saying, and in addition seeking to argue  with  armed
    men.  These it seems to me should be seen  cumulatively.   In  addition
    there  are  other  adverse  points  taken  against  the  Appellant   in
    paragraphs 36 and 38 and these cannot properly be left out  of  account
    given that a decision of a judge should be  looked  at  in  the  round,
    although I accept that what is said in paragraph 35 is, as Mr Ball  put
    it, the lynchpin of the adverse credibility findings.

29. In light of the above the challenge to the credibility findings  fails.



30. I turn next to ground 2.  Although it was  not  specifically  canvassed
    with me at the hearing, there is reference  to  a  failure  to  address
    Article 3 independently from  the  refugee  claim.   For  the  sake  of
    completeness I reject that ground of challenge.  There is  no  arguable
    basis upon which the Appellant could have succeeded under Article 3  on
    the findings of fact reached by the judge when  his  asylum  claim  had
    already failed.

31. Next comes the Article 15(c) point.  It is correct that  Article  15(c)
    was raised in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  and  is
    dealt with in the skeleton argument.  It is correct also that the judge
    has not made any specific reference to Article 15(c) in  his  decision.
    To that extent it can perhaps properly be said that  he  has  erred  in
    failing to address  a  matter  raised  before  him  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.

32. The real question in this case is whether the error was  material.   In
    my view, having taken all  of  the  circumstances  in  this  case  into
    account, it was not. I say this for the following reasons.

33. First, the judge has made an  alternative  finding  that  it  would  be
    reasonable  for  the  Appellant  to  have  relocated  to  Kabul.   This
    alternative finding has not been challenged  by  the  Appellant.   This
    point undermines the Appellant's  argument  as  regards  Article  15(c)
    because a number of the potential factors which might have been  prayed
    in aid as standing the Appellant out from the crowd (placing him at  an
    individualised risk) have been effectively considered and rejected.  In
    other words, the judge found that the Appellant could  reasonably  live
    in Kabul, and this conclusion is unchallenged.

34. Second, having regard to the skeleton argument  before  the  First-tier
    and the Record of Proceedings (as best as I can decipher it) I  do  not
    see a schedule of particular references to the country  information  to
    which the judge's attention had been drawn.  Mr Ball did not  represent
    below and could not be precise as to what was or was not referred to or
    submitted on the Appellant's behalf in regards to  Article  15(c).   He
    has helpfully not only provided me with the skeleton argument but  also
    extracts from country information that I accept were placed before  the
    judge.

35. The skeleton argument asserts that "caution" should be applied  to  the
    conclusions in AK. However, I see no submission in terms that AK should
    be departed from (with reference to the  Practice  Directions  or,  for
    example, what is said in SG  (Iraq)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940  about  the
    strength of the evidence and reasoning required to  justifiably  refuse
    to follow  a  designated  country  guidance  decision).  Nor  does  the
    skeleton include references to specific country information  linked  to
    the Article 15(c) issue.

36. Third, Article 15(c) contains two limbs the first of which is the  need
    to establish that there is a state of internal  armed  conflict  giving
    rise to the serious individual threat to life or person  by  virtue  of
    indiscriminate violence.  In the circumstances of this case  it  needed
    to be shown by the Appellant that such a situation pertained  to  Kabul
    at the relevant time.

37. Having regard  to  the  skeleton  argument,  the  extracts  of  country
    information provided (which  include  amongst  other  items  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines  2016  and  country  information  reports  produced  by  the
    Respondent) and the country information contained  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle (which as far as I can tell was before the First-tier Tribunal -
    indexed and paginated 1 to 228), it was unarguable that the first  limb
    of Article 15(c) could be satisfied in respect of Kabul as at the  date
    of the hearing before the judge.  Nothing  in  the  Naziri  proceedings
    assists the Appellant  in  respect  of  Kabul  (particularly  when  the
    judge's conclusion on internal relocation is factored in). As I see it,
    there was no proper basis upon which  the  judge  could  have  properly
    concluded  that  AK  should  be  departed  from.   There   was   simply
    insufficient evidence to show that any and all civilians in the capital
    would  be  at  risk.   In  respect  of   the   Appellant's   particular
    circumstances Mr Ball's arguments faces a  couple  of  obstacles  here.
    Aside from the fact that the judge's conclusion on internal  relocation
    is not challenged (see above), the Appellant's case before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was not argued on the basis that his own history  (having
    worked for a US company until 2009) would have placed him at real  risk
    in Kabul or indeed anywhere else.  Thus it is very  difficult  now  for
    the Appellant to be suggesting that  this  element  of  his  background
    would place him at risk.  It seems to me that this  is,  with  all  due
    respect to Mr Ball, a question of making  what  might  otherwise  be  a
    decent point before the First-tier Tribunal too late in  the  day.   In
    this regard I also note that the  UNHCR  Guidelines  risk  category  to
    which I have been referred to by  Mr  Ball  relate  very  much  to  the
    argument that I have just rejected, namely that the Appellant's history
    would  stand  him  out,  as  it  were,  notwithstanding   the   adverse
    credibility findings made by the judge in respect of what  occurred  in
    the home village.

38. Fourth, the grounds assert that the judge  had  failed  to  follow  the
    terms of the Respondent's guidance  as  set  out  in  the  Country  and
    Information Guidance document dated July 2016.  Reference  is  made  to
    paragraph 3.1.4 of that document.  Having  read  the  entirety  of  the
    policy summary for myself I fail to  see  how  the  judge  has  wrongly
    interpreted the guidance contained therein.  Indeed, the policy summary
    entirely supports what the judge  has  said  in  paragraph  39  of  his
    decision.  This also has a bearing on the Article 15(c)  point  because
    the country information guidance document says in terms that in view of
    the Respondent there was no internal armed conflict in Kabul.

39. In light of all of the above the Appellant's challenge on  the  Article
    15(c) issue fails as well.

40. I turn finally to the Article 8 challenge.  In  my  view  Mr  Ball  was
    right not to pursue this point with any vigour.  I cannot for  my  part
    see any basis upon which the Appellant could succeed under Article 8 in
    light of the facts as found by the judge.

41. For all these reasons the Appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    fails and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal stands.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date: 10 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


