
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01024/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th September 2017                    |On 26th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     SH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Sanders of Counsel, instructed by Maya
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Lloyd of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 14th March 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iraq, born [ ] 1982.  His asylum and
    human rights claim was refused on 17th January 2017 and the  subsequent
    appeal was heard by the FtT on 2nd March 2017.

 3. There had been a previous appeal so  the  FtT  applied  the  Devaseelan
    guidelines.  The FtT found that the Appellant would not be at  risk  if
    returned to Iraq and found that  he  is  from  Mosul  which  is  not  a
    contested area.

 4. The FtT found that even if the situation in Mosul had deteriorated, the
    Appellant could safely return to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (the IKR).

 5. Having found that the Appellant would not be at  risk  if  returned  to
    Iraq, the FtT considered Article 8, accepting that  the  Appellant  had
    family life in the UK with his wife and child.  The Respondent conceded
    at the  hearing  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his wife and child.  The  FtT  found  that  the  best
    interests of the child would be to stay in the UK with her mother,  and
    it would be proportionate for the Appellant to return to  Iraq  and  to
    apply for entry clearance to the UK.

 6.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  on  all  grounds.   The   Appellant   was
    unrepresented before the FtT, and was without legal representation when
    he applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   It  was
    contended that the FtT had made a factual mistake in stating that Mosul
    is not in a contested area, pointing out that  it  is  within  Nainawah
    province, and that it was accepted that this was a contested area.

 7. The Appellant pointed out that his wife is a British citizen who  could
    not accompany him to Iraq, and contended that there would be  a  breach
    of his Article 8 family life if he was forced to return to Iraq leaving
    his wife and child in the UK.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pedro in the following terms;



         "2.  The grounds assert, inter alia,  that  the  judge  misdirected
             herself in her application of the country guidance in AA  Iraq
             CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) by proceeding on the basis  that  the
             Appellant, being from Mosul, was not from a contested area and
             that this premise has tainted the judge's findings.

         3.   The  grounds  raise  an  arguable  error  of  law  capable  of
             affecting the outcome."

 9. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary that the FtT directed itself  appropriately,
    pointing out that the FtT had found that the Appellant had a reasonable
    option of relocation to the IKR.

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.



Submissions

11. Ms Sanders submitted that the FtT had erred in law by failing to follow
    AA (Iraq) which was the country guidance case in force at the  time  of
    the FtT hearing.  The FtT was factually wrong to find  that  Mosul  was
    not a contested area, as it was confirmed in the country guidance  case
    that it was within a contested area.  It was submitted that the FtT had
    failed to consider the personal  circumstances  of  the  Appellant,  to
    assess whether he had a reasonable option of relocation to the IKR, and
    I was asked to find that it was a clear error of law not  to  follow  a
    country guidance decision without giving reasons.

12. It was contended that the FtT had erred in law in  considering  Article
    8.  Ms Sanders pointed out that the Appellant has a British child which
    had not been considered by the FtT.   The  FtT  had  erred  in  law  by
    failing to consider section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

13. Mr McVeety did not adopt the rule 24 response, and  conceded  that  the
    FtT had materially erred in law as contended by Ms Sanders.

My Conclusions and Reasons

14. I announced at the hearing that the FtT had materially erred in law  as
    contended on behalf of the Appellant, and  the  FtT  decision  was  set
    aside with no findings preserved.

15. The FtT was factually incorrect in finding Mosul not to be a  contested
    area.  AA (Iraq) confirmed that Mosul was within a contested area,  and
    it was an error of law for the FtT  not  to  follow  country  guidance,
    without giving reasons.

16. The FtT did not carry out an adequate consideration  of  whether  there
    was a reasonable internal relocation option to the IKR.  This is  dealt
    with very briefly at paragraphs  50-51,  the  FtT  finding  being  that
    because there was no indiscriminate violence in the IKR, the  Appellant
    could safely  return.   There  was  no  further  consideration  of  the
    reasonableness of internal relocation.

17. The FtT erred in considering Article  8.   The  provisions  of  section
    117B(6) are set out in the FtT decision but not considered.  As it  was
    accepted  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with  a  qualifying  child  (his  daughter  is  a  British
    citizen), the FtT should have considered whether it would be reasonable
    to expect the  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   There  was  no
    consideration of reasonableness in line with the guidance given  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

18. Both representatives submitted that  no  findings  of  fact  should  be
    preserved because the consideration of risk on return was  flawed,  and
    therefore the appeal should be remitted to the FtT to be heard  afresh.



19.  I  considered  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's   Practice
    Statements, and decided that the appropriate course was  to  remit  the
    appeal back to the FtT.  This is because substantial fact finding needs
    to be undertaken, and it is more appropriate for this to be  undertaken
    by the FtT, rather than the Upper Tribunal.

20. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal will be heard at the Manchester Hearing Centre by a
    judge other than Judge Lloyd.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction.  I continue that direction pursuant  to
rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Unless  and
until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date 20th September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.




Signed                              Date 20th September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
