
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01096/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2016                   |On 26 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Akindele, instructed by A&A Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal arises from the decision of the respondent to refuse the
    appellant's application for asylum. The appellant's ensuing appeal was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ripley. In a decision promulgated on
    9 August 2016, the judge dismissed the appeal. The appellant now
    appeals that decision.

 2. The factual findings of the judge can be summarised as follows:

      a. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 15 March 2003
         who entered the UK on a lorry in July 2015.

      b. Since coming to the UK he has lived with his father, who is a
         British citizen.

      c. The appellant is from Karte Parwan in North West Kabul.

      d. The appellant's teacher at a madrasa in Kabul attempted to recruit
         him to Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ("Daesh"). The
         appellant agreed to join Daesh.

      e. The appellant's teacher was a man of influence whom the government
         would be unwilling to challenge.

      f. His mother became aware of his plans and sent the appellant to his
         uncle's home where he stayed for three days.

      g. He then left Afghanistan and travelled, via Iran, to the UK.

      h. After the appellant had left Afghanistan the teacher who had
         attempted to recruit him came to his home with some others in an
         armoured car with tinted glass which looked like bullet proof
         glass. They spoke to his mother through the door of the compound.
         They did not force their way in. When told that the appellant would
         not be returning to the madrasa they said they would find him
         wherever he went. There was only one such visit.

      i. The appellant's family have not been threatened by Daesh and his
         uncle has not been visited by the teacher or others from Daesh
         searching for the appellant.

      j. The appellant is in contact with family in Afghanistan and he and
         his father, who claim not to have had such contact, have been
         dishonest about this.

 3. The judge found at paragraph [35] that the appellant may be at risk on
    return to his mother's home as his teacher may be informed he has
    returned or the appellant may encounter him or someone connected to
    him. She found:

         "Once it was known that the appellant had returned, I would find
         that his teacher or someone on his teacher's behalf, may subject
         him to further radicalisation or forcible recruitment."

 4. At paragraph [38] the judge found that "there is a real risk that, once
    identified, [the appellant] could be apprehended [by Daesh] from the
    street without an opportunity to escape."

 5. At paragraph [39] the judge found that the appellant could not safely
    return to the environs of his old home or to that of his old madrasa.
    However, she went on to find:

         "Kabul is now a city of over three and half million and stretches
         to over 100sqm. I have found that his old teacher is not actively
         seeking him out and I do not see why that situation should change.
         I find that the appellant could now safely relocate to a relative
         in another part of Kabul or another part of the country. ... It
         would not be unduly harsh for him to relocate with or to a relative
         in another part of Kabul or to a relative already settled elsewhere
         in the country."

 6. The judge then found that the appellant was twelve when he left Kabul
    and that "as he gets older the prospects of being recognised in a
    chance encounter or being vulnerable to radicalisation as a child will
    reduce".

Grounds of appeal and submissions

 7. The grounds of appeal argue that having found the appellant would be at
    risk if he returned to the area of his family home or that of the
    madrasa at which he had studied, it was not reasonable to conclude that
    it would be safe for him to relocate to another part of Kabul.

 8. The grounds also argue that there was no basis for the judge to find
    that the appellant has family in other parts of Kabul - let alone other
    parts of Afghanistan - able and willing to support him.

 9. The grounds also take issue with the judge's finding that the teacher
    was not actively looking for the appellant. It is argued that the
    appellant could not be in a position to give evidence on this, as it is
    not something he could know, and the judge made assumptions that were
    not based on the evidence before her.

10. Mr Akindele, on behalf of the appellant, focused on the judge's finding
    that the appellant would only be at risk in certain parts of Kabul. His
    argument, in sum, was that if you are at risk in part of Kabul you are
    at risk in all of Kabul and there is no reasonable basis for carving
    out a portion (or portions) of Kabul as being the only areas in which
    the appellant would be at risk. He noted the judge had found the
    teacher who tried to recruit the appellant to be a man of influence. As
    such, it cannot be reasonable to find he would not have access to all
    of Kabul.

11. In respect of the appellant's family and their ability to support him,
    Mr Akindele highlighted that the appellant was only 12 when he left
    Kabul and it is not surprising he does not know the whereabouts of his
    extended family. He also contended that if the judge accepted that the
    police were not able to protect the appellant, it made no sense to find
    that his family could afford him protection.

12. Mr Whitwell argued that the judge had adopted the correct test in terms
    of internal relocation (whether it was unduly harsh) and read as a
    whole it could be seen that the decision was reasonable. The judge
    found that the family had no profile that would put them at risk; the
    appellant would not return to the Madrasa; and forced recruitment was
    not a major problem throughout Kabul. Taking these factors together, it
    was open to the judge to find it unlikely the appellant would be at
    risk so long as he avoided his home area and that of the madrasa.

Consideration

13. The judge found that the appellant would be at risk if he were returned
    to the environs of his old home or madrasa in Kabul. Having found such
    a risk to exist, the only basis on which it could be concluded that it
    would be safe for him to return to Afghanistan would be if internal
    relocation were possible.

14. Two limbs must be satisfied in order to find there can be internal
    relocation. Firstly, the appellant must be safe in another part of
    Afghanistan. Secondly, it must be reasonable (or not unduly harsh) for
    him to live in a part of the country in which he would not be at risk.
    As the appellant is a thirteen year old child, it is not reasonable for
    him to relocate to another part of Afghanistan without family support.
    Accordingly internal relocation would need to be to a safe location
    where the appellant has a family member he could live with or to which
    a family member could relocate with him.

15. With respect to the first limb, the judge found that the appellant
    could safely relocate to either (a) another part of Kabul or (b)
    another part of Afghanistan. In respect of the second limb, the judge
    found that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate
    with or to a relative in either (a) another part of Kabul or (b)
    another part of Afghanistan.

16. I accept that, applying the lower standard of proof, the judge could
    reasonably conclude, based on her findings of fact (as set out above at
    paragraph [2]), that the appellant would not be at risk if he relocated
    to another city in Afghanistan. The findings of fact indicate that the
    appellant's teacher is a man of influence in Kabul who is aware of
    where the appellant lived. It is consistent with the evidence to
    conclude that his reach and influence would not extend to another part
    of the country and that, if the appellant is living in another city, it
    is unlikely his whereabouts will come to the teacher's attention.

17. However, the same cannot be said for internal relocation within Kabul.
    The judge found the teacher to be man of influence against whom the
    state offered no protection and who travelled in an armoured car with
    tinted windows. She also found that the appellant would be at risk if
    he returned to his mother's home or if he went to the environs of the
    madrasa. She further found he would be at risk if the teacher became
    aware of his return.

18. Having made these findings, it was not open to the judge to conclude
    that the appellant could safely return to Kabul, so long as he stayed
    away from certain parts. There is free movement within Kabul and
    although the city is large, unless the appellant hid, there would
    always be a risk that the teacher (or someone connected to him) would
    learn of his presence or happen upon him. The judge's factual findings
    about the appellant's risk from the teacher and in certain locations
    within Kabul lead inextricably to the conclusion that it would not be
    safe for the appellant to return to, or internally relocate within,
    Kabul.

19. Even though, in my judgment, the appellant cannot safely relocate
    within Kabul, I accept the judge could properly conclude he would be
    safe in other parts of Afghanistan. The remaining question, therefore,
    is whether the appellant has family who could care for him elsewhere in
    Afghanistan. The judge found that he did. The judge's reasoning for
    this finding was that the appellant has a large family in Afghanistan
    with whom he and his father remain in contact. The judge referred to
    the appellant's father's description of a visit to family in Kabul in
    2010 where he said he had met "all his family, his brothers, everyone"
    The judge stated at paragraph [44] that she did "not believe that he
    has gone from knowing so many people in Kabul to having no connections
    there".

20. In my view, the judge was entitled to find that the appellant has
    relatives in Afghanistan and that he would receive support from his
    relatives. However, the evidence before the judge indicates that they
    are in Kabul. There was no evidence before the judge that supports a
    finding that the appellant would be able to live with family or friends
    in another part of Afghanistan. To so find was not consistent with the
    evidence and amounts to an error of law.

21. Accordingly, I find the judge has made two material errors. The first
    was to find that the appellant could internally relocate within Kabul.
    As I have explained, the judge's own findings lead inextricably to the
    conclusion that the appellant would not be safe anywhere in Kabul. The
    second error was to find that internal relocation to another part of
    Afghanistan would not be unduly harsh as the evidence before the judge
    was not consistent with a finding that the appellant would receive
    support from, and be cared for by, family outside of Kabul.

22. I now turn to remake the decision. Although Mr Akindale questioned
    aspects of the judge's factual findings, I am satisfied, having
    reviewed the evidence, that they were open to the judge and that they
    should be preserved.

23. For the reasons I have explained, it follows from the judge's findings
    of fact that the appellant would be at risk on return to Kabul
    regardless of where in the city he might reside, and that, because of
    the absence of family support to do so, it would be unduly harsh for
    him to locate to a city other than Kabul. I am therefore satisfied that
    the appellant has a well founded fear of persecution in Kabul for a
    Convention reason and that internal relocation to a safe location
    elsewhere in Afghanistan would be unduly harsh. Accordingly, I find
    that his appeal should be allowed.



Decision

24. The decision of the First Tier Tribunal contains a material error of
    law and is set aside.

25. I remake the said decision by allowing the appellant's appeal against
    the respondent's decision to refuse to grant him asylum.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 24 October 2016               |

