
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01406/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2016                      |On 03 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                    s H S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Heikkila, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a national  of  Afghanistan.   He  was  successful  in
    being granted permission to appeal against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Lucas sent on 20  July  2016  dismissing  his
    appeal on all grounds.  The grounds of appeal contend that there were a
    number of flaws in the judge's adverse credibility findings.  I do  not
    propose to set these out in detail because I am satisfied that  on  any
    reading the judge's determination is  vitiated  by  legal  error.   The
    identifiable errors include: a failure to address  relevant  background
    evidence concerning the nature of  the  Taliban's  modus  operandi  and
    activities; a failure to reach a decision on the issue of  whether  the
    appellant could reasonably be expected to have informed the police  and
    security authorities about the claimed attacks on his family; a failure
    when considering whether any reliance could be placed on the email from
    AGHCO to take into account that it was  sent  to  confirm  two  earlier
    letters sent to AFHCO;  and  a  failure  to  show  that  Tanveer  Ahmed
    principles were actually applied (the wording of [54]  appears  on  its
    face to mistakenly suggest that the documents were taken  into  account
    on the premise that the claim was wholly lacking in credibility).

2.   I raised with Ms Heikkila whether the judge's errors could be  said  to
    be material given  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  that  he  had
    returned from India to Kabul several times since  he  claimed  to  have
    come to the adverse attention of the Taliban  in  his  home  region  of
    Jalalabad.  She replied that it was the appellant's evidence that  when
    he returned he had lived in hiding  and  that  given  the  respondent's
    acceptance that he had worked for AGHCO it would only be  a  matter  of
    time before the Taliban would identify and target him.  Mr Tarlow  said
    he did not agree.

3.   Having considered the matter I have decided  that  the  judge's  errors
    were material in that had he accepted the appellant's account it was at
    least arguable that Kabul would not be  a  viable  internal  relocation
    alternative for him.  Accordingly, I set aside the judge's decision.

4.   Given that the principal reason  why  I  have  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision concerns assessment of credibility, the case will need  to  go
    back on remittal  to  the  FtT  so  the  appellant's  evidence  can  be
    considered afresh.  My decision should not be taken to indicate that  I
    consider the appellant has a strong case.   As  someone  who  chose  on
    several occasions to return to Kabul, a city where he claims  he  would
    be at risk of  being  targeted  by  the  Taliban,  he  may  have  great
    difficulty in establishing that the Taliban would target him  there  or
    that relocation to Kabul would be unreasonable.   Nevertheless,  he  is
    entitled to a further hearing at which his claim  can  be  assessed  de
    novo.  Any further evidence on which the appellant seeks to  rely  must
    be served in accordance with Tribunal directions  on  re-listing.   The
    background  materials  should  include  the  latest  EASO  Reports   on
    Afghanistan.

5.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and set aside his decision.  The case is remitted to the FfT before
    a judge other than Judge Lucas.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date: 30 September 2016
              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
