
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/01183/2020 (P)[1]


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27th November 2020               |On 03 June 2021                     |



                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                     AK
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation on the papers
For  the  appellant:      Ms  M  Cleghorn,  instructed  by  Halliday  Reeves
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

    1. The Tribunal may pursuant to Rules 34 of The Tribunal Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended) ("the Upper Tribunal
       Procedure Rules") make decisions in appeals without a hearing. The
       Upper Tribunal gave the provisional direction owing to the Covid-19
       pandemic that the decision on the error of law in this matter could
       be determined on the papers and invited submissions from both
       parties.  I have had regard to the views of both parties pursuant to
       rule 34(2) of The Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.

    2. Further, I bear in mind the principles established in Osborn v The
       Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61.  I have concluded that the matter
       although pertaining to asylum does not require, in the interests of
       justice and fairness, a hearing to determine the matters on the error
       of law or remaking.  Both parties are legally represented, and issues
       have been clearly explained and their views on the grounds fully set
       out.

    3. Directions were issued by UTJ Coker on 22nd September  2020  in  this
       appeal as to the proposal to set aside the decision of FtTJ Henderson
       and remake the decision granting the appeal of AK on asylum grounds.

    4. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 1st  January  2001
       and entered the United Kingdom on 21st April 2016 as an unaccompanied
       minor.   He  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  and   an
       unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  child  until  1st  June   2018.    His
       application for asylum was refused. His application for further leave
       was refused on 29th May 2018 and he appealed.

    5. FtTJ Henderson dismissed AK's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  his
       asylum claim and claim for humanitarian protection  but  allowed  his
       human rights, Article 3, claim for reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
       promulgated on 14th April 2020.  In particular the  judge  found  the
       appellant was abused by a Jihadi group in Kabul and that  there  were
       serious risks of violence to those returning from Europe from sources
       including the Taliban and criminal networks. FtTJ Henderson found the
       UNHCR report identified deteriorating  conditions,  that  there  were
       strong information networks of the Taliban in Kabul and difficulty in
       hiding in the community; those factors identified at paragraphs  [54]
       - [57] put the appellant at risk.

    6. There was no appeal  by  the  respondent  seeking  to  challenge  the
       findings of fact that the appellant met the Article  3  threshold  in
       Kabul, and that it would be unduly harsh for him to relocate there.

    7. UTJ Coker found the dismissal of his appeal to be incorrect and  gave
       a preliminary view that, given the findings of fact,  which  had  not
       been the subject of challenge, the appeal on  asylum  grounds  should
       have  been  allowed.  She  proposed  that  in  the  absence  of   any
       submissions to the contrary  to  allow  the  appeal,  set  aside  the
       decision of FtTJ Henderson on asylum and allow the appeal  on  asylum
       grounds.

    8. On 6th November 2020 I issued directions to the  Secretary  of  State
       that she must reply to the directions issued.

    9. The response from the respondent dated 9th November 2020 stated

           'The SSHD accepts that, given the unchallenged findings of  fact
           reached by FTTJ Henderson in a Decision and Reasons  promulgated
           on 14 April 2020( in particular at [54-57], it is  open  to  the
           Upper Tribunal to conclude that A's appeal  should  be  held  to
           succeed on asylum grounds'.

   10. In the light of the above I find the  Judge  erred  in  law  for  the
       reasons identified, and, in a manner  which  could  have  a  material
       effect on the outcome.  I set aside the decision pursuant to  Section
       12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007),
       but  preserve  the  findings  of  fact  identified,   in   particular
       paragraphs [54] -[57], and remake the decision  taking  into  account
       the submissions made by the Secretary of State and allow the appeal.

Order

The appeal of AK is allowed on asylum grounds and remains allowed  on  human
rights grounds (Article 3).



Signed: Helen Rimington
Upper Tribunal Judge  Rimington                                       Dated:
Signed 27th November 2020




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD


As I have allowed the appeal, I have considered making a fee  award  but  no
fee was paid and thus I make no order.


Signed: Helen Rimington
Upper Tribunal Judge  Rimington                                       Dated:
Signed 27th November 2020


-----------------------
[1] The coding in this order is in accordance with the Senior President's
Judges' Instructions


