
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01480/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 January 2020                            |On 05 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A S Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Goodwin, Counsel


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant in this appeal is a citizen of Afghanistan  who  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  respondent,  made
    on 31 January 2019, to refuse his protection and human  rights  claims.
    The appellant was the subject of  a  deportation  order,  signed  on  9
    January 2015, and his appeal  had  previously  been  dismissed  on  all
    grounds. The current appeal arose from a fresh protection  claim  based
    on the appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 24 June  2019,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lloyd-Lawrie allowed the appellant's appeal on both protection
    and human rights grounds.

 4. In relation to the  protection  claim,  the  judge  recorded  that  the
    parties agreed that, if the appellant's  claim  to  have  converted  to
    Christianity were genuine, the appellant was entitled to  international
    protection [22]. She heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  two
    church ministers and she concluded that  the  appellant  is  a  genuine
    Christian convert [31-32].

 5. In relation to article 8, the  appellant  had  been  sentenced  to  ten
    years' imprisonment in 2010. However, the  judge  accepted  there  were
    very compelling circumstances to warrant a finding that  removal  would
    be disproportionate [40]. She relied on evidence showing that  removing
    the appellant would be unduly harsh on the  appellant's  son,  who  has
    autistic spectrum disorder. In reaching her conclusion she referred  to
    the case of JG (Jamaica) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 982.

 6. The application for permission to appeal addressed both  limbs  of  the
    judge's decision. In relation to her finding on the  protection  claim,
    it is difficult to discern from the grounds where it is said the  judge
    arguably erred in law. The grounds simply point out that the  appellant
    had a serious criminal history and had consistently been found  not  to
    be credible in the past. Caution needed to be exercise before accepting
    a claimed conversion.

 7. In relation to the judge's conclusion on article 8, the  grounds  argue
    with greater conviction that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons
    for finding there were very compelling circumstances, which is  a  very
    high threshold, particularly as contact between the appellant  and  his
    son had only been established recently.

 8. Permission was granted to argue both grounds by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal E B Grant.

 9. The appellant has not filed a rule 24 response.

10. I heard oral submissions from the representatives  as  to  whether  the
    judge's decision contains material errors of law such that it should be
    set aside and remade.

11. For the respondent, Mr Howells relied on both grounds.  In  respect  of
    the protection ground, he took me to Shirazi v  SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    1562, in which Sedley LJ commented that great caution  was  appropriate
    in deciding the genuineness  of  religious  conversions  [32],  and  he
    criticised the judge's reliance on the citation from SA (Iran),  R  (on
    the application of) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 2575 (Admin) (wrongly  cited  by
    the judge) [24] because that was a judicial review case  and  therefore
    not binding authority.

12. I do not consider that this argument gets off the ground.  Both  Sedley
    LJ and Judge Gilbart QC were giving sage advice to  decision-makers  on
    the perils of assessing claimed religious conversions but neither  case
    is authority for a proposition of law by reference to which it  can  be
    said the judge in the present case erred. Mr Goodman's response was  to
    argue that the respondent's ground was essentially a disagreement  with
    the judge's finding and I agree with him.

13. Both representatives relied on the persuasive Scottish case of  TF  and
    MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58 in which Lord Glennie, delivering the  Opinion
    of the Court, analysed the approach to the evidence of church ministers
    in great detail. In particular, he  explained  that  such  evidence  is
    "admissible opinion evidence which is entitled to respect" [59].

14. At [39], he said,

         "... the appellant's case has to be considered in  the  round,  not
         only on the basis of the appellant's own evidence, which may or may
         not be accepted as  credible,  but  also  on  the  basis  of  other
         evidence that may be available. It does not follow  from  the  fact
         the appellant himself is disbelieved, even on very large  parts  of
         his story, that other evidence in support of  his  case  cannot  be
         relied upon. Much will  depend,  of  course,  on  what  that  other
         evidence is. If, for example, that other evidence comes  from  some
         wholly independent source and is, on the face of it, impartial  and
         objective, it is difficult to see how a finding that the  appellant
         himself is  dishonest  can  materially  affect  the  weight  to  be
         attached to it."

15. It is clear to me the judge's approach cannot be criticised for falling
    short on these grounds. She looked at the evidence in the round and the
    fact she found parts of the claim not credible  was  not  a  reason  to
    treat the evidence of the ministers as tainted. She was  plainly  aware
    of the timing of the conversion and the  appellant's  record  of  being
    found not credible. However, she  gave  reasons  for  placing  decisive
    weight on the evidence of the ministers after  having  seen  and  heard
    them give evidence,  as  she  was  perfectly  entitled  to  do.  In  my
    judgment, the judge's decision at [31-32] contains sustainable  reasons
    for concluding that the appellant's conversion was genuine.

16. I find there is no error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    to  allow  the  appeal  on  protection  grounds   and   therefore   the
    respondent's appeal against that decision is dismissed.

17. Any error in relation to the judge's consideration  of  the  article  8
    claim could not be material given I have  found  the  decision  on  the
    protection claim is not vitiated by material error of law. However,  as
    the ground was argued in the alternative, I shall set  out  my  reasons
    for finding the judge's decision  does  contain  an  error  of  law  in
    relation to article 8.

18. In essence, the judge found, in a single paragraph ([40]),  that  there
    were very compelling circumstances over and above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2, per section 117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002. The threshold for meeting the test is  very  high.
    In PF (Nigeria) v SSHD EWCA Civ 1139, Hickinbottom LJ  reiterated  that
    this is a more stringent test than unduly harsh [33] and he referred to
    Underhill LJ's description of the test in SSHD  v  JG  (Jamaica)  [2019
    EWCA Civ 982 as "extra unduly harsh".

19. It is  not  suggested  the  judge  in  the  present  appeal  failed  to
    appreciate the demands of the test because she referred at the  end  of
    the same paragraph to her conclusion that removing the appellant  would
    be "far in excess of unduly harsh on  the  Appellant's  son".  However,
    where the judge erred  was  in  failing  to  recognise  that,  as  also
    explained in PF (Nigeria) [33], the assessment  under  section  117C(6)
    requires the effects of deportation on the child to be balanced against
    the public interest in deportation.

20. The President of the Upper  Tribunal  has  also  set  this  out  in  RA
    (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019]  UKUT  00123
    (IAC) [22]:



         "It is important to keep in mind that the test in  section  117C(6)
         is extremely demanding.  The fact that, at this point,  a  tribunal
         is required to engage in a wide-ranging  proportionality  exercise,
         balancing the weight  that  appropriately  falls  to  be  given  to
         factors on the proposed deportee's side of the balance against  the
         weight of the public interest, does not in  any  sense  permit  the
         tribunal  to  engage  in  the  sort  of  exercise  that  would   be
         appropriate in the case of someone who is not within the  ambit  of
         section 117C.  Not only must regard be had to the factors  set  out
         in section 117B, such as giving little  weight  to  a  relationship
         formed with a qualifying  partner  that  is  established  when  the
         proposed deportee was in the United Kingdom unlawfully, the  public
         interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal is high; and even
         higher for a person sentenced to  imprisonment  of  at  least  four
         years."





21. I can find no evidence in the judge's consideration of  the  test  that
    she recognised the importance of the public interest, bearing  in  mind
    the appellant was sentenced to ten years' imprisonment  for  a  serious
    drugs offence, and balanced that against the  matters  put  forward  on
    behalf of the appellant.

22. I do not agree with Mr Goodwin that the judge's reference  at  [37]  to
    having directed herself to  "consider  all  of  the  considerations  in
    section  117B  and  117C"  is  sufficient  to  show  she  conducted   a
    proportionality balancing exercise as she was required to do.

23. Nor do I agree with him that the respondent's challenge is  akin  to  a
    perversity challenge. The error is not to have found  that  there  were
    extra unduly harsh consequences for the appellant's  son  but  to  have
    failed to set that against the public interest.

24. However, for the reasons already explained above, the judge's error  in
    relation to article 8 is not material to the outcome.





Notice of Decision

25. For these reasons the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and  the
    decision of  Judge  Lloyd-Lawrie  allowing  the  appeal  on  protection
    grounds shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 31 January 2020

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
