
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01587/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 December 2019                  |On 31 December 2019                  |
|Extempore decision                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     EA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire, Counsel instructed by Moorehouse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He  was  born  on  18  February
    1977.  He appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Colvin promulgated on 30 July 2019 dismissing his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of his asylum and humanitarian protection claim on
    19 January 2018.  The appellant made the asylum and human rights in the
    context of making representations against a decision of the  respondent
    to deport him taken on 11 March 2016 pursuant to section 32(5)  of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.  The basis for the appellant's  asylum  claim  was
    that he is a homosexual man who would be at risk  of  being  persecuted
    upon return to Nigeria.

Factual Background

 2. The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in 2007 on a
    visitor's visa using a passport in the name of another person  provided
    to him by an agent.  In 2009, he was granted an EEA residence  card  as
    the family  member  of  an  EEA  national.   Following  an  immigration
    enforcement visit, that card was later revoked on the  basis  that  his
    relationship was deemed to be a marriage of convenience.

 3. On 13 February 2015 in the Crown Court at Southwark, the appellant  was
    found guilty following a trial of a single count of fraud by  abuse  of
    position contrary to section 1(2)  of  the  Fraud  Act  2006.   He  was
    sentenced to a term of 36 months' imprisonment.  Consecutive  to  that,
    he was sentenced to three  months'  imprisonment  in  relation  to  the
    possession of false or improperly obtained identity documents, giving a
    total of three years, three months' imprisonment.  The  appellant  also
    had a previous conviction for common assault, for which he received two
    four-month concurrent sentences of  imprisonment,  each  of  which  was
    suspended for eighteen months.  The index offence relating to the fraud
    by abuse of position triggered the automatic deportation provisions  in
    the UK Borders Act 2007.

 4. Very shortly after the respondent informed the appellant that  she  had
    decided to deport him to Nigeria, he claimed asylum on the basis of his
    homosexuality.  That claim  was  refused  by  the  respondent  and  the
    appellant appealed to Judge Colvin, who heard  his  appeal  on  2  July
    2019.  At the appeal the appellant gave evidence, as  did  two  persons
    from the LGBT community.  There were a number of  documents  that  were
    before the judge and I shall turn to those shortly.

 5. In the course of a careful and detailed decision, the judge  summarised
    both the respondent's case (see  [27]  and  [29])  and  also  the  case
    advanced on behalf of the appellant.  At [46] to [64],  she  considered
    and rejected the appellant's asylum claim, although had found that  the
    appellant rebutted the presumption  contained  in  section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. The judge did not accept that the  appellant  was  gay.   The  relevant
    statutory exception to the automatic deportation decision could not  be
    engaged on that basis.  Secondly, she did not consider that any of  the
    exceptions to deportation contained in  the  Immigration  Rules  or  in
    Section 117C of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    applied.

 7. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal focused on the  credibility
    assessment conducted by the judge, and also her application of Rule 399
    of the Immigration Rules.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly granted permission to appeal  in  these
    terms:

         "It is arguable that in  its  'overall  assessment'  (paragraph  57
         onwards) the Tribunal had regard  only  to  those  aspects  of  the
         evidence that weighed against the credibility  of  the  appellant's
         claim and thus failed to reach its conclusion upon the basis of the
         evidence as a whole.  Permission to appeal is therefore granted."

Discussion

 9. At the outset of my analysis of the judge's decision, it  is  necessary
    to recall that challenges to findings of fact reached by the First-tier
    Tribunal are only appealable to this Tribunal in the event  that  those
    findings disclose or otherwise feature an error of law.  The  test  for
    whether or not an error of law featured in a finding  of  fact  in  the
    court below is now well-established.  It was set out with clarity in  R
    (On the application  of  Iran)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  At [9] of that decision, the Court  of
    Appeal summarised the various headings upon which it may be possible to
    establish that a finding of fact has been infected by an error of law:

         "(i) Making perverse or irrational findings on a matter or  matters
             that were material to the outcome ('material matters');

         (ii) Failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons  for  findings
             on material matters;

         (iii)    Failing to take into account and/or resolve  conflicts  of
             fact or opinion on material matters;

         (iv) Giving weight to immaterial matters;

         (v)  Making a material misdirection of law on any material matter;

         (vi) Committing or permitting a procedural  or  other  irregularity
             capable of making a material  difference  to  the  outcome  or
             fairness of the proceedings;

         (vii)    Making a mistake as to a  material  fact  which  could  be
             established by objective and uncontentious evidence, where the
             appellant and/or his advisers were  not  responsible  for  the
             mistake, and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a
             mistake was made."

    It is a high hurdle to pass.

10. Developing his submissions orally, Mr Claire submitted that [57] of the
    judge's decision and following was skewed.  He draws upon and  develops
    the permission to appeal  judge's  view  that  the  assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility only featured  the  points  militating  against
    him.  I disagree with this submission.   At  [57]  and  following,  the
    judge was giving  clear  and  decisive  findings  in  relation  to  her
    analysis of  the  case.   The  judge  had  already  outlined  what  the
    appellant's case was at [30].  It was not necessary for her  to  repeat
    her previous recitation of what he claimed the position was.  This  was
    the point in  the  decision  where  the  judge  reached  her  operative
    findings and she took a methodical and careful  approach  to  assessing
    the appellant's overall credibility.

11. Mr Claire submits that in her analysis at [58] the judge  held  matters
    against the appellant which were unfair and irrational.   In  [58]  the
    judge found that the appellant was a dishonest  individual.   She  drew
    extensively on his previous conduct to reach that finding.  She said:

         "For example, he came to the UK on a passport with  a  false  visa,
         and even though this may have been organised through  an  agent  he
         was an educated man aged  30  at  the  time  and  therefore  has  a
         responsibility for the falsehood.  He then entered into a  marriage
         with an EEA national on the basis of which he was granted a  5-year
         residence card.  However, this was revoked in January 2012  on  the
         basis that no evidence was found of a relationship or  cohabitation
         and, in particular, the appellant was unaware of the EEA national's
         whereabouts during an immigration enforcement  visit  in  September
         2011  and  therefore  it  was  considered  to  be   a   non-genuine
         relationship and a marriage of  convenience.   Then  there  is  the
         appellant's conviction for fraud  which  clearly  involved  serious
         dishonesty with the sentencing judge remarking upon  the  appellant
         having lied in his evidence at the trial."

12. In my view there is nothing irrational  or  unfair  about  the  judge's
    analysis of those matters  relating  to  the  appellant's  credibility.
    They were legitimate considerations which she was entitled to take into
    account.  They were not the only factors the judge considered.  At [59]
    the judge rejected an account the appellant had given of a relationship
    with a lady which had led to the birth of his  daughter  with  whom  he
    still enjoys a relationship in this country.  The appellant had claimed
    that he had engaged in sexual activity with a total of four people, two
    of whom were women.  One of  the  women  became  pregnant  during  that
    incident and was later to bear the  appellant's  daughter.   The  judge
    rejected that account and she stated that his relationship with one  of
    them had been  said  to  have  existed  for  two  years  prior  to  the
    appellant's common assault conviction against  her  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to suspended terms of imprisonment.

13. The judge had sight of a social worker's  report  prepared  in  another
    context and, although she noted that the appellant's relationship  with
    the other lady, the mother of the child,  was  not  mentioned  in  that
    report, she said that there is no doubt that it is indicated that there
    was a sexual relationship over  a  period  and  this  resulted  in  the
    conception of the daughter.  The judge also noted information that  had
    been revealed in the appellant's OASys Report prepared as part  of  the
    criminal proceedings, which suggested that he  was  in  a  relationship
    with another woman in 2010.  These were  rational  findings  which  the
    judge was entitled to arrive at on the basis  of  the  evidence  before
    her.  This analysis led to  the  judge's  findings  at  [60]  that  the
    appellant's  evidence  featured  a  significant  degree  of  lying  and
    dishonesty.  The judge then reached the  entirely  rational  conclusion
    that these significant levels of lying  and  dishonesty  that  she  had
    found in relation to the appellant led her to question his  credibility
    on other matters.

14. It was at this stage that the judge noted that  the  appellant  claimed
    asylum on the basis that he was gay very shortly after being threatened
    with deportation proceedings: the deportation order was  signed  on  11
    March 2016 and the appellant claimed asylum  on  17  March  2019.   The
    judge noted that there was no reference in  the  OASys  Report  to  the
    appellant claiming to be homosexual,  and  there  was  no  evidence  to
    confirm either of the two  claimed  relationships  that  the  appellant
    purported to have with men in the United Kingdom.  The judge also noted
    that there was no reasonable explanation for the lack of evidence  from
    relatives of the appellant in the United Kingdom as to the  appellant's
    sexuality.  Again these are all factors which the judge was entitled to
    consider in reaching her findings.

15. At [61], the judge considered the impact of medical evidence which  had
    been adduced by the appellant.  A psychiatric report had noted that  he
    was suffering from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  as  a  result  of
    claimed persecution that he had experienced in Nigeria before coming to
    this country.  At [61] the judge noted that:

         "The appellant has at no time sought medical  assistance  for  such
         matters - neither in prison after the deportation decision was made
         in March 2016 or of his  GP  at  any  time  thereafter  but  rather
         informed the probation office in October 2016 when the OASys Report
         was being completed that he  had  no  psychiatric  problems.   This
         clearly in my view undermines the weight that can  be  attached  to
         such a mental health diagnosis but it also seriously undermines the
         appellant's whole account for the cause of  the  diagnosis,  namely
         being detained in Nigeria for being gay."

16. The judge then considered the evidence of the two  witnesses  from  the
    LGBT community who had given evidence to support  the  appellant.   She
    stated at [62] that their evidence was "insufficiently substantial when
    considered in the overall evidential circumstances of this  case".   Mr
    Claire submits that that is a finding which  involves  holding  against
    these two independent witnesses the adverse credibility findings  which
    she had already reached in relation to the appellant.  I disagree.  The
    judge was entitled to take into account the overall evidence  that  she
    had heard including the evidence of these two witnesses in this manner,
    and she found that their evidence lacked weight, when considered in the
    round with the remaining evidence.  She noted later on in paragraph  62
    that both witnesses had made written  statements  about  the  appellant
    being very active within the LGBT community and at gay events in the UK
    including events with them, but neither could back  that  up  with  any
    detailed evidence of what that involved.  She noted that in the case of
    one of the witnesses, M, he effectively retracted from that  statement.
    In the course of submissions, Mr Claire did not suggest that the  judge
    had misrecorded M's evidence in that way.  The judge  also  noted  that
    the appellant knew very little about the personal circumstances of  the
    witness.  For example, she did not know that one  of  them,  H,  had  a
    partner even though the evidence that she heard was  that  the  partner
    had recently had an appeal hearing.

17. Mr Claire submits that the judge's treatment of  the  witness  evidence
    was ambivalent.  He  submits  the  judge  did  not  make  the  required
    findings that the witnesses were either being  dishonest  or  had  been
    thoroughly misled by the appellant into wrongly believing that  he  was
    gay.  There was an unresolved evidential point on a key  issue  in  the
    case, he submitted.  I disagree.  In her penultimate sentence at  [63],
    the judge addresses precisely that point in these terms:

         "Whether the witnesses have been duped or not  by  the  appellant's
         actions in believing that he is gay is  not  something  I  need  to
         decide.  I have however decided that their evidence does not  alter
         the conclusion reached on the appellant's own evidence."

18. In discussing the evidence of the two witnesses in this way  the  judge
    was simply referring to the evidence in the case  in  the  round.   She
    directed herself that that approach was necessary  when  prefacing  her
    evidential analysis in [57] of the decision.  She said this:

         "I must consider the evidence in the  round  and  apply  the  lower
         standard of proof of whether a matter is reasonably likely."

19. Having conducted that analysis,  the  judge  then  reached  her  global
    conclusion on the issue of the asylum claim.  At  [64]  she  said,  "in
    these circumstances", which I take to mean  in  light  of  her  overall
    analysis of the entire factual matrix of evidence in the  case,  "I  am
    satisfied that the appellant has not shown that he has been the subject
    of persecution or ill-treatment on the part of the Nigerian authorities
    before coming to the UK on grounds of his sexuality and that  there  is
    no risk on return".  Accordingly the judge dismissed the asylum limb of
    the appeal.

20. There is a point that Mr Claire suggests the judge failed  to  consider
    when reaching her conclusion on this point.  That relates  to  some  of
    the transcripts of so-called "gay chats" which  had  been  included  as
    part of the appellant's evidence.  I have had the opportunity  to  view
    those transcripts.

21. I find that the judge did not fail to consider these materials.  First,
    she noted at [23] that such materials had been provided.  Secondly,  at
    [63] she noted that she had considered those transcripts.  For  my  own
    part, having considered them, I find that the extracts to which I  have
    been alerted provide very little by way of qualitative assistance to Mr
    Claire's submissions.  It is clear that discussions of a sexual  nature
    have taken place between  people  in  the  transcripts.   Some  of  the
    discussion is sexually explicit and would  therefore  be  inappropriate
    for any Tribunal to take into account one way or another when  deciding
    whether a person's claimed sexuality is reasonably  likely  to  be  the
    case.  Other extracts of the chat records provide very little by way of
    indication as to who was making the remarks and who  is  receiving  the
    commentary or the communications.   For  example,  Mr  Claire  drew  my
    attention to some screenshots which feature at pages 241 to 245 of  the
    appellant's bundle.  These appear to be thumbnail images of individuals
    who have an account  on  the  social  media  platform  from  which  the
    screenshots were taken.  It is not clear from the printout who has sent
    the messages, who has received them nor what the contents of them  are.
    For example, and by way of example only, there is a photograph of a man
    who  does  not   appear   to   be   the   appellant   with   the   name
    "sweetpompey100100" and the hyperlinked text underneath it "i  am  fine
    how are you today".  Similar thumbnails and account names feature  with
    other ambiguous wording.

22. In my view these are not matters which take the  appellant's  case  any
    further.  The judge below clearly had regard to all the relevant  facts
    before her, and reached a conclusion which  was  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence that she had seen.  I conclude my analysis of this limb of the
    appellant's case by recalling that the judge below had the  benefit  of
    hearing all the witnesses give evidence, and of  seeing  and  analysing
    the entirety of the evidential landscape in the case.  The  submissions
    made by Mr Claire in relation to the judge's analysis of  those  issues
    do not undermine the judge's  analysis,  but  rather  simply  serve  to
    highlight that this was a careful and well-reasoned decision.

23. In relation to the second  ground  of  appeal  concerning  the  judge's
    consideration of Rule 399 of the Immigration Rules, Mr Claire  did  not
    develop his submissions orally and nor did he choose to do so  once  Mr
    Bramble had responded on behalf of the respondent.

24. Having considered the judge's analysis of the Article  8  limb  of  the
    appellant's case, it is in many respects a model analysis.   The  judge
    correctly identifies that the appellant was sentenced to less than four
    years' imprisonment but at least twelve months'  imprisonment,  meaning
    that  it  was  necessary  to  consider  whether  the  exceptions  under
    paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules applied.

25. The essential issue which the grounds  of  appeal  suggested  that  the
    judge failed properly to consider  was  whether  it  would  be  "unduly
    harsh" on the appellant's daughter for him to be deported.   The  judge
    correctly directed herself by reference to  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  UKSC  53
    that the expression unduly harsh assumes that there is a "due" level of
    "harshness" namely a level which may be acceptable  or  justifiable  in
    the  relevant  context.   The  judge  quoted  the  extract  from   Lord
    Carnwath's judgment which said that  unduly  requires  something  going
    beyond that level.  As  Mr  Bramble  submits,  the  appellant  has  not
    demonstrated that the tragic impact upon the  appellant's  daughter  of
    his deportation goes beyond the harshness which  would  necessarily  be
    expected to flow from  deportation  in  such  circumstances.   The  sad
    reality of deportation and criminal offending is that it wrecks  family
    lives and leaves a trail of destruction which often greatly exceeds the
    initial ambit of the primary offending.  Tragically this  case  is  one
    such example of that principle in action.   However  the  test  for  my
    consideration is not whether the deportation  of  the  appellant  would
    affect his daughter in a way which would necessarily be  expected,  but
    whether the impact on her goes beyond the impact which  would  normally
    be expected to apply in such circumstances.  Nothing in the submissions
    to me have revealed that the judge below erred in that respect.

26. Finally,  the  judge  concluded  her  consideration  of  Article  8  by
    reference to an extensive quotation from  Hesham  Ali  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60.  She  correctly  directed
    herself that the countervailing  factors  that  would  be  required  to
    outweigh the Secretary of State's view in relation to deportation would
    need to be very great indeed or as Lord Reed put it "by a  very  strong
    claim indeed".  The judge also noted that in Rhuppiah  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58, the  Supreme  Court  held
    that the  very  compelling  circumstances  test  establishes  that  the
    provisions of Part 5A are intended to provide for a structured approach
    to the application of Article  8  which  produces  a  result  which  is
    compatible with, and not in violation of, Article  8.   Of  course,  in
    that case the Supreme Court held that there is  an  inherit  degree  of
    flexibility within  the  provisions  contained  in  Part  5A.   However
    nothing in the submissions made in the  grounds  of  appeal  or  by  Mr
    Claire before me reveal that this was a case where the minimal level of
    inherent flexibility in those  provisions  should  have  benefited  the
    appellant.

27. The judge concluded at paragraph 74 that she was satisfied:

         "...that  the  appellant  has  not  put  forward   any   additional
         circumstances over and  above  those  already  assessed  under  the
         exceptions above.  Whilst he has been in the UK for the past twelve
         years and may well have become socially and  culturally  integrated
         during this time, he entered the  UK  illegally  and  has  remained
         without immigration status apart  from  a  period  when  he  had  a
         residence card which was subsequently revoked on the basis that the
         marriage was a sham.  He has  been  convicted  of  offences  whilst
         being here including a serious conviction for fraud."

28. In conclusion, the judge reached findings of fact concerning the asylum
    issue that were open to her on the evidence that she had.  They are not
    findings which all judges would have adopted  but  they  were  findings
    which were legitimate for the judge to reach.   Her  treatment  of  the
    Article 8 issues was sound and the submissions from Mr Claire  revealed
    no error of law.  This appeal is dismissed.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of Judge Andrew did not involve the making of an error of law.

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 20 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

