
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01824/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House, No hearing           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2021                     |On 20 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                    [H K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. I have reviewed the file in  this  case.   In  granting  permission  to
    appeal, a judge of the first-tier Tribunal observed as follows:

         "The grounds for appeal assert that having found the  Appellant  to
         be an Iraqi, it was arguably an error  of  law  for  the  Judge  to
         conclude that because she was not credible as to  her  nationality,
         she could not be believed that she did not have access to her Iraqi
         identity documents.  There is no indication in the Judge's decision
         that this issue was explored, particularly  in  the  light  of  the
         guidance contained in  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
         documents) CG Iraq [2019] UKUT 400  (IAC),  of  which  neither  the
         decision nor the grounds for  appeal  make  mention.   It  is  also
         arguable that the Judge did not adequately address the issue of the
         return of the Appellant to Iraq as a single woman,  notwithstanding
         the difficulty in making a proper assessment of  her  circumstances
         on return to which the Judge referred at the end of paragraph 38 of
         his decision.

         The grounds also assert the Judge arguably  erred  in  law  in  his
         assessment of the Appellant's claim under Article 8 as the wife  of
         a naturalised British citizen  by  not  adequately  addressing  the
         aspect of the claim under EX of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration
         Rules.  The findings at paragraphs 16  and  36  together  with  the
         matters referred to in the preceding  paragraph  of  this  document
         disclose an arguable error of law."

 2. On 1 March 2021 I wrote to the parties as follows:


         "I have reviewed the file in this case.   The  respondent  has  not
         indicated any intention to contest  the  appeal,  and  time  for  a
         notice under rule 24 has expired.


         I propose without more ado to set aside the decision of the  First-
         tier Tribunal for error of law as identified in paragraphs 4 and  5
         of the grant of permission, and remit the appeal to the  First-tier
         Tribunal for a fresh decision.


         Any submissions to the contrary  will  be  considered  if  received
         within 21 days of the date of this letter."



 3. There has been no response from the Appellant's solicitors.  On  behalf
    of  the  Respondent,  Mr  Tufan,   Senior   Presenting   Officer,   has
    specifically consented to the course of action proposed.

 4. I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  sent  out  on  16
    October 2020 for error of law as identified in the grant of permission.
     I remit the appellant's appeal for a fresh decision by the  First-tier
    Tribunal.




                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 15 April 2021
