
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01616/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 February 2019                  |On 18 March 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                MR NARINDER SINGH (aka: SURINDER SINGH SETHI)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms J Fisher of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant who claims to be a national of Afghanistan  but  who  the
    respondent believes is an India appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge G  Wilson  dated  15  October
    2018 refusing his appeal against the decision of the  respondent  dated
    17 January 2018 refusing him asylum and humanitarian protection in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McCarthy on 17 January 2019.  The  Judge  was  of  the  view  that  the
    appellant's nationality is disputed which is at the heart of his  case.
    The appellant claims to  be  an  Afghan  national  but  that  this  the
    respondent believes that the appellant is an  Indian  national.  It  is
    arguable that the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for  preferring
    the respondent's evidence regarding the appellant's nationality to  the
    appellant's evidence.

    The First-tier Tribunal's findings

 3. The  Judge  in  his  decision  made  the  following  findings  which  I
    summarise.

       . I do not accept the appellant's account that the  appellant's  visa
         application in 2006 was made by his agent in  India  such  that  he
         would have little  or  no  knowledge  of  these  applications.  The
         applications were made to the New Delhi British High Commission and
         an interview was conducted with Narinder Singh and his wife Gulgeet
         Kaur. On the basis that the application was  made  to  the  British
         High Commission in New Delhi; the address for  Narinder  Singh  and
         Gulgeet Kaur is a New Delhi address and interview template  records
         questions which were put to Narinder Singh and a  question  put  to
         Gulgeet Kaur through an interpreter. The interview was carried  out
         in person in New Delhi with those persons present and there was  no
         suggestion that it was done over the telephone. The purpose of  the
         interview was to establish whether the  appellant  and  his  wife's
         2006 application for visitor visas were genuine. The  British  High
         Commission was in possession of the passports of Narinder Singh and
         Gulgeet Kaur as the passport numbers were noted on the  application
         form and copies were produced by them.

       . The appellant  accepts  that  the  photographs  attached  to  these
         applications are those of himself and his wife. If I am  to  accept
         the appellant's account that he had no knowledge of these 2006 visa
         application I must accept one of two  propositions.  Firstly,  that
         those conducting the interview  did  not  verify  identity  of  the
         persons that they were interviewing  against  photographs  and  the
         passports  that  were  in  their  possession,  notwithstanding  the
         purpose of the interview was that the entry clearance  officer  had
         concerns as to the validity of the visa application. Alternatively,
         the agent to arranged for  two  people  of  an  identical  or  very
         similar appearance to the appellant and  his  wife  to  attend  the
         interview.

       . I find that both propositions are so implausible as to be incapable
         of any reasonable belief. I find that the appellant  and  his  wife
         attended the interview in New Delhi on 5 July 2006 for the purposes
         of obtaining an entry clearance visa with their Indian passport. In
         addition, based on the address provided on their visa  applications
         form, I find that the appellant lived in New Delhi at the time  the
         2006 visa applications were made. I find that  the  information  in
         the visa application forms as  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's
         evidence under cross-examination. The appellant stated that he  has
         never been to India. I find that this is a  material  inconsistency
         which goes to the heart of the appellant's account.  This  material
         inconsistency undermines the appellant's personal credibility,  the
         credibility of his account and the veracity of his case.

       . The appellant has produced Afghan birth certificates  for  himself,
         his wife and his mother. The appellant has sent,  what  he  asserts
         are, original Afghan passports to the respondent which were  handed
         to me at the hearing. The documents were considered  in  line  with
         the case of Tanveer Ahmed and that the documents need to be weighed
         in light of all the evidence in the case.

       . The birth certificate for the appellant is dated 11 November  2016.
         The birth certificate for the appellant's mother and wife dated  22
         December 2016. Despite  the  certificates  being  issued  within  a
         relatively short period of each other the header and logo  for  the
         appellant's birth certificate is different to the appellant's wives
         and mothers' certificate.  The  telephone  numbers  given  for  the
         Embassy on the appellant's birth certificate is  different  despite
         the address being the same. The note contained on  the  appellant's
         birth certificate is different to that contained upon his wife  and
         mothers. The note about the appellant's  birth  certificate  states
         "it is not common practice in some parts of Afghanistan to  provide
         newly born babies with birth certificates. This certification based
         on evidence seen may therefore be considered  as  information  only
         for the date of birth of the person identified above". The note  in
         relation  to  the  wife's  appellant's  wife  and  mother's   birth
         certificate states that this "certification is  based  on  evidence
         seen may therefore be considered as information only for  the  date
         of birth of the person identified above".

       . The date of birth for the appellant, his wife and  his  mother  are
         first January. The date given  to  each  of  his  children  in  his
         witness statement is also first  January.  I  find  that  different
         format between the birth certificates given  the  relatively  short
         period within which they  were  issued,  the  difference  telephone
         numbers and the difference  of  the  note  on  each  of  the  birth
         certificates ways against  their  reliability.  I  find  that  each
         family member  sharing  the  same  birthday  of  first  January  is
         implausible.

       . The appellant has provided what it seems original Afghan  passports
         together with an original letter of verification  from  the  Afghan
         Embassy in relation to the passports  and  birth  certificate.  The
         verification of the birth certificate contains a  spelling  mistake
         because in the letter "to whom it may concern" it is  been  written
         as "consern". The letter verifying passport  spell  this  the  word
         concern correctly. The letter adopts the same stamp that is used of
         the birth certificates.  However,  there  is  a  sticker  which  is
         attached letters  which  is  not  attached  to  the  earlier  birth
         certificate. It is unclear why put the sticker and  the  stamp  was
         required to demonstrate authenticity of  the  letter  but  not  the
         birth  certificate.  The  letters  do  not  attach  copies  of  the
         passports demonstrate that the photographs have been verified. Both
         the passports and birth certificates have  been  issued  while  the
         appellant has been in the United Kingdom.

       . The hearing was  previously  adjourned  by  Judge  Boyes  who  gave
         Directions that the appellant may wish to provide  evidence  as  to
         how he came  to  obtain  the  passport  and  the  process  and  the
         information that he provided to obtain it. Despite  this  Direction
         there is no evidence before  me  as  to  the  processes  that  were
         undertaken in order to obtain the  birth  certificate  or  passport
         other than the statement within the appellant's statement  that  he
         underwent verification process with the Afghan Embassy. Each  other
         factors detailed  above  weighs  against  the  reliability  of  the
         documents.

    The grounds of appeal

 4. The appellant in his grounds of appeal states  the  following  which  I
    summarise. The respondent accepts that  the  appellants  are  Sikhs  as
    claimed. The main issue in the appeal before the  First--tier  Tribunal
    was whether the appellants are citizens of Afghanistan or  citizens  of
    India. The Judge refused to accept the appellant's account that he  had
    no knowledge of the 2006 entry clearance applications  made  in  India.
    The appellant stated that he has never been to India.

 5. The Judge found it implausible that all the appellants shared the  same
    date of birth of  first  January  of  different  years.  The  appellant
    produced copies of his identity documents but they were not legible and
    had not been translated. The Judge  made  findings  of  the  linguistic
    report and noted that the appellant was fluent in Dari and was able  to
    understand a little Pushtu and gave evidence in  Dari  at  the  hearing
    which the judge accepted was one of the languages of Afghanistan. These
    are both Afghan languages and not commonly spoken in India.  The  Judge
    agreed with the respondent that the linguistic report was inadequate as
    it did not set the  characteristics  of  the  dialect  and  accent  and
    compared those characteristics of the appellant's outspoken Dari.

 6. There is no data suggesting Indian citizens speak Dari at all. There is
    data suggesting Afghan Sikhs speak Punjabi and  sometimes  Dari  and/or
    Pashto. In reaching his conclusion the Judge did not address himself to
    this crucial evidence.

    The hearing

 7. At the hearing I heard submissions from both parties  and  reserved  my
    decision which I give now.

    Error of law findings

 8. I have given anxious scrutiny to the decision of the  First-tier  Judge
    and have taken into account the grounds of appeal and the documents.

 9. At the heart of the appeal was  whether  the  appellant  is  an  Indian
    national or a national of Afghanistan. If the appellant was a  national
    of India, the events that he claims occurred in Afghanistan  could  not
    have happened because he was not in Afghanistan. If the appellant is  a
    national of Afghanistan, then  his  asylum  claim  must  be  considered
    accordingly.

10. The Judge has given ample and cogent reasons for finding the  appellant
    is not a national of Afghanistan but is indeed a national of India. The
    burden of proof in proving nationality, like any other evidence,  falls
    on the appellant to the lower standard  of  proof  required  in  asylum
    cases.

11. The Judge considered the evidence of the respondent that the  appellant
    and his wife made an application for  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom as  visitors  in  2006.  The  respondent  provided  documentary
    evidence that both were present at the British High Commission  in  New
    Delhi and were interviewed personally. The Judge noted  that  both  the
    appellant and his wife were asked questions  by  an  interviewer  which
    they  answered  which  shows  that  the  interview  was  not  conducted
    remotely. The Judge also placed reliance on the evidence  that  at  the
    British High Commission, the passports that they produced  were  Indian
    passports and their address was stated as in New Delhi.  This  evidence
    therefore squarely put the appellant and his wife as physically present
    in New Delhi in 2006 with Indian passports.

12. The Judge was entitled to place no reliance  on  the  appellant's  bare
    denial that he did not make the  visa  applications,  and  nor  did  he
    attend interviews at the British High Commission in New Delhi  and  his
    claim that he had never been to India. There was no  credible  evidence
    before the Judge, other than the appellant's evidence, that he and  his
    wife were actually in Afghanistan in 2006 and therefore could not  have
    been at the High Commission in Delhi. The most persuasive evidence that
    the Judge relied  upon  was  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  were
    physically present at the British High Commission being interviewed was
    that the appellant himself accepted that the  photographs  attached  to
    these 2006 visa application forms were of himself and his wife.

13. The Judge stated that if he was to accept the appellant's account  that
    the appellant had no knowledge of these 2006 visa application, he  must
    accept one of two propositions.  Firstly,  that  those  conducting  the
    interview did not  verify  identity  of  the  persons  that  they  were
    interviewing against photographs and the passports that were  in  their
    possession, notwithstanding the purpose of the interview was  that  the
    entry clearance officer had concerns as to the  validity  of  the  visa
    application. Alternatively, the agent who arranged for two people of an
    identical or very similar appearance to the appellant and his  wife  to
    attend the  interview.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  both
    propositions were incapable of belief.

14. The Judge was not only entitled to accept but he was  bound  to  accept
    that the respondent had provided  cogent  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant and his wife were present  at  the  New  Delhi  British  High
    Commission in 2006 being interviewed for visa applications  with  their
    Indian passports.

15. No credible reason was advanced by the appellant for  the  respondent's
    evidence other than a bare denial that they were at  the  British  High
    Commission 2006 and also claimed that they have never  been  to  India.
    The appellant not having provided an explanation for  the  respondent's
    evidence, relied on his and his wife's Afghanistan  passports  to  show
    that there are nationals of Afghanistan and thus imply that they  could
    not have been present at the British High Commission. This evidence  is
    not mutually exclusive. The Afghan passports do not in themselves  cast
    doubt on the respondent's cogent evidence that the  appellant  and  his
    wife had made an entry clearance application in New Delhi in 2006 where
    they were both physically present with Indian passports with  addresses
    in New Delhi, albeit in different names. The claimed  Afghan  passports
    were subsequently obtained, and which do not prove that they  were  not
    physically present at the British High Commission in  2006.  These  are
    two separate issues.

16. The Judge  noted  that  the  appellant's  appeal  had  been  previously
    adjourned, and Directions given by Judge Boyes  for  the  appellant  to
    bring evidence and to explain the process and documents that he used to
    update his Afghanistan passport in Europe. Despite this Direction,  the
    Judge noted there is no evidence before him as to  the  processes  that
    were undertaken in order to obtain the birth  certificate  or  passport
    other than the statement  within  the  appellant's  statement  that  he
    underwent verification process with the Afghan Embassy.

17. The appellant therefore was given every opportunity to provide evidence
    about the process and the kind of information he provided to be  issued
    Afghanistan passports.

18. The Judge was entitled to rely on the inconsistencies and anomalies  in
    the birth certificate and other documents provided by the appellant and
    was entitled to place no reliance on them. The Judge was also  entitled
    to rely on background evidence that Afghanistan passport  are  easy  to
    obtain fraudulently. The fact that an  Embassy  in  Europe  issued  the
    Afghanistan issued the passports does not in itself mean that they  are
    reliable within the  Tanveer  Ahmed  principles  especially  given  the
    inconsistencies in the birth certificates and other  documents.  It  is
    reasonable to assume that birth certificate had  to  be  submitted  for
    Afghanistan passports to be issued.

19. The grounds of appeal make much of the fact that the  appellant  speaks
    Dari and some Pashto which languages are spoken in Afghanistan and  not
    commonly spoken in India. It was argued that this demonstrates that the
    appellants must be nationals of Afghanistan. The Judge did not rule out
    the possibility that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  could  have  been
    originally from Afghanistan but moved to India a very long time ago and
    by at least 2006 had become Indian nationals. Judicial notice is  taken
    of the fact that people move countries and thereby nationalities. There
    are British citizens who have lived in this country  for  a  very  long
    time and still speak Pashto and Dari. Therefore, it would  be  possible
    for the appellant to speak Dari and still be a national of India.

20. Although the Judge said that he did not  find  credible  that  all  the
    families members date of birth is first January with  different  years,
    is an error because it is customary in Afghanistan to give the date  as
    first January with different years. I find that this is not a  material
    error in the circumstances of this appeal, and this  has  not  rendered
    the decision unsafe.

21. I find that the Judge was entitled and required to reach his conclusion
    based on his consideration and evaluation of the evidence as  a  whole.
    The appellant's grounds of appeal are of  no  merit  whatsoever  and  a
    merely quarrel with the  Judge's  findings.   The  permission  is  very
    generous and there is no material error,  real,  actual,  perceived  or
    embryonic.

22. For each of these reasons the Judge was  not  satisfied,  even  to  the
    lowest standard, that the events of which the appellant speaks happened
    in Afghanistan are not credible because  the  appellant  has  lived  in
    India since at the very least since 2006 when he made applications  for
    visitor visas at the British High Commission in New Delhi  with  Indian
    passports under a different name and date of birth.

23. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:

         "15.     It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls  used  the
         words "vital" and "critical" as synonyms  of  the  word  "material"
         which we have used  above.  The  whole  of  his  judgment  warrants
         attention, because it reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not
         to overturn a judgment at first instance unless  it  really  cannot
         understand the original judge's thought processes when  he/she  was
         making material findings."

24. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning in  the
    Judge's decision for why he reached his conclusions which he was  bound
    to reach on the evidence before him.  In  any  event,  I  find  that  a
    differently  constituted  Tribunal  would  not  come  to  a   different
    conclusion  on  the  evidence  in   this   appeal.   There   are   many
    inconsistencies in the  evidence  which  cannot  be  explained  by  the
    appellant providing an Afghan passport and his ability  to  speak  Dari
    and some Pashto.

25. I find that no material error  of  law  has  been  established  in  the
    decision. I find that the Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant is not entitled to be  recognised  as  a  refugee  or  to  be
    granted humanitarian protection in this country. I uphold the decision.



DECISION

Appeal dismissed


      Dated this 14th day of March 2019
Signed by,
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


.............................................
Mrs S Chana
