
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01298/2019 - P


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|At Field House on 23 July 2020       |On 13 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran. He arrived in the United Kingdom in
    July 2018 with his wife and daughter (born in 2005), at which  time  he
    claimed  asylum.   The  respondent  refused  the  application  and  the
    appellant thereafter appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. In a decision sent on 11 April 2019, FtT  Judge  Skehan  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
    grounds.  In doing so, Judge Skehan, made, inter  alia,  the  following
    findings of fact:

          i) The appellant left Iran unlawfully  in  1984/5  and  lived  in
             Turkey, before being deported to Iran in 1987.  The  appellant
             left Iran because he  did  not  complete  compulsory  military
             service and was caught working when it was illegal for him  to
             do  so  absent  a  military  service/conscription   completion
             certificate.  Upon return to Iran the appellant  was  detained
             for four or five months and tortured.   Upon  release  he  was
             monitored closely and required to undertake military service.

         ii) The appellant found it difficult to obtain a job in  Iran.  He
             moved to Japan, living there between 1990 and 1992.  Upon  his
             return to Iran he opened a shop which was subsequently  closed
             down by the Iranian authorities.

        iii) The appellant and his wife have  been  active  members  of  an
             evangelical Church in the UK and were both baptised  in  2018.
             They are genuine Christian converts.

 3. The FtT rejected the appellant's claim that he  would  evangelise  upon
    return  to  Iran  and,  also,  concluded  that  the  appellant  is  not
    considered by the Iranian authorities to have links with MEK or to have
    any other political profile.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed against the FtT's decision and,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on the 6 August 2019, Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Harris
    dismissed  that  appeal.    DUTJ   Harris'   decision   was,   however,
    subsequently set  aside  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Callaghan  in  a
    decision dated 25 September 2019, pursuant to rule 43 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 5. The matter thereafter came before Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer and  Her
    Honour Judge Stacey ("the Panel") on 5 November 2019.  At that  hearing
    Ms Everett, appearing on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  confirmed
    that the respondent did not seek  to  challenge  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Callaghan's decision.

 6. In a decision promulgated on the 7 November 2019, the Panel  set  aside
    the decision of the FtT providing, inter alia,  the  following  reasons
    for doing so:

         "5.  The FTT did not make any clear findings on two aspects of  the
             appellant's claim (which were supported by his wife, who  gave
             evidence before the  FTT):  (i)  they  received  leaflets  and
             pamphlets    about    Christianity    and    attended    house
             Churches/meetings in Iran co-ordinated by Sister  Helen,  from
             the beginning of 2018; (ii) they were told  that  their  lives
             were in danger  because  Sister  Helen  was  arrested  by  the
             Iranian authorities,  and  they  would  therefore  have  their
             details in connection with Christianity in Iran.   It  is  for
             this reason that they claimed  they  abandoned  everything  to
             flee Iran.  The FTT also failed to make any  findings  on  the
             reliability of the appellant's wife's evidence at all.


         6.    The appellant appealed against the FTT's decision, relying on
             three grounds of appeal:


          i) The FTT failed to provide adequate reasons for its  conclusion
             that the appellant would not evangelise in Iran and failed  to
             apply the principles in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.


         ii) The FTT failed to engage with the country background  evidence
             ...to the effect that upon  return  to  Iran  the  authorities
             would be adversely interested  in  him  as  a  result  of  his
             illegal  exit,  his  Christianity  and  the  authorities  past
             adverse attention in him.


         ...


          9. Ms Everett conceded that  grounds  1  and  2  have  been  made
             out...We are satisfied that this concession was properly  made
             for the reasons we set below.


         10.  Ms Everett agreed with the submission in  ground  1  that  the
             finding that the appellant would not  evangelise  in  Iran  is
             inconsistent with the finding that he is a  genuine  Christian
             convert who has chosen to belong to an evangelical  Church  in
             the UK  and  carried  out  evangelical  activities  here.   Ms
             Everett also agreed that the FTT failed to make clear findings
             of fact on the matters we set out at [5]  above.   Ms  Everett
             accepted that the claim that Sister Helen was arrested and  it
             was reasonably likely that the authorities would have come  to
             know about the appellant's and his wife's Christian activities
             whilst in Iran, was a  significant  component  of  the  asylum
             claim and it was an "Robinson" obvious error of law to fail to
             engage with this aspect of the  claim,  albeit  this  was  not
             clearly pleaded in the grounds.


         11.  Ms Everett also acknowledged that  the  FTT  was  required  to
             apply the country guidance contained in SSH  and  HR  (illegal
             exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]  UKUT  00308  (IAC)
             wherein the UT said this at [23] (our emphasis):


                  "In our view the evidence does not establish that a failed
                  asylum  seeker  who  had  left  Iran  illegally  would  be
                  subjected  on  return  to  a  period   of   detention   or
                  questioning such that there is a real risk  of  Article  3
                  ill-treatment.  The evidence in our  view  shows  no  more
                  than that they will be questioned, and that if  there  are
                  any  particular  concerns  arising  from  their   previous
                  activities either in Iran or  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
                  whichever country they are returned from, then there would
                  be a risk of further questioning, detention and  potential
                  ill-treatment.  In this regard it is relevant to return to
                  Dr Kakhki's evidence in re-examination where he said  that
                  the treatment they would receive  would  depend  on  their
                  individual case.  If they co-operated  and  accepted  that
                  they left illegally and claimed asylum abroad  then  there
                  would be no  reason  for  ill-treatment,  and  questioning
                  would be for a fairly brief period.  That seems to  us  to
                  sum up the position well, and as a consequence we conclude
                  that a person with no history other than that of  being  a
                  failed asylum seeker who  had  exited  illegally  and  who
                  could be expected to tell the truth when questioned  would
                  not face a real risk of ill-treatment during the period of
                  questioning at the airport."


         12   Ms Everett accepted that at no point in its decision  did  the
             FTT assess whether "particular concerns" would  arise  in  the
             sense that within the context required by SSH. In  particular,
             when cumulatively assessing the risk posed by the  appellant's
             Christianity at [16c], the FTT failed to assess  the  risk  at
             the point of return at Tehran airport or to take into  account
             the additional ingredient that the appellant would  be  liable
             to prosecution as an illegal deportee, in addition to being  a
             Christian convert.  Although ground 2 does not expressly  rely
             upon SSH it makes the broader point that  the  FTT  failed  to
             address the 2019 CPIN that illegal  departure  in  combination
             with other matters may lead the Iranian authorities to take an
             adverse interest in the appellant.


         13.  We did not hear any submissions on ground 3, which relates  to
             Article 8.  This remains a live issue albeit the focus of  the
             appeal  has  always  been  on  asylum  and  not  human  rights
             grounds."


 7. Since the decision  of  the  Panel,  there  has  been  further  country
    guidance authority from the Upper Tribunal relevant to this appeal - PS
    (Christianity-Risk) Iran CG [2020] UKUT 00046. As  a  consequence,  the
    matter was listed for a Case Management Hearing (as was envisaged would
    be necessary at the hearing before the Panel).

 8. At the Case Management Hearing both parties indicated that  the  appeal
    could properly be determined on the  papers  i.e.  did  not  require  a
    further oral hearing. It was observed in particular that the Panel  had
    preserved the 'positive' findings of fact  made  by  the  FtT  and  the
    respondent did not,  in  such  circumstances,  seek  to  re-open  these
    preserved findings.  I concurred and issued Directions (given orally at
    the  Case  Management  Hearing)  providing  a  timetable  for   written
    submissions.

 9. The appellant's written submissions were received  in  accordance  with
    the timetable.  The SSHD has chosen not to provide written submissions,
    which were required to be lodged by no later than 19  June  2020.  That
    this was so was envisaged as a possibility by  the  Presenting  Officer
    who appeared at the CMH.

Decision and Reasons

10. Turning then to the initial task before me, to  determine  whether  the
    appellant has demonstrated a real risk that he would be persecuted  for
    a Refugee Convention reason should he be returned to Iran.  I  conclude
    he has for the following reasons.

11. The preserved findings of the FtT are set out at [2] above and I do not
    repeat them at this stage, save  to  highlight  the  finding  that  the
    appellant is a genuine Christian convert.  I  also  note  Ms  Everett's
    acceptance before the Panel (recorded at [10] of the Panel's  decision)
    that the FTT's preserved  finding  that  the  appellant  is  a  genuine
    Christian convert who has chosen to belong to an evangelical church  in
    the  UK  and  who  has  carried  out  evangelical  activities  here  is
    inconsistent with the finding that the appellant would  not  evangelise
    in Iran. The SSHD has not sought to resile from such acceptance  before
    me.

12. Although  I  do  not  concur  with  Ms  Everett's  view  that  it  must
    necessarily follow from the  fact  that  the  appellant  is  a  genuine
    Christian convert who has chosen to belong to an evangelical church  in
    the UK and who has carried out  evangelical  activities  here  that  he
    would evangelise in Iran, I find that conclude otherwise would  need  a
    clear and rational foundation in the evidence.

13. On the evidence before me I accept the appellant's  assertion  that  he
    would seek to keep his conversion private if returned  to  Iran  though
    fear of being persecuted by the Iranian authorities should they  become
    aware of his conversion. The evidence  before  me  of  the  appellant's
    activities on behalf of the Church  in  the  UK,  which  I  accept,  is
    strongly supportive of such a conclusion  and  I  find  that  there  is
    nothing else in the evidence which leads me to conclude otherwise.

14. The assessment of  risk  upon  return  to  Iran,  given  the  preserved
    findings and the finding I have made at  [13]  above,  must  be  viewed
    through the lens of the recent Upper Tribunal Country Guidance decision
    - PS - which bears heavily on this case. The headnote to PS reads:

          1. This  country  guidance  applies  to  protection  claims  from
             Iranians  who  claim  to  have   converted   from   Islam   to
             Christianity.


          2. Insofar as they relate to non-ethnic Christians, this decision
             replaces the country guidance decisions in FS and Others (Iran
             - Christian Converts) Iran CG [2004] UKIAT 00303 and SZ and JM
             (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT  00082  which
             are no longer to be followed.


          3. Decision  makers  should  begin  by  determining  whether  the
             claimant has demonstrated that it is reasonably likely that he
             or she is a Christian.   If  that  burden  is  discharged  the
             following considerations apply:


               i) A convert to Christianity seeking to openly practice  that
                  faith in Iran would face a real risk of persecution.


              ii) If the claimant would in fact conceal his faith, decision-
                  makers should consider why.  If any part of the claimant's
                  motivation is a  fear  of  such  persecution,  the  appeal
                  should be allowed.


             iii) If the claimant would choose to conceal his  faith  purely
                  for other reasons (family  pressure,  social  constraints,
                  personal  preference  etc)  then  protection   should   be
                  refused.  The  evidence  demonstrates  that  private   and
                  solitary worship, within the  confines  of  the  home,  is
                  possible and would not in general entail a  real  risk  of
                  persecution.


          4. In cases where the claimant is found to be insincere in his or
             her  claimed  conversion,  there  is  not  a  real   risk   of
             persecution 'in-country'. There being no reason  for  such  an
             individual to associate himself with Christians, there is  not
             a real risk that he would come to the adverse attention of the
             Iranian   authorities.   Decision-makers   must   nevertheless
             consider the possible risks arising at the  'pinch  point'  of
             arrival:


               i) All returning failed asylum seekers are subject to
                  questioning on arrival, and this will include questions
                  about why they claimed asylum;


              ii) A returnee who divulges that he claimed to be a Christian
                  is reasonably likely to be transferred for further
                  questioning;


             iii) The returnee can be expected to sign an undertaking
                  renouncing his claimed Christianity. The questioning will
                  therefore in general be short and will not entail a real
                  risk of ill-treatment;


              iv) If there are any reasons why the detention becomes
                  prolonged, the risk of ill-treatment will correspondingly
                  rise. Factors that could result in prolonged detention
                  must be determined on a case by case basis. They could
                  include but are not limited to:


                   a) Previous adverse contact with  the  Iranian  security
                      services;


                   b) Connection to persons  of  interest  to  the  Iranian
                      authorities;


                   c) Attendance at a church with perceived  connection  to
                      Iranian house churches;


                   d)  Overt  social  media  content  indicating  that  the
                      individual   concerned    has    actively    promoted
                      Christianity.


                                                               (my emphasis)


15. Bringing this together, it is clear that applying the country  guidance
    to the established factual matrix - both the preserved facts and  those
    facts I have found above -  the  appeal  must  be  allowed  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds. The appellant is a genuine  Christian  convert  who
    would conceal his faith upon return to Iran through  a  fear  of  being
    persecuted. Those parts of the Country Guidance emphasised above  point
    to  only  one  conclusion  on  such  facts,  that  the  appellant   has
    established his case under the Refugee Convention.

16. In this particular case there are also a number of other 'risk factors'
    which the appellant does not need to deploy in order to succeed in this
    appeal but go to reinforce the conclusion that he should  succeed  i.e.
    that he left Iran illegally and has had previous adverse  contact  with
    the Iranian authorities. In addition, I accept as reasonably likely  to
    be true the appellant's and his wife's evidence of the  attendance  and
    meetings in Iran coordinated by sister Helen, as well as  the  evidence
    regarding Sister Helen's subsequent arrest, are also reasonably  likely
    to be true.

17. For the reasons given above the appellant's appeal is allowed.

Decision

For the reasons given above,  upon  remaking  the  decision  on  appeal  the
appellant's appeal is allowed on Refugee Convention grounds.  For  the  same
reasons it is also allowed on Article 3 ECHR grounds.


Signed
M O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor                          Date: 7 August 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.

