


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/01798/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 October 2018              |On 24 October 2018             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    L. G.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of the DRC, entered the United  Kingdom
           illegally in 2017 and claimed asylum. Her protection  claim  was
           refused on 5 January 2018, and her appeal against  the  decision
           was heard and dismissed by First Tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon in
           a decision promulgated on 27 March 2018.
        2. Permission to appeal that decision was sought  on  two  grounds.
           The  first  raised  a  challenge  to  the  adverse   credibility
           findings, asserting that the Judge should have attached  greater
           weight to the content of a letter which was said to  corroborate
           her account of her experiences in the DRC. The second  raised  a
           challenge to the treatment of the Appellant's health,  asserting
           that the Judge failed to follow  the  approach  set  out  in  AM
           (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64.
        3. Permission was refused on the second ground, but granted on  the
           first by First tier Tribunal Judge  Chohan  on  25  April  2018,
           although it was noted that it  was  not  clear  that  the  error
           contended for  would  have  had  any  material  bearing  on  the
           disposal of the appeal.
        4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further evidence.
        5. Thus the matter came before me.


      The hearing
        6. When the appeal was called on for hearing Ms Brakaj did not make
           any submissions in relation to the second ground, beyond stating
           that the Appellant continued to rely upon the second  ground.  I
           infer that she sought  thereby  to  renew  the  application  for
           permission to  appeal  upon  the  second  ground  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal, although no such application has been formally made.
        7. In my judgement permission was correctly refused by the  FtT  in
           relation to the second ground. The Appellant had  accepted  that
           she was diagnosed with her condition in the  DRC  in  2006,  and
           that she had thereafter received treatment for her condition  in
           the DRC until she left in 2017. Her evidence about the  adequacy
           and nature of the treatment received in  the  DRC  was  rejected
           [37], and there is no challenge offered to  that  rejection.  It
           was therefore well open to the Judge to conclude  that  adequate
           and effective treatment was available to her in the DRC [38].
        8. The Appellant's condition was presently well managed, and  posed
           no current threat to her life, whilst she remained  in  the  UK.
           Although she relied upon medical evidence  to  suggest  that  an
           interruption to her treatment  upon  return  to  the  DRC  would
           result in a deterioration in her condition,  with  a  consequent
           threat to her life, on the evidence before him it  was  open  to
           the Judge to conclude that  there  was  no  real  risk  of  this
           occurring [38-9]. Thus the Appellant did not meet the Article  3
           threshold, and there is no substance to the bald complaint  that
           the Judge failed to follow the AM (Zimbabwe) approach.  Nor  had
           the Appellant established in the eight months during  which  she
           had been present in the UK prior to  the  hearing,  any  "family
           life". Nor had she established any "private life" of  sufficient
           strength and quality to engage Article 8.  The grounds offer  no
           challenge to either of these findings. Accordingly, as an adult,
           there was no Article 8 gateway that would allow her to introduce
           evidence concerning  her  health  into  any  assessment  of  the
           proportionality of the decision under appeal because that  stage
           was not reached; GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40.
        9. The focus of Ms Brakaj's  submissions  was  therefore  upon  the
           first ground, which is drafted in the following terms;
           It would seem irregular that the Judge  has  partially  accepted
           the letter from XX in that he is willing  to  accept  she  is  a
           member of XX however has not accepted that she was  an  activist
           nor was  detained  and  tortured....  This  evidence  should  be
           afforded  greater  weight  and  the  Judge  has   not   provided
           comprehensive or logical findings as to why he only accepts part
           of the letter.
       10. Ms Brakaj argued that this was not a  complaint  of  perversity,
           and accepted that it could not be said the Judge had  overlooked
           relevant evidence. Thus she framed the complaint as a failure to
           give adequate reasons for the Judge's  decision  not  to  attach
           sufficient weight to the letter to  accept  it  as  an  entirely
           accurate account of the Appellant's experiences in the DRC,  and
           thus entirely corroborative of her own evidence.
       11. I am not satisfied that the approach  Ms  Brakaj  contended  for
           would have been an appropriate one. The  weight  that  could  be
           given to the letter in question, dated  16  February  2018,  was
           quite properly considered by the Judge in  the  context  of  the
           failure of the author to give oral evidence at the appeal,  and,
           because  following   the   Appellant's   cross-examination   the
           Respondent had felt able to argue that no weight could be  given
           to the letter at all [28-30].  Thus  the  Judge  adopted,  quite
           properly, a more holistic approach than  that  which  Ms  Brakaj
           sought to advocate. The Judge did not suggest that  "no  weight"
           could be given to the letter's contents. On the contrary he  was
           "prepared to give some weight to the letter". That did not  mean
           however that he was obliged  to  accept  the  contents  of  that
           letter as true.
       12. In my judgement it is quite clear that, although he did not  set
           this out expressly, the Judge followed the guidance  offered  by
           Ouseley J in CJ (on the  application  of  R)  v  Cardiff  County
           Council [2011] EWHC 23, upon the importance of the  approach  in
           Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318.  That  guidance  can  be
           summarised as  follows.  Documentary  evidence  along  with  its
           provenance needs to be weighed in the light of all the  evidence
           in the case. Documentary evidence  does  not  carry  with  it  a
           presumption  of  authenticity,  which  specific  evidence   must
           disprove, failing which its content must be accepted.  The  same
           can be said of written evidence supplied by a  witness  who  has
           not attended  a  hearing  and  tendered  themselves  for  cross-
           examination. What is required is an appraisal of the document in
           the light of the evidence about its nature,  provenance,  timing
           and any relevant background evidence, and in the  light  of  all
           the other evidence in the case, especially  that  given  by  the
           Appellant who relies upon it as corroborative of their account.
       13. Thus in the course of his decision the Judge noted the  apparent
           inconsistency (unexplained in any  re-examination)  between  the
           Appellant's account of where she  had  met  the  author  of  the
           letter, and where he had stated they had met within the  letter.
           No criticism is advanced of his doing so.
       14. The Judge also noted,  and  clearly  placed  significant  weight
           upon, the inconsistency between  the  Appellant's  inability  to
           demonstrate anything other than vague and superficial  knowledge
           of XX on the one hand, and the claims made  within  the  letter,
           and by herself, for the length of her involvement with XX as  an
           activist, on the other hand. It is not suggested before me  that
           no such inconsistency existed, or, that an adequate  explanation
           was ever offered to the Judge for it,  and  then  overlooked  by
           him. Moreover Ms Brakaj ultimately  accepted  that  this  was  a
           matter upon which the Judge was entitled, and indeed obliged, to
           focus.
       15. In the circumstances, as the decision  makes  abundantly  clear,
           the Judge felt unable to accept the claims made by the Appellant
           for her activities in the DRC, as corroborated in the letter  in
           question, because he concluded that  those  claims  were  simply
           inconsistent with the  knowledge  that  she  had  been  able  to
           demonstrate upon arrival in the UK.  That  adverse  finding  was
           open to him on the evidence, was properly explained, and  in  my
           judgement the grounds do not properly engage with it.  That  was
           the reason, explained in clear terms, why the Judge rejected the
           Appellant's claim to be a political activist. Thus  the  reasons
           offered by the Judge for  his  decision  were  in  my  judgement
           entirely adequate; MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958.
       16. In the circumstances Ms Brakaj's complaint that  the  Judge  did
           not go through the letter paragraph by paragraph explaining  why
           he did not accept each  element  of  its  content  as  true  was
           entirely misplaced. Nor was the Judge obliged to make an express
           finding to the effect that individual elements of the content of
           the letter were untrue after looking at the letter in isolation.
           The rejection of the majority of the content of  the  letter  is
           clear, and it is a conclusion  that  results  from  the  adverse
           findings the Judge has made, having looked at  the  evidence  in
           the round.
       17. Accordingly, and notwithstanding the terms in  which  permission
           to appeal was granted to  the  Appellant  the  grounds  fail  to
           disclose any material error of law in the approach taken by  the
           Judge to the appeal.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  5
   February 2018 contained no error of law in the decision to  dismiss  the
   Appellant's appeal which requires that decision  to  be  set  aside  and
   remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 19 October 2018



