
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01622/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 August 2016                              |On 11 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                    [A K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Visa Inn
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone.  On 16 May 2016  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Amin dismissed the appeal she had  brought  against  the
    decision of the respondent on 5 October 2015 to refuse  her  claim  for
    asylum.  In her grounds of appeal  the  appellant  submitted  that  the
    decision was contrary to the Refugee Convention and was  wrong  not  to
    grant her humanitarian protection or leave under the private and family
    life provisions of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The appellant in her grounds of appeal stated that she would be  giving
    evidence and required the  assistance  of  a  Temne  interpreter.   The
    Tribunals Service sought to book such  an  interpreter  but  eventually
    confirmed there was no Temne interpreter available.   When  the  appeal
    was  relisted  to  be  heard  on  6   April   2016,   the   appellant's
    representative requested that this be converted to a CMR  in  light  of
    the FtT's inability to secure a Temne  interpreter.   On  4  April  the
    request was refused with a direction  that  the  appeal  proceed  to  a
    hearing  on   submissions   only.    On   5   April   the   appellant's
    representatives wrote saying that it was "of  grave  concern"  that  it
    remained that no interpreter could be  found;  and  that  having  taken
    instructions, "we respectfully request that the appeal for tomorrow  be
    converted therefore to the papers -  given  that  the  bundle  skeleton
    argument before the court  is  both  detailed  and  extensive  and  all
    supporting documents are before the court."

3.   At [8] of her determination  Judge  Amin  reflected  this  as  follows:
    "[t]here was an agreement between the parties that  the  hearing  would
    proceed on submissions only as it had  been  difficult  to  secure  the
    assistance of a Temne speaking interpreter."

4.   The grounds of appeal raised several  points,  the  one  advanced  most
    strongly  by  Mr  Sellwood  being  that  of  procedural  fairness.   He
    emphasised that in both of her asylum  interviews  the  respondent  had
    secured the assistance  of  a  Temne  interpreter.   He  cited  various
    authorities relating to adjournments, including  Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:
    Fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  and  several  old  IAT  cases.   His
    argument in a nutshell was that  the  appellant  had  been  denied  the
    opportunity to give evidence in person as she had  requested.   Despite
    the  fact  that  the  judge  who  refused  the  first  application  for
    permission rejected the other grounds and the eventual grant only  gave
    express leave to argue the interpreter  point,  Mr  Sellwood  submitted
    that the judge had also erred in failing to determine  the  appellant's
    humanitarian protection claim and also in failing to determine, in  the
    context of assessing the Article 8 claim, the  best  interests  of  the
    child.

5.   I am grateful to both representatives for their very succinct and  able
    submissions.  I have had regard to the respondent's Rule 24 notice.  It
    seems to me that this is a case where it is important to look first  at
    what the judge did in relation to the appellant's grounds of appeal and
    how the judge set out his findings.  In this context it is  clear  that
    the  judge  failed  to  make  a  proper  finding  on  the   appellant's
    humanitarian protection claim.  Despite correctly noting at  [31]  that
    this claim had two limbs (a) medical; and (b) her fear  of  robbers  in
    Sierra Leone, the judge only proceeded to address (a).  Notwithstanding
    that the appellant' claim based on (b) was not on  its  face  a  strong
    one, but the judge should have addressed it.

6.   As regards the judge's treatment of the appellant's  Article  8  claim,
    he properly identified this on her being able to claim that  she  could
    meet the requirements of the Rules that she would face very significant
    obstacles to return back to Eritrea; and if unable to do that, on being
    able to show that the refusal  decision  would  breach  her  Article  8
    rights.  Here there are two difficulties.  The  judge  (again)  nowhere
    addresses the appellant's claimed fear of harm at the hands of robbers.
     Second, the judge's  assessment  nowhere  takes  into  account,  as  a
    relevant consideration, that it has been made without  the  benefit  of
    the appellant's oral evidence.  On certain matters, e.g. the extent  of
    her ability to take care of  herself  in  terms  of  daily  tasks,  the
    appellant's oral evidence may have been relevant.

7.   Having noted certain deficiencies in the judge's determination  I  turn
    back to the principal ground of appeal based on procedural  unfairness.
    In certain respects the ground lacks foundation.  On the basis  of  the
    letter sent by the appellant's representatives, the judge  was  clearly
    entitled at [8] to state that there had been agreement that the  appeal
    would be by way of submissions only.  Looking at this  letter  it  must
    also be questioned why the appellant's solicitors considered  that  the
    failure to secure an interpreter for the appellant warranted  them  not
    attending along with  the  appellant's  daughter  as  a  witness.   The
    daughter would have been in a  position  to  give  evidence  about  the
    physical and mental ability of her mother and related matters.  She may
    also have been able to shed on  the  likely  living  circumstances  her
    mother would face on return to Sierra Leone.  At  the  same  time,  the
    judge should not have forgotten the fact that  the  conversion  of  the
    hearing to one on submissions only was not the  original  wish  of  the
    appellant or her solicitor and that it had only come about as a  result
    of the failure of the Appeals Service to secure a Temne interpreter and
    that the appellant's solicitors continued  to  regard  the  failure  to
    secure a Temne interpreter as a matter of "grave concern".

8.    In  the  above  circumstances  I  consider  that   the   hearing   was
    procedurally unfair and that it should go back on remittal to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard afresh before a judge other than Judge Amin.

9.   I further direct that:

     1.  A fresh attempt be made to obtain a Temne interpreter.  Given  that
         we know that an interpreter in the  language  was  secured  by  the
         respondent  on  two  occasions  during   the   appellant's   asylum
         procedure, it is far from obvious that the Appeals Service has used
         best endeavours.  It may be that the potential pool of interpreters
         is tiny, because her representatives confirmed on 21 July 2016 that
         she does not speak Mendi or Krio (languages that some Temne  speaks
         also speak), but fresh  efforts  should  be  made.   This  being  a
         direction to the HMCTS, it is to be meditated through the  Resident
         FtJ Judge at Hatton Cross.

     2.  The appellant's representatives inform the Tribunal within 14  days
         as to whether or not the appellant's daughter will attend  to  give
         evidence.

     If in consequence of these directions it is  established  that  despite
    fresh endeavours there  is  no  Temne  interpreter,  the  FtT  will  be
    entitled to proceed with  the  case.   If  it  is  confirmed  that  the
    appellant's daughter will not or cannot attend, then the  FtT  will  be
    entitled to determine the case on the basis of submissions only.

     For the above reasons:

     The FtT judge materially erred in law.

     The decision is set aside and remitted to be heard afresh by  the  FtT.



No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date: 9 August 2016

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
