

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/01736/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunal Liverpool  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th September 2018                        |On 21st September 2018       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                     MMK
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bednarek, of Broudie, Jackson and Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Herwald dated 3 April 2018 dismissing his appeal against  the
      respondent's decision of  21  January  2018  refusing  his  protection
      claim. The appellant claimed to fear harm in Iran as  a  result  of  a
      series of incidents in 2015 which are, in summary:

      (i)   that he was arrested by security forces in a council office when
           he refused to pay a bribe to process a planning application  and
           he complained about government complacency about bribes; he  was
           arrested, detained for a  week,  beaten,  and  released  with  a
           warning that he should not cause any problems in the future;

      (ii)  sometime later at a bank he complained loudly that he was  being
           made to wait to see someone about a  bank  loan  whereas  others
           were being shown  through  to  see  the  bank  manager;  he  was
           arrested, detained for 4 days, beaten and  upon  being  released
           was told that this was his  second  warning  (witness  statement
           [19]) and could face a charge of  blasphemy  for  insulting  the
           supreme leader;

      (iii) a week later at the same bank he asked to complain to  the  bank
           manager who called him a troublemaker; during a fracas he pulled
           down pictures of the supreme leader,  shouted  'down  with  this
           regime' and stamped his feet on the pictures of  the  Ayatollah;
           he later became aware that the authorities had visited his  home
           looking for him.

2     It is also part of the appellant's case that he  has  become  divorced
      from his wife in Iran, and since his arrival in the United Kingdom  in
      August 2015, has entered into an Islamic religious marriage  with  Ms.
      VK, 'Congolese' (as described on  the  copy  of  an  Islamic  marriage
      certificate  at  page  E1  of  the  respondent's  bundle),   who   has
      discretionary leave to remain in the UK. At the  time  of  the  appeal
      before the judge, VK was pregnant.

3     The appellant  arrived  in  United  Kingdom  on  5  August  2015,  and
      underwent a screening interview on that date. Some amendments  to  the
      screening interview were sent to the  respondent  by  the  appellant's
      solicitors on 12 July 2016. His SEF interview took place on 7 December
      2017, and the respondent's decision was made on 22 January 2018.

4     The respondent did not believe the appellant's account  of  events  in
      Iran, and found that as the appellant's partner in the UK  was  not  a
      British citizen, or a person who was settled or with  refugee  status,
      she did not meet  the  definition  of  partner  for  the  purposes  of
      Appendix FM of the immigration rules, and refused the application.

5     The appellant's appeal came before the judge  on  6  March  2018.  The
      appellant, VK, and VK's father gave oral evidence.

6     The judge made findings on the appellant's account of events  in  Iran
      at paragraph [14(i)-(j)], and held at [14(k)]  that  he  rejected  the
      appellant's account of being wanted by the authorities in Iran.

7     Further, the judge considered the appellant's private and family  life
      under article 8ECHR at [32]-[35] and held at [32]  that  the  evidence
      given by VK was persuasive and was satisfied that  she  believed  that
      she was in an ongoing relationship with  the  appellant.  However  the
      judge held, also at [32], that given the appellant's credibility,  and
      his lack of honesty in telling the court about  his  supposed  divorce
      proceedings in relation to his  first  wife  in  Iran,  and  that  the
      appellant was an economic migrant to the UK, that although  VK  had  a
      desire for a genuine and subsisting relationship,  the  appellant  did
      not. "All the evidence points to his using her as a potential  vehicle
      for remaining in the United Kingdom, along with any  child  which  she
      may bear."

8     The judge found in the alternative at [33] that even if there  was  an
      interference with the appellant's family life engaging  the  operation
      of Article 8 ECHR, the decision was in accordance with the law and had
      the legitimate aim of forwarding the economic well-being of the United
      Kingdom. In finding at [34] that the decision was  proportionate,  the
      judge noted firstly that the appellant was not a credible witness  and
      had told lies to the immigration officer and was not telling the truth
      about his history in Iran. The judge made some observations about  the
      strength of the appellant's relationship with VK, held  at  [35]  that
      VK's immigration status  was  not  settled  and  the  appellant's  was
      precarious, and  held  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  not  be
      disproportionate. The appeal was dismissed.

9     The appellant appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  in  grounds  dated  17
      April 2018. The grounds are extensive, but necessarily so,  and  I  do
      not criticize them for that. I set the nature of the grounds out below
      under 'Discussion'.

10    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      Lindsley on 9 July 2018.

11    I heard submissions from the parties today. Mr. Mills was  helpful  in
      indicating that he conceding certain matters, as I set out below.

      Discussion

      The protection claim

12    At [14(c)], the judge noted that at  question  3.2  of  the  screening
      interview the appellant had said that he had  not  been  arrested;  at
      question 3.3 that he was not the subject of any arrest warrant or  was
      wanted by any authority in any country, and at question 4.2 when asked
      to explain his reasons for claiming asylum,  the  appellant  had  said
      only "In Iran if you do not like the government the government dislike
      it. For example when some Iranians were deported from UK back to  Iran
      the  government  they  were  executed",  and  had  not  mentioned  any
      incidents in a bank.  The judge held at [14 (d)]  that  the  appellant
      was telling the truth in the screening interview, and  impliedly,  was
      therefore not telling the truth when he later set  out  his  claim  to
      have been arrested twice, and to be wanted by the Iranian authorities.



13    At [14(c)] the judge referred to a letter of representations dated  12
      July 2016 making  an  amendment  to  question  3.3  at  the  screening
      interview, to the effect that the appellant was wanted by the  Iranian
      authorities as he had  insulted  the  supreme  leader  and  the  plain
      clothed authorities had visited his home and had been looking for him.
      The judge noted that this amendment had come almost a year  after  the
      screening interview took place.

14    Further, the judge noted that the appellant's  actual  explanation  as
      to why he had  not  set  out  matters  more  fully  in  the  screening
      interview was that he was tired and that there were problems with  the
      interpreter at the screening interview.   The  judge  noted  that  the
      appellant had said he was 'fit and well  to  be  interviewed'  at  the
      screening interview, and had not  complained  about  any  interpreting
      problems at the time or in the later representations of 12 July 2016.

15    These matters were all, on considering the structure  of  the  judge's
      decision, matters which contributed to his  overall  decision  at  [14
      (k)] that he did not believe the appellant's account.

16    In challenging those findings regarding  the  screening  interview  at
      paragraphs [4]-[10] of his grounds of  appeal,  the  appellant  argues
      that the delay in providing representations dated  12  July  2016  was
      because  neither  the  appellant  nor  his  representatives  had  been
      provided with a copy of the screening interview until shortly prior to
      that time.

17    Further, it was asserted that the appellant did not say  that  he  was
      fit and well to be interviewed; a potentially relevant passage on that
      issue in the screening was question 2.1 which reads as follows:

           "Do you or your dependents ... have any
           - medical conditions
           - disabilities
           - infectious diseases
           - taking any medication?"

      The handwritten answer is recorded as 'No, fit and well'.

18    I find, even taking into account that the appellant  may  have  had  a
      legitimate reason for not providing any statement of correction to the
      screening interview  until  almost  a  year  later,  not  having  been
      provided with a copy of that screening interview, that the  judge  was
      entitled nonetheless to have regard to  the  differences  between  the
      screening interview and the subsequent evidence of the appellant, when
      assessing the appellant's credibility. It is  to  be  noted  that  the
      judge observed as follows at [14(c)]:

            "I might have been able to give some more credit to that letter
           [of amendments dated 12 July 2016] had it not taken so  long  to
           make that explanation, but more importantly, before me, he  said
           that the problem with the screening interview was that  firstly,
           he was tired." (And the judge also refers to the timing  of  the
           appellant's complaint about the interpreter.) (Emphasis added)

19    Thus, it is apparent that the judge placed more reliance on  the  fact
      that there was no  evidence  of  the  appellant  being  tired  at  the
      screening interview, and  that  no  complaint  about  the  quality  of
      interpreting had been made at the screening interview or in the letter
      of 12 July 2016, than  on  the  delay  in  making  amendments  to  the
      screening  interview,  when  treating  the  differences  between   the
      screening  interview  and  the  later  evidence  as  diminishing   the
      appellant's credibility. Any misapprehension that the judge  may  have
      made about the reasons for the timing of the letter of  12  July  2016
      was not material therefore.

20    As regards the appellant's claim that he was tired  at  the  screening
      interview, I find that the there was no error in  the  judge  treating
      the appellant as fit and well at that interview. Although I agree with
      Mr. Bednarek that the words 'No - fit and well' at question 2.1 of the
      screening was the appellant's response to the question  about  whether
      he had any ongoing  medical  conditions  or  disabilities,  infectious
      diseases, etc, and those questions are not necessarily questions about
      how a person feels in that particular moment, I  note  that  appellant
      was previously asked at the outset of the screening interview,  at  A1
      as follows:

           "Please let me know if you feel unwell at any time  during  this
           interview

           Are you ready to be interviewed?"

      To which the answer is recorded, 'Yes'.

21    Therefore the appellant indicated he  was  ready  to  be  interviewed,
      having been specifically advised that he should  let  the  interviewer
      know at any time if he was unwell. There  was  no  complaint  then  or
      later in the screening interview that he was unwell in any way.

22    Further it is correct to note that the there was no complaint  at  the
      screening interview or in the letter of representations dated 12  July
      2016 that there was any interpreting  problem.  I  therefore  find  no
      error in the judge's findings at [14 (b)-(d)].

23    However, at [14(e)], the  judge  purports  to  set  out  discrepancies
      about what the appellant had taken down from the  wall  in  the  third
      incident, and  whether  or  not  he  had  stamped  on  images  of  the
      Ayatollah. Before me, it is accepted by Mr. Mills, after we considered
      all the relevant evidence relating to this  part  of  the  appellant's
      account, that there was no material  discrepancy  in  the  appellant's
      account on which the judge could reasonably  have  relied.  Mr.  Mills
      therefore accepts that the judge erred in law at [14(e)] in purporting
      to find a discrepancy in the  appellant's  evidence,  when  there  was
      none. Mr Mills argues however that the error was not material.

24    Further, at [14(f)] in a very closely packed paragraph, and  in  which
      most of the evidence referred to is unsourced (but most  of  which  is
      actually derived from the SEF interview,)  the  judge  advanced  in  a
      series of propositions,  that  the  following  matters  could  not  be
      reconciled with one another:

           (i)   having set out the appellant's description of a  visit  by
                 the authorities to the appellant's home,  looking  for  the
                 appellant (which I find to be a quote  from  SEF  questions
                 113 - 116), the judge said of the appellant that 'later  on
                 he claimed that the authorities never returned to the house
                 and  did  not  leave  any  documents',  which   cannot   be
                 reconciled with his claim that his wife was given documents
                 two or three times telling her that she had to  go  to  the
                 authorities to be questioned;

           (ii)  neither could it be reconciled with his claim that someone
                 from the authorities came to the door and asked her to sign
                 for letters;

           (iii) further, this cannot be reconciled  with  the  appellant's
                 claim at 4.3 of the screening  interview  that  he  had  no
                 documents  and  could  access  no  documents  because  'The
                 Iranian government does not issue these documents".

25    To analyse the judge's reasoning here, it is necessary to set out  the
      actual evidence on which the section is based, from the SEF:

           "113  After for five days who got in touch

                 My brother's friend came to see me, he told  me  after  the
                 incident the authorities came to my house searching for me.

           114   What did the authorities say you

                 They asked my wife where I was and searched the house  that
                 day

           115   How long after the incident  did  the  authorities  search
                 your house

                 It wasn't more than 1 or 2 hours after the incident

           116   Did the authorities say anything else you

                 No  my  wife  didn't  have  any  information  and  she  was
                 frightened

           117   Did they leave any documents

                 No just asked for me

           118   How many people were there

                 4 or 5

           119   Did they return

                 No

           120   If they didn't say why  they  were  looking  for  you  and
                 didn't leave any documents then why did you decide to  flee
                 the country

                 2 or 3 times she had letters to say she had  to  go  to  be
                 questioned and they told her she had to cooperate. My  wife
                 was saying that the house was under surveillance.

           121   When did she get the letters

                 After they searched the house 2 days later she got a letter

           122   And after that
                 The 2nd letter was 4 days after the incident

           ...

           129   Did they send her the letters or hand them to her

                 Somebody from the authorities came to the door,  gave  them
                 to her and asked her to sign

           130   You said earlier that the  authorities  didn't  leave  any
                 documents you know (sic) say that they  left  letters  with
                 your wife, can you explain

                 They didn't leave anything when they searched the house"

26    Also relevant to this passage of evidence is the appellant's  evidence
      in his witness statement as follows:

           "38 The home office referred to the fact that I stated  that  my
           wife was given documents to report to the authorities [RFRL 37].
           This is correct. When I stated that my wife was  not  given  any
           documents [AI R117] I was referring to that particular visit. My
           wife was not given documents on the  first  visit.  When  I  was
           asked if the people returned [AI R119] and I  responded  "No"  I
           was referring to those specific people. The same people did  not
           return however other people did return. I was not asked  if  the
           authorities returned.

           39  My  ex-wife  was  issued  with  letters  to  report  to  the
           authorities. My ex-wife also informed  me  that  the  house  was
           under surveillance [AI R120].

           40  The  Home  Office  referred  to  my  response  in  screening
           interview that the Iranian authorities do  not  issue  documents
           [SI 4.3] [RF RL 37]. My  response  was  referring  to  documents
           relating to the charges against me.  My  wife  was  issued  with
           letters advising her to report to the authorities.  She  had  to
           produce the letter in order to access the building. This is  not
           inconsistent."

27    The appellant argues within his grounds of appeal that in relation  to
      the alleged discrepancies in the appellant's account as  discussed  by
      the judge at [14(f)], either that no such discrepancy arose,  or  that
      the judge failed to take into  account  the  appellant's  explanations
      about such matters in his witness evidence.

28    I find that those arguments are made out. In relation to  the  judge's
      suggestion that the appellant had stated that the  authorities  'never
      returned to the house and did not leave any documents', that is not an
      accurate quote from question 119 of the SEF  interview  where  he  had
      immediately beforehand been describing the incident when 4 or 5 people
      had searched his home and when asked if they returned,  the  appellant
      said 'no'.

29    I also note  that  in  answer  to  question  129  as  to  whether  the
      authorities sent his wife letters or handed them to her, the appellant
      said "Somebody from the authorities came to the door, gave them to her
      and asked her to sign."

30    I therefore find that within the SEF  interview  itself,  there  is  a
      distinction to be made  between  the  group  of  4  or  5  people  who
      attended on the first occasion on the one  hand,   and  single  people
      ('Somebody') coming on later occasions, and what they did or  did  not
      hand over  on  those  visits.  The  judge  does  not  appear  to  have
      recognised the distinction to be made. Further, the appellant gave his
      explanation about those answers at his paragraph  38  of  his  witness
      statement, above.  The  judge  does  not  appear  to  have  given  any
      consideration to that explanation.

31    I therefore find that the judge  errs  in  law  in  stating  that  the
      appellant's answers in interview on this issue 'cannot be reconciled'.



32    Paragraph [12] of the appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  addresses  the
      alleged  discrepancy  between  the  appellant's  account  in  the  SEF
      interview that documents were given to his  wife,  compared  with  his
      reference at question 4.3 of the screening interview that  he  had  no
      documents and could not access  any  documents  'because  the  Iranian
      government does not issue documents'. The  judge  had  also  described
      this as evidence which could  not  be  reconciled.  I  note  that  the
      appellant gave a response to that  issue  at  paragraph  [40]  of  his
      witness statement, to the effect that his response  was  referring  to
      documents relating to the charges against him, as opposed  to  letters
      issued to his wife advising her to report to the authorities. Whatever
      is to be made of that explanation, it is one which was not taken  into
      account by the judge. I find this to be a material error of law.

33    The judge also states at the  end  of  [14(f)]  that  the  appellant's
      evidence at paragraph [39] of his witness statement that  "My  ex-wife
      also informed me that the house  was  under  surveillance"  cannot  be
      reconciled with the appellant's earlier claim that he had not been  in
      contact directly with his ex-wife at all while in hiding, and  he  had
      only received messages about her  from  the  friend  of  his  brother.
      However it seems to me that the appellant has not positively  asserted
      that his wife spoke to him directly about that matter. As per question
      120 of the SEF, quoted above, the appellant stated "My wife was saying
      that the house was under surveillance". His answer  does  not  say  to
      whom she said that the house was under surveillance. The appellant did
      not positively assert that she stated that directly to him. Therefore,
      it seems to be that there is little if anything here to be reconciled.

34    It is to be noted  that  the  judge  appeared  to  treat  the  alleged
      discrepancies set out at [14(f)]  as  being  significant,  because  he
      describes issues which he had mentioned before  that  point  as  being
      'the least of the problems with the appellant's story', and yet I have
      found errors of law in respect of the judge's approach to the evidence
      at [14(f)].

35    At [14(g)] the judge finds that it was implausible that the  appellant
      would choose to leave Iran after the third incident, given that he had
      been warned and released on two previous occasions. Mr  Mills  accepts
      the appellant's challenge to that finding at  paragraph  [13]  of  the
      appellant's grounds of appeal. I find that it  was  not  open  to  the
      judge  to  treat  this  part  of  the  appellant's  account  as  being
      implausible, given his account that he had been  detained  and  beaten
      twice already, that on the second occasion,  the  appellant  had  been
      warned that  he  might  face  blasphemy  charges,  and  on  the  third
      occasion, his account was  that  he  stamped  on  a  portrait  of  the
      Ayatollah. It needs no imagination, if that last event  actually  took
      place, to consider that an individual may be at real risk  of  serious
      harm in Iran as a result of such actions. Thus, the judge's  reasoning
      at [14(g)] also falls away.

36    The judge's point at [14(i)] appears to be a repetition of  the  point
      raised at the bottom of paragraph [14(f)] on page 7, regarding alleged
      discrepancies in the manner in which the appellant was in contact with
      his wife. I have already dealt with that matter at [33] above.

37    Overall, I find that there are sufficient  errors  of  law,  including
      those errors which have been accepted by Mr. Mills, so as to result in
      those errors being material to the outcome of the  appellant's  appeal
      in his protection claim.

38    I therefore set aside the judge's decision on the protection claim.

      Article 8

39    Mr. Mills accepted the argument at paragraph [28] of  the  appellant's
      ground of appeal that there had been evidence before the judge, in the
      form of a witness statement and oral evidence from  VK's  father,  and
      supporting letters from others, which was relevant to the  credibility
      of the appellant's claim to be in a genuine relationship with VK,  but
      which the judge had not referred to  in  his  decision.  Both  parties
      examined their respective notes of evidence, and confirmed  that  VK's
      father had been asked  questions  in  cross-examination,  and  by  the
      judge, about whether he thought the appellant may be  seeking  to  use
      his relationship with VK as a means to gain leave  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom. VK's father had replied, in summary, that he  did  not
      think that this was the case, and that the appellant was  a  good  and
      open man. However, Mr Mills argued that any error on the part  of  the
      judge in failing to  refer  to  that  evidence  would  not  have  been
      material to the judge's overall assessment on  Article  8,  given  the
      adverse credibility findings found within the judge's finding  on  the
      protection claim.

40    However, given the judge's finding at [32] that the appellant did  not
      have honest motivations for entering into his  relationship  with  VK,
      and his finding at [34]  that  the  appellant's  lack  of  credibility
      impacted on the proportionality assessment, I  find  in  light  of  my
      findings above regarding errors in the assessment  of  the  protection
      claim, that there are material errors of law in the  judge's  decision
      on Article 8 as well.

      Decision

      I find that the making of the judge's decision involved the making  of
      material errors of law.

      I set aside the entirety of the judge's decision.

      Due to the extent of the findings of fact which will need to  be  made
      in the remaking of the decision in this appeal, I remit the appeal  to
      the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing


Signed:                                            Date: 20.9.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns a protection claim. Unless  and until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies both to the appellants  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Date: 20.9.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




