
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01504/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 September 2018                          |On 3 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 Mohamed [T]
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Benin.  In a decision sent  on  26  June
    2017 Judge Mather of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed his appeal
    against the decision made by the  respondent  on  26  January  2017  to
    refuse his protection claim.

2.   I am grateful to both representatives for their  succinct  submissions.



3.   The appellant's principal ground assails the judge's treatment  of  the
    expert evidence in the form of a report  by  Professor  Lawrence.   The
    judge deals with this report at paragraphs 15(s) and  paragraph  28  as
    follows:

         "15(s)   A  report  had  been  submitted  from  Professor  Benjamin
                Lawrence of the Rochester Institute  of  Technology  in  New
                York.  I appreciate that the author states that he considers
                the Appellant's narrative of his experience in Benin  to  be
                an entirely plausible narrative of persecution on  religious
                grounds,  centred  on  his  refusal  to  become   a   Voodoo
                practitioner  and  political  persecution  centred  on   his
                refusal to join a Voodoo community.  Throughout the  report,
                however,  the  author  states  that  the  narrative  of  the
                Appellant with respect  to  his  persecution  is  plausible,
                however, it is highly unusual in terms of  Voodoo  practices
                in Benin and, more broadly, in West  Africa.   Paragraph  21
                states that the nature of his attempted  incorporation  into
                the Voodoo community  is  considerably  at  odds  with  many
                scholarly and media accounts of Voodoo communities which are
                generally considered to  be  peaceful  and  voluntary.   The
                author stated that based on the information given to him and
                his expert knowledge, he had developed a hypothesis  of  the
                Appellant's claim.  The full report appears at pages  10  to
                20 of the Appellant's bundle.


         28.  Whilst I have  read  the  conclusions  and  reasons  given  by
                Professor Lawrence, he found the Appellant to be a  credible
                witness although he  states  the  events  described  by  the
                Appellant  to  be  highly  unusual  and  he  describes   his
                hypothesis.  I have not found the Appellant to be a credible
                witness for the reasons set out above and I am not persuaded
                by the conclusions set out in the report.   With  regard  to
                the letters submitted by the Appellant, I bear in  mind  the
                case of Tanvir Ahmed."

4.   The principal ground has two main limbs.  First it  is  contended  that
    what the judge  states  at  paragraph  28  evinces  a  "Mibanga"  error
    consisting of first deciding on credibility  and  then  evaluating  the
    expert evidence.  I do not consider this  contention  made  out  as  it
    seems to me clear from the wording of the second sentence of  paragraph
    28 that the reasons for not finding the  appellant  credible  "set  out
    above" must refer to the judge's assessment of the expert report.

5.   However, I find merit in the second limb of the  appellant's  principal
    ground - which can be paraphrased as stating that the judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for taking a different view  of  the  appellant's
    credibility - or rather (to use the expert's  term)  plausibility.   In
    effect, what the judge sought  to  do  was  to  discount  the  expert's
    assessment that the appellant's account was plausible on the basis that
    the expert himself had said the appellant's account was "highly unusual
    in terms of voodoo practices in Benin".  However, that really  amounted
    to a rejection without reasons of  why  Professor  Lawrence  found  the
    appellant's account plausible notwithstanding it  was  highly  unusual;
    and  it  did  not  address  the  fact  that  Professor   Lawrence   had
    specifically stated that the tension between described  and  derivative
    practices "should in no way be viewed as doubt on my  part"  (paragraph
    21).  Furthermore, the judge's assessment in the two  paragraphs  cited
    earlier does not engage with the evidential  considerations  identified
    by Professor Lawrence's assessment which included that: the  respondent
    in her RFR had relied on incomplete and out-of-date  information;  that
    the appellant's account did "resonate  with  occasional  narratives  of
    aberrant voodoo communities" (see  also  paragraphs  26-28);  that  the
    respondent in her COI appeared to be unfamiliar with the  operation  of
    forced  marriages  in  Benin,  notwithstanding  that  the   appellant's
    narrative was consistent with known practices in Benin (paragraphs  39-
    44).

6.   In such circumstances if the judge was minded to  discount  the  expert
    report because it accepted that  the  appellant's  account  was  highly
    unusual, it was incumbent on him to explain why he  rejected  Professor
    Lawrence's view that its highly unusual nature did  not  make  it  less
    plausible.

7.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and that her decision should be set aside.  In the  nature  of  the
    error no findings of fact can be preserved and it is hence  appropriate
    to remit it to the FtT.

8.   To conclude:

         the decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for  material  error  of
    law;

         the case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Mather).

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed:                                 Date: 27 September 2018
              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

