
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01863/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 November 2016                  |On 30 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     TG
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pascoe of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The respondent refused the appellant's application  for  asylum  or
         ancillary protection on 10 February 2016. His appeal  against  this
         was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  ("the  Judge")
         following a hearing on 30 August 2016.

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify  the  appellant.  This  direction  applies  to,
         amongst others, all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so
         given the continued protection issues involved.

The grant of permission

      3. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  granted  permission  to  appeal  (3
         November 2016) stating it is arguable that;

             1.    "...the  judge  may  have  failed  to  give   sufficient
             consideration to the doctor's conclusion that the scarring was
             unlikely to have been self-inflicted and was  'diagnostic'  of
             burning with heated metal rods, in  light  of  the  background
             evidence before him, which showed that this is a  common  form
             of torture  in  Sri  Lanka  [pg  54  appellant's  bundle].  In
             rejecting the account due to  the  discrepancy  regarding  the
             cause  of  the  scarring  he  gave  no  consideration  to  the
             possibility that a person who has been  subjected  to  torture
             may have difficulty in recalling events."

             2.   "I grant permission on all grounds."

             3.   I note here that the additional grounds  remaining  after
             the rejection of the ground that the case should  have  to  be
             adjourned to enable the  experts  to  explain  inconsistencies
             between the accounts were;

                  (a)   attaching  inadequate  weight  to  the  reason   for
                  delaying his asylum claim,

                  (b)  providing inadequate reasons in finding a letter from
                  his father to be inconsistent with the overall claim, and

                  (c)  a failure to note that it is perceived opinion  which
                  is the trigger for possible persecution and not his actual
                  LTTE involvement.

Respondent's position

      4. The respondent asserted in her reply (18 November 2016) and  orally
         that the Judge directed himself appropriately. He was  entitled  to
         make findings on inconsistencies and overall credibility bearing in
         mind the delay in claiming asylum. He correctly took  into  account
         the failure by the appellant to say he had been burned.

Discussion

      5. The Judge stated [16];

             "Of particular significance is the medical evidence  submitted
             by the appellant which he states supports his account. In  his
             interview at question 18 the  appellant  stated  that  he  was
             beaten on the back with sticks and then  with  a  fibre  rope.
             They then sexually assaulted him, tied his hand above his head
             and beat him again. At question 19 the appellant  stated  that
             his attackers placed a large sack over his head which had been
             soaked in petrol and continued  to  beat  him.  The  appellant
             makes no allegation of  burning  or  that  the  sack  was  set
             alight. The medical report repeats  a  brief  history  of  the
             account and states that the scars are  diagnostic  of  burning
             rather than beating, as claimed by the appellant. All  of  the
             scars were from burn injuries rather than beating. The  report
             opines  that  the  scars  could  not  be  from  beatings   and
             definitely not from beating with a rope.  The  author  of  the
             report  attempted  to  explain  away   the   discrepancy,   by
             speculating that the beating they have been with a  hot  metal
             rod, but that was not  the  evidence  of  the  appellant.  The
             report concluded  that  the  author  had  to  explain  to  the
             appellant that the scars were from burn rather  than  beating,
             which was not consistent with his claim, he  was  very  gentle
             with the appellant but he became upset. The  report  continues
             to  discuss  what  it  called  'mind  scars'  resulting   from
             traumatic experiences  but  make  no  specific  findings  with
             regard to the appellant, the author of the report  was  not  a
             psychiatrist. I find that the medical report does not  support
             the  appellant's  account  and   in   a   significant   degree
             contradicts the appellant's account, which severely diminished
             his credibility. On a subsidiary  that  the  appellant's  oral
             evidence on the length of time of his treatment in a clinic in
             Sri Lanka is contradicted by the submitted clinic  record.  In
             his written statement and in evidence, the  appellant  claimed
             that he had treatment at the clinic for ten days, whereas  the
             clinic record states that the treatment was for five days."

      6. I agree with Ms Pascoe that the discrepancy between the appellant's
         evidence of beating and the Dr's of burning with a heated metal rod
         can be properly explained by the appellant's further evidence  that
         his head was covered with a sack at the time and the injuries  were
         inflicted to his back. It is entirely possible that he had no  idea
         the item inflicting the scars could have been a  heated  metal  rod
         and that the pain he felt was from that searing heat rather than  a
         beat with a stick. In those circumstances the  adverse  credibility
         finding was unsustainable. I am of course aware of the  discrepancy
         as to the length of hospitalisation (5 days  or  10).  This  was  a
         secondary consideration for the Judge and of far less  significance
         than the flawed primary finding. It is a material error of law  and
         I set the decision aside.

      7. If themselves none of the other grounds  have  any  merit  as  they
         amount to  nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
         decision, and do not amount to a material error of law.

      8. The issue in [6] above is of such significance, that I  agree  with
         both representatives that the matter will need to remitted for a de
         novo hearing with no findings being preserved.



Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
    hearing before a Judge other than Judge Taylor.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
29 November 2016
