
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01482/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard remotely on Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 January 2021                            |On 18 January 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     P h
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms P Yong, Counsel, instructed by M&K Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Paul ("the judge"), promulgated on  20  April  2020,  in
    which he dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human rights claims.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, arrived in the United Kingdom in 2011
    and claimed asylum.  An initial appeal was  dismissed  in  March  2011.
    Further representations were  submitted  to  the  respondent  some  six
    months later.  It then took the respondent six years to make a decision
    on these representations.  Having done so, they were treated as a fresh
    claim with a right of appeal.

 3. In essence, the appellant's case was that he had been a soldier in  the
    Iraqi army, a special bodyguard for a senior politician, and had access
    to the International Zone  (otherwise  known  as  the  Green  Zone)  in
    Baghdad.  He claimed that as a result of his position he had been  told
    by terrorists to take weapons and explosives into that restricted  area
    of the capital.  He refused and claims that as  a  result  he  was  the
    subject of  threats  against  his  life.   This  claim  was  thoroughly
    rejected by the First-tier Tribunal in 2011, although it  was  accepted
    that the appellant had been a soldier with a role as a  bodyguard,  and
    that he had had access to the International Zone.  In  support  of  his
    second appeal, the appellant produced what was said to  be  two  threat
    letters, which the appellant had only obtained after the  dismissal  of
    his first appeal.  It was said that these  disclosed  a  real  risk  on
    return.  The skeleton argument provided on the appellant's behalf  also
    raised the issues of a risk on return based solely on the accepted fact
    of his role with the military and that Article 8 would be  breached  by
    removal from the United Kingdom on account of the significant delay  in
    the respondent making a decision on the further representations.

The judge's decision

 4. The judge made it clear that the appellant's case on appeal was focused
    on the two threat letters.

 5. The reliability of these two letters was rejected on  the  basis  of  a
    significant contradiction in the appellant's  evidence  as  regards  an
    individual, Mr K.  In his witness statement, the appellant had asserted
    that he knew Mr K well and that it was he  who  had  given  the  threat
    letters to the appellant.  However, in oral evidence, the appellant has
    stated that he had never in fact met Mr K at all.

 6. Having dealt with this documentary  evidence,  the  judge  went  on  to
    conclude  that  the  respondent  was  correct  in  asserting  that  the
    appellant could return to his home area  of  Kirkuk  without  being  at
    risk, and that he was in contact  with  family  and  friends  in  Iraq.
    Nothing was said about the Article 8 claim  at  all.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The grounds of appeal seek to challenge  each  aspect  of  the  judge's
    conclusion set out in the previous paragraph.  Permission  was  granted
    on all grounds.

The hearing before me

 8. Ms Yong relied on all the grounds of appeal.  She submitted  that  even
    if the judge had been entitled to reject the  reliability  of  the  two
    threat letters, he should nonetheless have dealt with the argument that
    the appellant would be at risk purely on  the  basis  of  his  accepted
    history as a soldier.  She relied on paragraphs 295 and 310 of SMO  MO,
    KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG  [2019]  UKUT  400
    (IAC) ("SMO").  She submitted that a proper consideration of this issue
    could have made a difference to the outcome of the appeal.  In  respect
    of Article 8, Ms Yong submitted that the judge  had  simply  failed  to
    address this live issue.

 9. Mr Melvin relied on his rule 24 response.  In his submission, it was in
    unclear as to whether the issues referred to in the previous  paragraph
    had been properly canvassed  before  the  judge.   In  any  event,  the
    accepted past history could not have been sufficient to disclose a risk
    on return.  Although the judge  had  not  addressed  Article  8,  there
    appeared to be little substance to that claim in any event.

10. I reserved my decision as to whether the judge had materially erred  in
    law.

Decision on error of law

11. I am entirely satisfied that the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
    the  two  threat  letters  were  unreliable.    There   was   a   clear
    contradiction in the appellant's evidence relating to the acquiring  of
    this evidence and it was plainly open to the  judge  to  conclude  that
    this completely undermined the weight to be attached  to  the  letters.
    There is no error here.

12. However, I am (just) persuaded that the judge  has  committed  material
    errors of law in respect of his  failure  to  address  the  alternative
    argument based upon the  appellant's  accepted  history,  and  also  in
    respect of the failure to consider the  Article  8  claim.   I  am  not
    entirely confident that these matters were  canvassed  in  real  detail
    before the judge, but the skeleton argument which I accept  was  before
    him did make the arguments.

13. These two errors are material, albeit by a  relatively  narrow  margin.
    It cannot be said that they "could" not have made any difference to the
    outcome of the appeal.

14. I therefore set the judge's decision aside.

Remaking the decision

15.  At  the  hearing  I  canvassed  the  possibility  that  could  receive
    submissions on the merits of the appellant's case without the need  for
    either a resumed  hearing  or  additional  written  submissions.   Both
    representatives agreed with this course of action.

16. Ms Yong then asked for permission to see whether or not  the  appellant
    would wish to submit any further evidence in respect of Article  8.   I
    refused.  The appellant had had every opportunity  to  adduce  relevant
    evidence, both before the First-tier Tribunal and  in  advance  of  the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal (by way  of  an  application  under  rule
    15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules).  Without criticising  Ms
    Yong, she was unable even to say whether there was in fact any relevant
    evidence available to the appellant.

17. In all the circumstances, including the  presumption  that  a  decision
    should be remade on the available materials if the decision of a First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is set aside, I concluded that it was fair  for  me
    to proceed by way of submissions only.

18. Mr Melvin relied on the reasons for refusal letter.  The appellant  was
    not a truthful witness.  There were  no  problems  with  documentation.
    The appellant could go  and  live  in  his  home  area  of  Kirkuk,  or
    alternatively internally relocate to the IKR or Baghdad.  His  accepted
    past history would not give rise to a risk on return.  As to Article 8,
    the delay, whilst not insignificant, could not permit the appellant  to
    succeed.

19. Ms Yong relied on the submissions made in respect of the error  of  law
    issue.  She also submitted that the appellant's accepted  past  history
    might be detected on return and this would place him at risk.  This was
    the case even if the threat letters were taken  out  of  the  equation.
    The time spent away from Iraq was not fatal to  the  protection  claim.
    On Article 8, the length of residence in the United  Kingdom,  together
    with the respondent's delay, or sufficient for him to succeed.

Findings

20. There is no sound basis whatsoever for departing from the  findings  of
    fact made by the two previous First-tier Tribunal judges.  I find  that
    the appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity and was a soldier (described as a
    promoted soldier in the evidence) in the Iraqi military  from  November
    2005 until he left the country in December 2010.  I accept that he  was
    part of a contingent of bodyguards to a prominent Iraqi politician,  Mr
    Salih, and that he had access to the International Zone in Baghdad.

21. Beyond those basic facts, which had been  accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in 2011 and re-affirmed  in  the  latest  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, I do not accept that the appellant has  been  truthful  about
    any aspect of the  remaining  elements  of  his  claim.   There  is  no
    reliable evidence before me to disturb the findings made in  paragraphs
    20-25 of the First-tier Tribunal's 2011 decision, having regard to  the
    well-known principles set out in Devaseelan.  As mentioned  earlier  in
    my decision, the reasons given by the judge in the most recent Tribunal
    decision as to the reliability of  the  threat  letters  were  entirely
    sound.  I find that the letters are unreliable.

22. The effect of the  above  is  as  follows.   The  only  accepted  facts
    relating to the appellant's protection claim are that he was a promoted
    soldier, acting as a bodyguard for a limited period of time,  and  that
    he had access to the International Zone in Baghdad.  His claim to  have
    received adverse attention of any sort as result of his  occupation  is
    untrue in all respects.  He has never been  the  subject  of  any  such
    attention.

23. Like the judge, I too find that the appellant is in contact with family
    members in Iraq.

24. There has never been any issue as regards documentation.  Certainly, no
    issue was raised either in the grounds of appeal or in  submissions  to
    me.  I find that the appellant either has relevant documentation in the
    United Kingdom or that it could readily  be  obtained  either  in  this
    country or in Iraq, having regard to the relevant guidance set  out  in
    SMO.

25. I find that the appellant's home area is Kirkuk.

26. As regards the appellant's circumstances in United Kingdom, I find that
    he is healthy, single, and has not  established  any  significant  ties
    here.  As a matter of simple fact, he has resided in this country since
    January 2011 without any leave to remain.

Conclusions

27. For the reasons set out below, I conclude that the appellant is not  at
    risk on return by virtue of his accepted history as a  soldier  in  the
    Iraqi military, or on any other basis.

28. There is no issue arising as to a risk by virtue of a lack of  relevant
    documentation.

29. Ms Yong relies on paragraph 310 of SMO to support her  contention  that
    the appellant would, if his past  were  detected,  be  perceived  as  a
    collaborator and would therefore be at risk.  The passage  referred  to
    states as follows:

           "310.  Perceived collaborators of  Western  organisations/armed
           forces.  This group was considered in BA (Iraq) to be likely to
           be at risk in those parts of Iraq which were under ISIL  control
           or had high levels of insurgent activity.  The risk was  thought
           to be lower in Baghdad, although there was evidence at that time
           to show that groups including ISIL were active  and  capable  of
           carrying out attacks there.  That assessment must  be  revisited
           because of several durable changes.  Firstly, ISIL is no  longer
           in control of swathes of territory in Iraq.  Secondly, there  is
           considerably less involvement of Western armed forces in what is
           accepted by the respondent to be an internal armed  conflict  in
           Iraq.  Thirdly, there is considerably less evidence of ISIL  and
           other insurgent groups carrying out attacks in Baghdad.   We  do
           not consider that this  group  would  be  at  enhanced  risk  in
           Baghdad as there is insufficient recent evidence to support such
           a conclusion. In respect of the risk to such individuals in  the
           Formerly Contested Areas, the situation is clearly different  to
           that considered in BA (Iraq).  As noted  at  1.9  of  the  EASO
           report on Targeting of Individuals "working for the  coalition
           was less sensitive than in  the  past."   In  areas  where  ISIL
           remains active, its primary  target  is  those  associated  with
           central or local governance or the security apparatus and  there
           is little recent evidence to show that those with a  current  or
           historical connection to Western organisations or  armed  forces
           would be at enhanced risk on that account alone.  That is not to
           say that such an association is irrelevant for the  purposes  of
           the sliding scale analysis; were such an association  to  become
           known at a fake checkpoint, for example, then such an individual
           might well be at enhanced risk as compared to a civilian without
           such an association.   We  accept,  therefore  that  a  past  or
           current association to a Western organisation or  allied  forces
           is a relevant factor in the Article 15(c) analysis,  albeit  one
           with less significance than before."

30. What is said in paragraph 310 must be seen in context.  The  particular
    risk category was derived from an EASO report  entitled  "Targeting  of
    Individuals" and what was said in BA (Iraq) CG [2017]  UKUT  18  (IAC).
    These two sources were considering  the  position  of  individuals  who
    might be targeted by ISIL at a time when that brutal  organisation  was
    in control of a significant proportion of the  country  (see  paragraph
    309 of SMO).  However, as is made clear in paragraph 310, the situation
    had moved on by the time SMO was decided.  The issue of past or current
    association with a Western organisation or allied forces  carried  with
    it less significance than had previously been the case.   The  Tribunal
    that such an association could put an individual at enhanced  risk  if,
    for example, this fact was to emerge at a fake checkpoint  operated  by
    ISIL.

31. The difficulties facing the appellant's case in respect  of  Ms  Yong's
    central submission are as follows.  First, the appellant has not, on my
    findings, ever suffered any problems on account of his past association
    with the Iraqi army and its collaboration with allied forces.   Second,
    he would be returning as  a  civilian  and  his  association  with  the
    military is now a decade in the past.  Third, and in any event, I  have
    not been referred to any evidence, and SMO does not support a  contrary
    position, that the appellant would face the  reasonable  likelihood  of
    being stopped at a fake checkpoint operated by  ISIL on this route from
    Baghdad to Kirkuk, nor would he be at risk once re-settled in his  home
    city.  Thus, it is not reasonably likely that the  issue  of  his  past
    occupation will come to light, at least  not  in  the  context  of  any
    actors who would wish to do him  harm  as  a  consequence.   Fourth,  I
    conclude  that,  in  light  of   his   particular   circumstances   and
    characteristics, he would, in the alternative, be  able  to  internally
    relocate to either Baghdad or the IKR:

              i. he has family members in Iraq who could provide support  in
                 respect of any place of relocation;

             ii. he is healthy and clearly able to work;

            iii. he has resided in Baghdad in the past  when  working  as  a
                 soldier;

             iv. his past association with the military would not cause  him
                 material difficulties;

              v. he would be documented;

             vi. there is no reason why he  would  not  be  permitted  entry
                 into, and residence in, the IKR.

32. It has not been suggested that the appellant would be at risk  for  any
    other reason.

33. Ultimately, the appellant cannot show that  he  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution, Article 3  ill-treatment,  or  serious  harm  pursuant  to
    Article 15c of the Qualification Directive.  Even if a risk existed  in
    his home area, he could internally relocate.

34. The protection claim fails.

35. The Article 8 claim is also unsuccessful, having regard  to  the  well-
    known case law and section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act.  The appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom  since  the
    beginning of 2011, but this has been on  an  entirely  unlawful  basis.
    There is no evidence of any significant  ties  in  this  country  going
    beyond the simple fact of a fairly lengthy residence.  The appellant is
    healthy and single.  There are clearly no very significant obstacles to
    him reintegrating into Iraqi society.  I am willing to assume that  the
    appellant speaks sufficiently good English and that  he  has  not  been
    reliant upon public funds.  These factors would  be  of  neutral  value
    only.  If I were wrong about either, there would exist a further factor
    against him.

36. As to the respondent's delay  in  making  a  decision  on  the  further
    representations,  I  attach  some  weight  to  what  is  a   relatively
    significant period of time.  Having said that, there is no evidence  to
    show that the appellant (or anyone on his behalf) chased the respondent
    during this time or  that  he  sought  to  challenge  the  respondent's
    failure to make a decision by way,  for  example,  of  judicial  review
    proceedings.  There is no evidence to show that the appellant  suffered
    any particular detriment as result  of  the  delay:  indeed,  all  that
    occurred was that he continued to reside  in  this  country  unlawfully
    following his unsuccessful appeal in 2011.  There  is  no  evidence  to
    show that he established significant ties in this  country  during  the
    period of delay.  The delay was not in my view particularly  egregious.
    I bear in mind that  the  respondent  had  considered  the  appellant's
    original asylum claim expeditiously.  There was no particular timeframe
    within which the further representations should have been decided.

37. In all the circumstances, I do not regard the delay as  constituting  a
    particularly significant feature of the Article  8  claim  such  as  to
    permit the appellant to succeed, whether this factor is  considered  in
    isolation or cumulatively.  The respondent's refusal  of  human  rights
    claim was proportionate unlawful.

Anonymity


38. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and I maintain it,
    given that the appellant has made a protection claim.

Notice of Decision

39. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


40. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

41. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  7 January 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

