
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01134/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 6 March 2019                      |On 25 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                    M A F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on [~] 1972.  His wife and
son are also dependent on his claim.

He initially arrived in the UK on 31 January 2010 on a student visa and
subsequently made an in time application for asylum, which was refused and
an appeal was dismissed.  Further representations were made in support of a
fresh claim, which were also refused but following a judicial review these
were still refused.  On 5 September 2016 submissions were made on the basis
of the Appellant's private life, given it was asserted his child had been
resident for more than seven years.  However, factually that was not the
case at the time.  Further representations were made on 14 March 2017,
which were refused in a decision dated 5 January 2018.

The Appellant appealed against this decision.  His appeal came before First-
tier Tribunal Judge Hussain for hearing on 5 March 2018.  In a Decision and
Reasons promulgated on 6 March 2018 the judge allowed the appeal with
regard to Article 8 on the basis that it would not be reasonable to expect
the Appellant's child to leave the UK.

Permission to appeal was sought in time, by the Appellant, on the basis
that the judge had erred in failing to make any findings in relation to the
Appellant's protection claim, which had also been raised for determination,
along with the Article 8 claim.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge
Hodgkinson in a decision dated 10 April 2018 on the basis that the grounds
of appeal had arguable merit. In a rule 24 response dated 14 June 2018, the
Respondent did not oppose the application for permission to appeal and
invited the Upper Tribunal to determine the appeal.

    Hearing

At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Aboni on behalf of the
Respondent accepted that the judge had made a material error in failing to
make any findings in respect of the Appellant's protection claim.  The
parties agreed that it would be appropriate to remake the decision in that
respect, there being no challenge to the judge's Article 8 findings in
respect of the Appellant's son.

Mr Karnik on behalf of the Appellant submitted that the judge was required
by Section 86 of the NIAA 2002 to determine a ground of appeal and asylum
has clearly been raised as a ground of appeal, which the judge had noted at
[4] of his decision.

In terms of submissions on the substantive asylum claim, Ms Aboni sought to
rely on the refusal letter and the findings of Judge Renton in the Upper
Tribunal in the determination dated 19 July 2012, who considered the
Appellant's case in line with the relevant country guidance, which at the
time was LP CG [2007] UKAIT 00076 (IAC) and consequently found that the
Appellant would not be at risk on return at that time.  At [25] Judge
Renton made specific findings that the Appellant was not a member of the
LTTE and did not have links with them at all.  Whilst he accepted that the
Appellant was arrested and detained on suspicion of being in the LTTE, he
found the Appellant would not be of any real interest to the authorities
and there was no reason to think that interest in him would have increased
during his absence from Sri Lanka.  Ms Aboni submitted that Judge Renton's
findings were the starting point today.  The Appellant had still not
established that he would be of adverse interest to the authorities if
returned to Sri Lanka now.

Ms Aboni submitted that whilst there is a copy of a letter from a Sri
Lankan attorney and an arrest warrant, that this did not take the matter
any further.  The Appellant has never claimed to have had any involvement
in the LTTE nor to be involved with any sur place activities which would
have created a prior risk profile or brought him to the attention of the
Sri Lankan authorities.

In respect of GJ CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), Ms Aboni submitted that this
identifies current risk categories at head notes (3) and (7) and identifies
that this can apply to Tamils in the Diaspora.  However, the Appellant has
never claimed to have been involved in any such activities and does not fit
into any of the risk categories.  She submitted that he is not somebody who
would be seen as an individual threatening the integrity of the Sri Lankan
state and there is no reason to believe he would be on any computerised
stop list: see GJ at (7) subparagraph (d).

Ms Aboni acknowledged that whilst head note (8) of GJ highlights the
sophisticated nature of intelligence used by the Sri Lankan authorities,
she submitted this case is still as it was before Judge Renton.  The
Appellant has no profile and has not established to be at risk of
persecution or ill-treatment on account of his perceived political opinion.
 Thus, the appeal should be dismissed.  Ms Aboni also informed the Upper
Tribunal that the Appellant had been granted 30 months' discretionary leave
on a ten year route settlement.

In his submissions, Mr Karnik adopted much of what Ms Aboni had said.
However, he submitted that GJ (op cit) represents a significant departure
from the country guidance at the time the appeal came before Judge Renton,
i.e. LP (op cit).  Judge Renton's findings start at [21].  The Appellant
was found to be a credible witness and in those circumstances the primary
contention is that he falls squarely within (7)(d) of GJ, i.e., a person
whose name appears on a computerised stop list due to an extant court order
or arrest warrant.  One of the accepted facts is that the Appellant
absconded whilst on bail and in those circumstances, it is not at all
surprising that there would be an arrest warrant.

Ms Aboni replied by stating that the Home Office position at [13] of the
refusal dated 5 January 2018 asserts that there is no independent evidence
to support the Appellant's claim and that ought to carry substantial
weight.  There is no evidence that the letter from the Sri Lankan attorneys
dated 12 June 2015 has been addressed, considered or even put before the
Respondent, albeit was accepted that it was served, along with the
Appellant's witness statement by fax to the First-tier Tribunal by the
Appellant's current solicitors.

I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Findings and Reasons

14.  In light of the decision in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702, I  take  the
    decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Renton as the starting point. The  key
    findings at [25] summarised at [7] above are that whilst the  Appellant
    was not a member of the LTTE and did not have links with them,  he  was
    arrested and detained by the Sri Lankan  authorities  on  suspicion  of
    being in the LTTE. In light of the country guidance then in force -  LP
    CG [2007] UKAIT 00076 (IAC) Judge Renton did  not  find  the  Appellant
    would be at risk on return if returned to Sri Lanka.

15.   Since  that  determination  was  promulgated  on  19  July  2012,  the
    Appellant's previous representatives, Nag Law  solicitors,  obtained  a
    letter from a Sri Lankan attorney,  T.  Purushotthaman  dated  12  June
    2015, in which he states that he  was  instructed  by  the  Appellant's
    father due to the fact that police officers visit his home looking  for
    his son;  that  the  attorney  contacted  the  Terrorist  Investigation
    Division, who informed him that the Magistrates Court of  Colombo  have
    issued an open arrest warrant against the Appellant, due  to  the  fact
    that he violated bail  conditions  and  escaped  from  Sri  Lanka.  The
    attorney states that he then undertook  a  search  of  the  records  at
    Colombo Magistrates Court on 8 June 2015 and had sight of the  original
    arrest warrant issued against the Appellant on 25 March 2010, case  no.
    3736/8/9.  The  attorney  states  that  the  records  showed  that  the
    Appellant was involved in a business partnership with an  LTTE  member,
    as a result of which he was arrested on 27 April 2009 and  remanded  in
    Welikada prison; he was bailed on 9 October 2009 on condition he report
    to TID on a fortnightly basis but failed to report on 29 January  2010,
    as a result of which TID applied to the Magistrate to issue  an  arrest
    warrant against him. It would appear that this letter was served on the
    Respondent as part of a fresh asylum claim made on 2 July 2015.

16.  A copy of the arrest warrant dated 25 March 2010, bearing the case  no.
    3736/8/9, with an English translation, is appended  to  the  letter.  I
    bear in mind the judgment of Lord Justice Fulford  in  PJ  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 at [41]:

         "41. In my judgment, Judge Woodcraft doubted the validity of these
         documents (certainly, to a material extent) on a significantly
         false basis. Thereafter, Judge Kekic - having accepted Mr
         Jayasinghe's status as a lawyer - failed to address the key issue
         that then arose, given the suggested source of these documents (a
         court in Sri Lanka) and the route by which they were obtained (two
         independent lawyers who sent them directly to the appellants'
         solicitor in the United Kingdom) ... In the absence of a sufficient
         reason for concluding otherwise, the inescapable conclusion to be
         drawn from this material - retrieved independently, it is to be
         stressed, by two lawyers from the Magistrates' court on separate
         occasions - is that the appellant will be arrested on his return to
         Sri Lanka as a result of links with the LTTE and their activities."


17.  The Appellant's asylum claim was very narrowly pleaded  by  Mr  Karnik,
    who submitted, in essence, that based on the findings of Upper Tribunal
    Judge Renton, the Appellant's appeal  now  falls  to  be  allowed  when
    considered in light of the current country guidance: GJ CG [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC) at (7)(d) which provides:

         "(7) The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution
         or serious harm on return to (d) A person whose name appears on a
         computerised "stop" list accessible at the airport, comprising a
         list of those against whom there is an extant court order or arrest
         warrant. Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will be
         stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate Sri
         Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant."


18.  I find, based on the findings of Judge  Renton,  the  letter  from  the
    attorney,  Mr  T.  Purushotthaman,  appending  an  arrest  warrant  and
    translation, that the Appellant would be  at  risk  of  persecution  if
    returned to Sri Lanka in light of the guidance set out in GJ at  (7)(d)
    and that at [168] of  the  judgment,  the  Respondent's  representative
    accepted that: "individuals in custody in Sri Lanka continue to  be  at
    risk of physical abuse, including sexual violence, and that  such  risk
    is persecutory."

    Notice of Decision

19.  The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds




    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




    Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 20 March 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


