
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01814/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 14 July 2017                   |On 17 July 2017                          |
|                                  |                                         |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                hammam alarbi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Williams, instructed by Broudie Jackson & Canter,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Hammam Alarbi, was born on 11 June 1993 and is a citizen
    of Libya.  He appealed against the decision of the respondent to refuse
    him asylum.   The  decision  is  dated  15  January  2016.   First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Wedderspoon) in a decision promulgated  on  2  December
    2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the appeal should be allowed.  Granting  permission,  Judge
    Storey found that it was arguable  that  "the  appellant's  case  needs
    specific  consideration  under  Article  15(c)  of  the   Qualification
    Directive and Article 3 ECHR on the basis of the  generalised  violence
    ... the judge gave his case no such consideration".  Both parties agree
    that such consideration should have been given  by  the  judge  on  the
    facts.  Since the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision,  the
    Upper Tribunal has given new country guidance in  ZMM  (Article  15(c))
    Libya CG [2017] UKUT 263 (IAC)

 3. The head note of ZMM reads:

         The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level   that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person.

    In  the  circumstances,  this  appellant  is  entitled  to  be  granted
    humanitarian protection and for his appeal to be allowed on  Article  3
    ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 2  December
2016 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  This appeal is  allowed  on
humanitarian protection and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 15 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 15 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

