
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01941/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 July 2017                              |On 26 July 2017               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     HS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. K. Gayle, Elder Rahimi Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Wylie, promulgated  on  28  April  2017,  in  which  she
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to grant asylum.


  2. As this is an asylum application I make an anonymity direction.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


     "It seems to me that, for present purposes, the crucial  paragraphs  of
     the decision under consideration are paragraphs  46  to  52  -  through
     those paragraphs the judge explained  her  reasons  for  rejecting  the
     appellant's core claims (as to an association with  one  "Hoshang"  and
     others associated with/involved with the Komala group).


     As per the grounds (paragraphs 3 to 5), I consider it arguable that the
     reasoning in the paragraphs 46 to 52 just referred to is flawed   -  to
     the extent that a material error of law might  be  found  at  the  next
     stage."


  4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
     representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


  5. Mr. Gayle submitted that the judge had placed significant weight on the
     background evidence.  She  had  found  that  there  was  a  discrepancy
     between the Appellant's evidence and this background  evidence  insofar
     as he met up with friends who were in the Komala group.  I was referred
     to the  joint  report  from  the  Danish  Refugee  Council  and  Danish
     Immigration Service entitled "Iranian Kurds" (the "Danish Report") (K23
     of the Appellant's bundle).  At paragraph 3.1.1 the party  organisation
     of Komala SKHKI is set out.  The judge had  quoted  from  this  in  the
     decision [46].  In particular, I was  referred  to  the  fact  that  it
     states that Komala members in Iran are  either  individuals  having  no
     connection to other members and reporting directly to Komala  SKHKI  in
     KRI, or they are organised in cells where each cell comprises three  to
     five members.


  6. I was referred by Mr. Gayle to paragraph 3.3.1  of  the  report  (K28).
     This is  entitled  "Party  organisation  of  Komala  Party  of  Iranian
     Kurdistan".  This states that "In small towns, members and sympathizers
     know of one another but this is not the case in bigger cities."


  7. Mr. Gayle submitted that, as stated in the grounds,  the  Tribunal  had
     accepted that the Appellant came from a small town  and  therefore  the
     Appellant's account was wholly consistent with  the  country  evidence.
     Mr. Gayle further submitted that the core  issue  was  that  the  judge
     found it implausible that the Appellant had given funds to Komala,  but
     the background evidence showed that  this  was  not  implausible.   The
     Appellant was a supporter of Kurdish rights and had  never  claimed  to
     have a great deal of interest in politics.  It was not implausible that
     he would give a donation to a group sympathising with Kurdish rights.


  8. In relation to paragraphs [49] and [50] it was submitted that there was
     a significant gap between the interview and the hearing.  The interview
     took place in July 2016 and the hearing in March 2017.   The  incidence
     of contact may have  changed  during  that  period  but  this  was  not
     something to which the judge had referred.  In  relation  to  paragraph
     [51] the Appellant had been told he was at risk and there was  no  need
     for him to ask for more detail.  He had to flee.  It was  unsustainable
     that his evidence had been vague.  It was not  relevant  what  rank  of
     Ettela'at the neighbour held.  It was well-known that Ettela'at  was  a
     secretive organisation.


  9. In relation to the lack of contact with his brother, the  decision  did
     not contain much detail of the evidence that had been given of  contact
     with his brother.  The key was that the Appellant had fled while  being
     actively sought.  Communications with Iran were routinely monitored.


 10. In response, Mr. Avery submitted that he struggled to see  anything  of
     substance in the primary grounds.  In relation to the Danish Report the
     Appellant had not been specific about to which branch of Komala he  was
     referring.  The report stated that in small  areas  members  of  Komala
     tended to know who each other were.  However, it was clear  on  reading
     the rest of paragraph 3.3.1 that their activities were kept secret.


 11. There was no  substantial  difference  between  the  evidence  and  the
     findings.  Komala was a highly secretive organisation and  it  was  not
     consistent that members would discuss it openly in a  coffee  shop.   I
     was referred to paragraph 23 of the Reasons for Refusal  Letter,  where
     further evidence as to the nature of Komala was set out.


 12.  In  relation  to  the  other  alleged  errors,   these   were   merely
     disagreements with the findings of the judge.  The  Appellant  had  not
     provided much evidence.  The decision did not involve the making  of  a
     material error of law.


 13. In response Mr. Gayle submitted that the Appellant had stated  that  he
     did not know anything about the activities of Komala.  I  was  referred
     to Q33 and  Q34  of  his  asylum  interview.   He  submitted  that  the
     Appellant did not know about Komala's activities but he just knew  that
     his friends were raising money for the party.   It  was  understandable
     that the party would seek donations from sympathisers.  The  judge  had
     found it implausible on the basis of the background evidence, but  this
     was wrong.


 14. The decision was unsafe.  The Appellant had not embellished  his  claim
     either in relation to his knowledge of  Komala  or  the  activities  of
     Komala.  In relation to the assertion that  the  grounds  were  a  mere
     disagreement with the findings of the judge, on the correct standard of
     proof, reasonable likelihood, the Appellant's  account  was  reasonably
     likely.


Error of Law Decision


 15. I have carefully considered the background evidence to which the  judge
     has referred as found in the Danish Report.  I find that the Appellant,
     as acknowledged by Mr. Gayle, did not specify which wing or  branch  of
     Komala his friends were involved with.


 16. Paragraphs [45] to [47] of the decision are as follows:


     "The appellant stated that he became aware that Hoshang was a member of
     Komala in May or June 2015, during discussion with him  and  two  other
     friends who he met in the coffee shop". [45]


     "This is not consistent with the objective evidence that Komala members
     in Iran are either individuals having no connection to  other  members,
     or organised in a cell of three  to  five  members.   Members  are  not
     allowed to get together in groups of more than two  or  three  members.
     As well as members there are  sympathisers  of  the  organisation,  who
     listen to the party's radio programmes, watch Komala TV, and engage  in
     collective activities.  The sympathisers usually do not  know  who  the
     members are as members never present themselves as such.  Members  keep
     their party affiliation secret even with regards to  their  own  family
     members." [46]


     "Given the secrecy, I do not  accept  that  Hoshang,  if  a  member  of
     Komala, would discuss his affiliation and membership with friends in  a
     coffee shop, such that the owner of the coffee shop and other customers
     would be aware of his membership, as well as the Appellant." [47]


 17. In relation to the evidence cited by the judge at [46], this  is  taken
     from two paragraphs of the Danish  Report.   Paragraph  3.1.1  entitled
     "Party organisation of Komala SKHKI" states:


     "Regarding the party's mode of organization in Iran, Ebrahim  Alizadeh,
     General Secretary of the Kurdistan Organization of the Communist  Party
     of Iran, Komala (Komala, SKHKI) explained that Komala members  in  Iran
     are either individuals  having  no  connection  to  other  members  and
     reporting directly to Komala SKHKI in KRI, or  they  are  organized  in
     cells where each cell comprises three to five members."


     "The sympathizers and the members come into contact and are  acquainted
     with  one  another  through  different   collective   activities.   The
     sympathizers usually do not know who members are as the  members  never
     present  themselves  as  such.  However,   through   these   collective
     activities, the members get to  know  the  best  and  the  most  active
     persons among sympathizers. Later on, the members will establish closer
     connections with these sympathizers encouraging them to become  engaged
     in organized party activities including establishing parallel cells."


     "Ebrahim Alizadeh (Komala, SKHKI) informed the delegation  that  Komala
     SKHKI does not allow its members in Iran to get together in  groups  of
     more than two to three persons."


 18. At paragraph 3.3.1 "Party  organization  of  Komala  Party  of  Iranian
     Kurdistan" the report states:


     "Siamak Modarresi, Head of Political Bureau, Komala  Party  of  Iranian
     Kurdistan, informed the delegation that the  party  has  a  clandestine
     organization inside Iran consisting  of  active  members  who  secretly
     carry out activities either in cells or in related clandestine NGO.  In
     addition, there are  a  larger  number  of  sympathizers  who  are  not
     organized in cells.


     Siamak Modarresi, Komala Party of Iranian Kurdistan, stated that  there
     is little or no contact between the members and  the  sympathizers.  In
     small towns, members and sympathizers know of one another but  this  is
     not the case in bigger cities. The members keep their party affiliation
     secret even with regards to their own family members."


 19. I find that the judge has quoted from both of these paragraphs  of  the
     Danish Report in [46].  She has merged together the evidence  in  these
     two paragraphs, which relate to different branches of Komala.  She  has
     not included all of the information set out in those two paragraphs but
     has selected parts of each paragraph.


 20. Taken as a whole, parts of the background evidence are not inconsistent
     with the Appellant's evidence.  It was accepted that the Appellant came
     from a village ten kilometres away from Baneh.  He does not come from a
     city.  In 3.3.1 it states "In small  towns,  members  and  sympathizers
     know of one another".  This evidence has not been cited in [46].  It is
     therefore not inconsistent that, as a sympathiser living in a  village,
     he knew who members of Komala were.


 21.  Neither  is  the  Appellant's  evidence  as  accepted  by  the   judge
     inconsistent with paragraph 3.1.1 where it states that the Komala SKHKI
     "does not allow its members in Iran to get together in groups  of  more
     than two to three persons".  The Appellant's evidence is that three  of
     his friends were members of Komala.  He has not referred to there being
     a gathering  of  more  than  three  of  them.   At  Q60  he  refers  to
     discussions "amongst the four of us" but as  the  Appellant  is  not  a
     member of Komala, there is nothing inconsistent in this evidence.

 22. The judge states that the Appellant said  that  he  became  aware  that
     Hoshang was a member during discussion with him and other  two  friends
     who he met in the coffee shop.  Given that it was stated in the  Danish
     Report that members and sympathisers would know of one another in small
     towns, it is not inconsistent that the owner of  the  coffee  shop  and
     other  customers  would  be  aware  of   Hoshang's   membership.    The
     Appellant's evidence at his asylum interview when asked why they  would
     discuss Komala in the coffee shop is that the table  where  they  would
     sit "was separate from the other tables" (Q74).  He also gave  evidence
     that it would only be "once a week, or once every four days" (Q61).


 23. I find that the background  evidence  shows  that,  in  smaller  towns,
     members and sympathisers of Komala would know who each other were.  The
     judge has found in [46],  when  setting  out  some  of  the  background
     evidence, that this would not be the case.  I find that the  fact  that
     the Appellant was aware of Hoshang being a member is not implausible or
     inconsistent with the background evidence.   I  find  that  this  is  a
     material error of law as  it  casts  doubt  on  the  whole  credibility
     findings.


 24. In relation to the Appellant's knowledge of Komala, at his interview he
     was asked what the level of involvement of his friends was with  Komala
     (Q32).  He replied "As far as I know, they were  actively  working  for
     Komala party, but I didn't know much about their activity."  At Q33  he
     was asked whether he knew "anything at all about how they were actively
     working for Komala or what their activities  /  duties  involved".   He
     replied: "No, I don't know much about their activity, but I  knew  they
     were working for Komala."  At Q34 he was asked again: "So you  did  not
     know what their duties involved, correct?" His answer is  recorded  as:
     "I knew they were getting money from people for Komala, but  because  I
     didn't have an interest in involvement in politics, I  didn't  want  to
     ask them too much about what they were doing."


 25. He states in response to Q35 that  all  he  knew  was  that  they  were
     collecting money for the party because he had been asked to give  money
     a few times for the party.  At Q44 he again stated that he did not have
     much knowledge about Komala.


 26. The Appellant has never claimed to have a great interest  in  politics.
     At [48] the judge states:


     "The appellant said that he gave a donation when asked by Hoshang,  but
     had very little information what the money would be used for, or  where
     it would be sent.  I do not accept that someone such as  the  appellant
     with little interest  in  politics  would  give  a  fairly  substantial
     financial donation without some enquiry into how it would be  used,  or
     even to which of the two distinct wings of Komala the donation would be
     given."


 27. I find that there is nothing implausible about an organisation such  as
     Komala seeking donations from sympathisers.  The  Appellant  has  never
     claimed to have been that interested in politics, but he has claimed to
     have an interest in Kurdish rights (Q45, Q57, Q69).  I do not find that
     the fact that the Appellant did not know what the money would  be  used
     for casts doubt on his claim to have given money to Komala,  given  the
     aims of Komala, and the stated interest of  the  Appellant  in  Kurdish
     rights.


 28. Further, at [48] the judge states that there are two distinct wings  of
     Komala although she has made  no  distinction  between  them  at  [46].
     However, the background evidence indicates that there are three  wings.
     In the Danish Report it refers to Komala  SKHKI,  Komala  KZK  and  the
     Komala Party of Iranian Kurdistan.


 29. In relation to [49] and [50], the judge has not considered the  gap  of
     time between the interview and hearing, and whether this could  explain
     the apparent inconsistency in the evidence.  In relation  to  [51]  and
     [52], given that the Appellant had been told by somebody  in  Ettela'at
     that his life was in danger, the judge has not explained why  the  rank
     or status of that person is relevant.  Neither has  she  explained  why
     she would have expected the Appellant to be  more  specific  about  the
     enquiries made about him.  The Appellant's claim was that he  was  told
     to leave Iran as his life was in danger.


 30. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of  law
     in relation to the credibility findings.  The judge has been  selective
     in the parts of the background evidence cited [46], and the Appellant's
     evidence is not inconsistent with the background evidence when properly
     considered.


 31. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
     paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
     First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
     party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
     opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
     First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
     necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
     overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
     to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


 32. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law and I set the decision aside.


 33. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.


 34. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Wylie.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 25 July 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


