
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01928/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 22 March 2018                   |On 24 April 2018                        |
|                                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     BL
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey, Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal McAll (the judge), promulgated on 3 May 2017, in which  he
        dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision
        dated 9 February 2017 refusing his protection claim.



   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, date of birth [ ] 1979.
        He and his family, consisting of his wife and 3  sons,  are  Hindu.
        They entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 8 September  2016.
        The appellant claimed asylum on that date.


     3. The appellant maintained  that  he  and  his  dependents  would  be
        subjected to serious ill treatment if returned  to  Afghanistan  on
        account of their religion. They lived in a district of Kabul  since
        2003 and had encountered harassment  and  discrimination  based  on
        their religion including the throwing of stones at their house, the
        posting  of  stickers  on  their  door,  and  verbal   abuse.   The
        appellant's wife could not go to  the  Hindu  temples  as  she  was
        unable to go out alone. Their oldest son was hit on the head with a
        stone because he was Hindu.  On  one  occasion,  two  years  before
        arriving in the UK, the appellant was hit  by  a  soldier  using  a
        rifle butt because he was sleeping on a coach when the other Muslim
        passengers were praying. The appellant  stopped  working  2  months
        before leaving Afghanistan. He does not have a job to  go  back  to
        and the family would have nowhere to live.


     4. Although she accepted that  the  appellant  and  his  family  where
        Afghan Hindus, the respondent rejected his account  of  their  ill-
        treatment. This was because  of  internal  inconsistencies  in  the
        appellant's account relating to the reasons that caused the  family
        to leave Afghanistan and the time that their problems started.  The
        respondent relied on background evidence and the  Country  Guidance
        case of TG and others  (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)  Afghanistan  CG
        [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC) in concluding that  members  of  the  Hindu
        community did not face a real risk of persecution or  ill-treatment
        such as to entitle them to a grant of international  protection  on
        the basis  of  their  religious  identity  per  se,  and  that  the
        appellant and his family would be returning to Kabul  as  a  family
        unit where there were functioning Hindu  temples  from  which  they
        could seek support and assistance.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and his  wife  and
        considered a bundle of  documents  that  included  statements  from
        them, several media articles,  a  'generic'  report  by  Dr  Jasjit
        Singh, dated 9 June 2016 in respect of the status of Sikh women  in
        Afghanistan, and a copy of TG.


     6. In the section containing his findings of credibility and fact  the
        judge  quoted  extensively  from  TG  and  indicated  that  he  had
        considered the background evidence published after  TG.  The  judge
        said it was clear  that  the  Afghan  Hindu  and  Sikh  communities
        continue to reduce in number as members of those  communities  seek
        better lives elsewhere.  The  communities  remain  concentrated  in
        areas such as Kabul and are seen as easy targets  for  kidnaps  and
        extortion.  The judge found that the situation for Sikhs and Hindus
        had not improved since TG, but that the situation had  not  altered
        to such an extent that would entitle him to depart from the Country
        Guidance decision.


     7. At [30], with reference to the report by Dr Singh, the judge stated
        that this particular topic (the status of Sikh and Hindu  women  in
        Afghanistan) "... was considered and dealt with in the decision  of
        TG and others." The  judge  noted  that  Dr  Singh  arrived  at  "a
        different conclusion than the Tribunal in its consideration of  the
        HJ Iran test", and  the  expert's  opinion  that  "...  the  forced
        veiling of women contradicts the beliefs of seek women." The  judge
        noted that Dr Singh had not  been  called  to  give  oral  evidence
        whereas the expert in TG had been cross-examined. The judge was not
        satisfied that the Tribunal in TG would have  reached  a  different
        conclusion if Dr Singh's opinion had been communicated to them, and
        was not satisfied that the report amounted  to  fresh  evidence  or
        information entitling him to depart from the guidance in TG.


     8. In respect of the appellant's submission that his wife did not have
        the freedom to walk the streets of Kabul unless she was covered  as
        she would otherwise be automatically  identified  as  a  Hindu  and
        targeted, the judge quoted from paragraphs 92  and  93  of  TG  and
        noted that the appellant's wife did not  fall  within  the  "single
        women" group referred to in the Country Guidance  decision.  Having
        acknowledged  that  the  appellant's  wife  was  unable   to   find
        employment as a Hindu woman  in  Afghanistan,  and  accepting  that
        women in general are discriminated against, the judge did not  find
        that the discrimination identified by the appellant  and  his  wife
        amounted to persecution for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.


     9. The judge then considered the appellant's evidence  in  respect  of
        the assault by the soldier on the coach, noting that there  was  no
        mention of this incident in the  appellant's  Screening  Interview,
        and concluded that the appellant had fabricated this incident as he
        would otherwise have mentioned it in his Screening Interview.


    10. The judge considered whether the appellant's children would be able
        to receive an education in Afghanistan and quoted from paragraph 94
        of TG. At [36] the judge noted that the funds used by the appellant
        to bring his family to the UK  would  have  comfortably  secured  a
        private education for his children and observed that the  appellant
        had  been  in  employment  with  sufficient  funds   to   pay   for
        accommodation, provide for his family and to save a substantial sum
        of money. Given that the appellant had been employed for  12  years
        without experiencing any discrimination the  judge  found  that  he
        would be able to find and obtain employment in  Kabul  which  would
        allow him to finance his children's education. The  judge  was  not
        therefore satisfied that the appellant's children would  face  such
        serious discrimination in  their  education  so  as  to  amount  to
        persecution.


    11. The judge accepted that the appellant's son had been  struck  by  a
        stone on the way home from  school,  and  that  the  appellant  had
        worked exceedingly hard  and  in  difficult  for  circumstances  to
        provide for his family and to save his income in order  to  find  a
        better life outside Afghanistan.  The  judge  did  not  accept  the
        appellant's  claim  that  he  and  his  family  would  be   without
        accommodation  given  his  evidence  that  the   Sikh   and   Hindu
        populations are continuing to dwindle.


    12. While the judge accepted that the  appellant  and  his  family  had
        faced some discrimination in the past, he was  not  satisfied  that
        they had  been  specifically  targeted,  other  than  one  isolated
        incident involving his son. Applying the guidance in TG, the  judge
        concluded that neither the appellant nor his family  held  a  well-
        founded fear of persecution.


The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

    13. The grounds of appeal, as amplified by Ms Harvey  in  her  skeleton
        argument  and  in  her  oral  submissions,  challenge  the  judge's
        decision  on  3  bases.  It  is  first  submitted  that  the  judge
        misdirected himself in his application of  TG  to  the  appellant's
        wife. In TG the Tribunal indicated that  the  HJ  (Iran)  issue  in
        respect of Sikh or Hindu women had not been adequately developed by
        the parties. The judge merely noted that the appellant's  wife  was
        not a single Hindu woman and therefore had the  protection  of  her
        husband. There was however  no  finding  of  fact  as  to  why  the
        appellant's wife did not leave her home unaccompanied and unveiled,
        and no assessment as to whether she modified her behaviour in order
        to avoid ill-treatment on account of her religion or sex.  The  2nd
        ground contends that, in rejecting the appellant's account  of  the
        attack  on  the  coach  as  a  fabrication,  the  judge  failed  to
        appreciate the limited purpose of the Screening Interview and  that
        he was not consequently entitled to draw an adverse inference based
        on the appellant's failure to mention this attack at his  Screening
        Interview. The  3rd  ground  contends  that  the  judge  failed  to
        undertake a lawful assessment  of  the  cumulative  effect  of  the
        discrimination faced by him and  his  family,  and,  in  so  doing,
        failed to make material findings of fact and failed  to  take  into
        account relevant considerations, particularly  in  respect  of  the
        appellant's ability to find employment on  return  to  Afghanistan,
        the  availability  of  accommodation,  and  the   impact   on   the
        appellant's children.

Discussion

    14. At [30] the judge indicated that the status of Sikh and Hindu women
        in Afghanistan, in the context of the HJ  (Iran)  principles,  "...
        was considered and dealt with in the case of  TG  &  others.."  The
        judge was not consequently satisfied that the evidence before  him,
        albeit relating to the status of Sikh women and  not  Hindu  women,
        was sufficient to entitle him to depart from the findings in TG.


    15. Paragraph 92 and 93 of TG read,

          "92.     Dr Giustozzi also referred to Sikh and Hindu  women  not
          leaving the house unless properly covered, as with  most  if  not
          all women in Afghanistan, in order to avoid an  adverse  reaction
          amongst some members of the Muslim community. We  accept  that  a
          Sikh or Hindu woman not 'properly attired' may  be  subjected  to
          abuse and harassment  on  the  streets  in  Afghanistan  but  the
          evidence clearly indicates that this is the same for  all  women,
          whatever their religious persuasion, including Muslim  women.  It
          was submitted that such a requirement may  give  rise  to  an  HJ
          (Iran) issue. Whilst our attention was not drawn to  Y&Z  by  the
          parties we can confirm that we have considered the application of
          the HJ (Iran)  issue  to  the  religious  context  although  this
          argument was not adequately developed  before  us  and  fails  to
          distinguish between members of these religious groups who  choose
          not to go out alone or covered as that is the way they ordinarily
          behave and those that may be forced to hide a fundamental element
          of their belief(s) to avoid persecution.


          93.     Nevertheless we do consider that a Sikh or  Hindu  single
          woman without family protection from a husband, other male member
          of the family, or within a family unit in which there is no  male
          member of the household able to provide effective protection, may
          be entitled to international protection based  upon  threats  and
          related acts as a result of their perceived  vulnerability  as  a
          member of a minority religious group with no  form  of  available
          protection against such. In this respect  we  note  the  evidence
          regarding abductions of women  and  female  children  and  forced
          conversions to Islam. Credible threats of any form of violence or
          serious  harm  (including  forced   marriage   involving   forced
          conversion or not), where there is inadequate  protection  should
          entitle that person to a grant of international protection."

    16. It is apparent from the above extracts that the Tribunal in TG  did
        not comprehensively deal with the issue whether the requirement for
        women to be veiled and to be accompanied by a male relative outside
        the home, which would include visiting places of worship,  amounted
        to a modification of a fundamental element of their beliefs, or the
        reasons for such modification. Because he wrongly believed that the
        position of Hindu women had been 'dealt  with'  in  TG,  the  judge
        failed to conduct  an  analysis  on  the  HJ  (Iran)  model.  As  a
        consequence, there are insufficient  findings  as  to  whether  the
        appellant's wife would, even in the  absence  of  any  feared  ill-
        treatment, conceal herself with a veil  and  only  venture  outside
        accompanied for cultural or  religious  reasons,  and  whether  the
        treatment  feared  by  the  appellant's  wife   might   amount   to
        persecution. In her statement the appellant's wife  indicated  that
        she was a prisoner in her own home. On the basis  of  the  evidence
        before the judge, it cannot be said that he would  inevitably  have
        reached the same conclusion even if he had undertaken  a  full  and
        proper assessment under the HJ (Iran) principles. I am consequently
        satisfied this amounts to a material legal error.


    17. I am additionally satisfied that the legal error is material  given
        that there was no consideration of  the  HJ  (Iran)  principles  in
        respect of the position of women as a Particular Social Group,  not
        just Hindu women. The general  background  evidence  suggests  that
        women, regardless of  whether  they  are  single  or  married,  and
        regardless of their religion, do  not  have  the  freedom  to  walk
        outside without being veiled and without  being  accompanied  by  a
        suitable male relative. One can  easily  imagine  the  debilitating
        impact this may have on a woman's personal freedom. The  imposition
        of these strictures appears to be  on  account  of  both  religious
        principles and sex. I note that in  NS  (Social  Group  -  Women  -
        Forced marriage) Afghanistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00328, a CG  case  now
        of some vintage, women were held to constitute a particular  social
        group within Afghanistan. Had  the  judge  applied  the  HJ  (Iran)
        principles to the particular facts of this case, his conclusion, so
        far as it relates to the appellant's wife, may have been different.




    18. At [36] to [40] the judge finds that the appellant would be able to
        find employment given  that  he  previously  worked  for  12  years
        delivering medical cartons, that he would consequently be  able  to
        afford to educate his children privately, and that there  would  be
        accommodation available for the family given the dwindling size  of
        the Hindu and Sikh populations.


    19. The appellant's evidence was that  he  and  his  family  could  not
        afford to leave Afghanistan when their property was seized in Khost
        in 2003. The appellant was previously employed transporting cartons
        of medicine around the environs of Kabul. He did not have  his  own
        vehicle and relied on public transport. He maintained that he  only
        got his previous job from a Muslim man who  knew  his  father,  and
        that his father was no longer residing in Afghanistan. He  believed
        he would be unable to obtain other employment because of  religious
        discrimination. The evidence presented by the  appellant  indicated
        that he did not have any qualifications and  had  not  studied.  He
        stated an interview that he could "write  a  name".  He  maintained
        that all the money earned by him and his  father  was  put  into  a
        joint family savings to enable them to come to the UK. Since he and
        his family arrived in the UK his parents left Kabul and he believed
        they are making their way to the UK. The appellant  no  longer  has
        any family  members  left  in  Afghanistan.  The  appellant's  wife
        claimed that, although her family are in Afghanistan, they  do  not
        speak as they are unhappy with her choice of husband and there  has
        been no contact since the marriage in 2003. The  appellant  claimed
        that it had taken many years for  his  family  to  save  sufficient
        funds to enable them to leave the country together. He  claimed  in
        his asylum interview [78] that he had been saving money  his  whole
        life in order to leave Afghanistan.

    20. The judge found that the appellant  had  worked  very  hard  for  a
        period of 12 years in order to save enough money to get his  family
        outside the country. I am not however satisfied that the judge made
        clear findings  in  respect  of  the  circumstances  in  which  the
        appellant obtained his employment  in  Kabul,  or  that  the  judge
        appreciated that the funds paid to the agent were jointly earned by
        both the appellant and his father over an extended period. Nor am I
        satisfied that the judged adequately engaged with  the  explanation
        given by the appellant as to why  he  would  have  difficulties  in
        getting the same employment or finding alternative  employment.  In
        concluding that the appellant would be able to get  employment  and
        that his employment would  enable  him  to  privately  educate  his
        children, the judge has not taken into account this evidence. I  am
        satisfied that the judge's failure to engage with  the  explanation
        provided by the appellant in respect of the circumstances in  which
        he  obtained  his  previous  employment  and  the  difficulties  he
        envisaged in finding further employment on return, and his  failure
        to take into account the length of  time  that  it  took  both  the
        appellant and his father to accumulate their savings,  renders  his
        conclusion that the family would have adequate resources to pay for
        private education unsafe.


    21. Paragraph 94 of TG reads,

          "In relation to Sikh and Hindu children  a  number  of  areas  of
          concern arise from the evidence we have been asked  to  consider.
          The evidence indicates that there have been  occasions  of  Hindu
          and Sikh  families  not  sending  their  children  to  school  in
          Afghanistan, especially  girls,  as  a  result  of  the  fear  of
          harassment  and  ill-treatment  which  is  corroborated  by   the
          evidence.  Within  the  state  system  where  children   of   all
          denominations are taught there is  evidence  of  requirements  to
          learn and recite the Koran, discrimination, and lack of  adequate
          education facilities. In areas where  numbers  warrant,  such  as
          Kabul, special schools have been set up to provide education  for
          children by Sikh teachers and some children are taught within the
          Gurdwara as a result. Such education is only provided however  up
          to and including primary  level  with  the  requirement  that  at
          secondary level children will be taught within the  state  system
          where they become exposed to problems referred to in the evidence
          unless an individual's family has the means to  pay  them  to  be
          educated privately. If credible evidence is provided  of  a  real
          risk of such ill-treatment and harassment to a  child  on  return
          sufficient to prevent them receiving a proper education, which is
          shown to be a fundamental element  of  their  personal  identity,
          that they wish to pursue, rather than a child not  being  further
          educated as a result of the traditional  belief  that  they  will
          continue within a family business and therefore do not require to
          be further educated or for  some  other  reason,  then  this  may
          amount to such  serious  discrimination  either  on  its  own  or
          cumulatively with other forms of discrimination such as to  cross
          the threshold of persecution. However, this is a  fact  sensitive
          issue that must be considered in each case."

    22. The appellant's oldest son, who was 12 � years old at the  date  of
        the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  If  returned  to  Afghanistan  he
        would enter general secondary education. If his father  was  unable
        to privately educate him,  the  appellant's  oldest  son,  who  had
        already been specifically targeted  on  account  of  his  religion,
        would be required to attend a general secondary school where he may
        encounter sustained discrimination. Given the guidance in paragraph
        94 of TG, this discrimination  may  amount  to  persecution.  I  am
        therefore satisfied that the judge's failure to  adequately  engage
        with the appellant's evidence  relating  to  his  employment  is  a
        material legal error.


    23. For the reasons  given  above  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's
        decision is vitiated by material legal errors. There is no need for
        me to consider in any detail the remaining ground of appeal.  I  am
        nevertheless  satisfied  that  the  judge  may   not   have   fully
        appreciated the limited purpose of the Screening Interview when  he
        concluded that the appellant fabricated his account of the  assault
        on the coach. In YL (Rely on SEF)  China  [2004]  UKIAT  00145  the
        Tribunal stated, at [19]

          "... a screening interview is not done to establish in detail the
          reasons a person gives to support her claim for asylum. It  would
          not normally be appropriate for the Secretary  of  State  to  ask
          supplementary questions or to entertain elaborate answers and  an
          inaccurate summary by an interviewing officer at that stage would
          be  excusable.  Further  the  screening  interview  may  well  be
          conducted when the asylum seeker is tired after a  long  journey.
          These things have  to  be  considered  when  any  inconsistencies
          between  the  screening  interview  and  the   later   case   are
          evaluated."

    24. There is no indication that the judge was aware of the  nature  and
        purpose of the screening interview and,  although  he  additionally
        relied on what  he  described  as  further  embellishments  in  the
        appellant's later evidence concerning this incident,  I  find  that
        his conclusions are nevertheless unsafe.


    25. Both parties indicated that, were I to find  a  material  error  of
        law, the most appropriate approach would be  to  remit  the  matter
        back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing.  given  the
        nature of the judge's legal errors, I am satisfied this is the most
        appropriate course of action.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision is vitiated  by  material  legal  errors.
The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing,
all issues open, before a judge other than judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
McAll.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               23 April 2018
Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
