
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01193/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 April 2019                     |On 13 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 sECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LK
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Vokes, Counsel instructed by Genesis Law
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. On 29 January 2019, UT Judge Chalkley decided there was legal error  in
    the decision and reasons statement of  FtT  Judge  Fenoughty  that  was
    promulgated on 19 March 2018.  Judge Chalkley determined that the legal
    error was in the way Judge Fenoughty assessed the  possibility  of  the
    respondent's internal relocation  in  Zimbabwe.   Because  the  parties
    wanted time to secure additional evidence, Judge Chalkley adjourned the
    error of law hearing but  retained  the  case  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    because the remaining issues are narrow.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal directed that the case be anonymised because of
    the nature of the appeal and the vulnerability of the  respondent.   It
    is appropriate to maintain anonymity and I do so, the terms of my order
    being contained at the end of this decision and reasons statement.

 3. The case was transferred to me for the  resumed  hearing.   No  further
    evidence was provided prior to the hearing.   On  the  morning  of  the
    hearing, Mr Vokes provided a skeleton  argument  and  the  Home  Office
    Country Policy and Information Note (CPIN) Zimbabwe: Sexual orientation
    and gender identity and expression (version  4.0,  January  2019).   Mr
    Vokes explained he was  not  calling  the  appellant  to  give  further
    evidence because the remaining issues were limited to the  question  of
    internal relocation.  Ms Aboni confirmed internal  relocation  was  the
    sole issue.

Submissions on behalf of the respondent

 4. Mr Vokes asked me to remake the decision in favour  of  the  respondent
    for two reasons.  First, he argued  that  the  appellant  was  at  risk
    throughout Zimbabwe and not only in her home area.  Second,  he  argued
    that it was unduly harsh to expect the appellant  to  move  to  another
    part of Zimbabwe.

 5. Mr Vokes reminded me of the findings that are preserved.  The appellant
    Secretary of State conceded the respondent was  a  victim  of  domestic
    servitude and sexual exploitation prior to coming  to  the  UK.   Judge
    Fenoughty  found  the  respondent  to  be  lesbian,  to  have   had   a
    relationship in Zimbabwe that became known to her family, that an uncle
    took her to a local police station where she was abused, that  she  was
    forced to marry  against  her  will  and  suffered  abuse  within  that
    marriage, that her family brought her to the UK, that while  she  lived
    with her parents in the UK she did  not  express  her  sexuality,  that
    since leaving her family  home  she  has  lived  openly  and  formed  a
    relationship, and that her parents are unwilling to support her  unless
    she lives as a straight female.  Mr Vokes concluded that the respondent
    has experienced persecution  in  Zimbabwe.   Ms  Aboni  confirmed  this
    conclusion is accepted by the appellant Secretary of State.

 6. Mr Vokes argued the information in the current CPIN was  sufficient  to
    establish the appellant was at risk of further  persecution  throughout
    Zimbabwe.  He relied first on paragraph 2.6.3, which recites the  fifth
    head note from LZ (homosexuals) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 00487,  insofar
    as "lesbians, living  on  their  own  or  together,  may  face  greater
    difficulties that gay men."  Mr Vokes also  referred  me  to  paragraph
    4.3.5 as evidence the respondent could not realistically be expected to
    seek protection from the Zimbabwean police.

 7. Mr Vokes developed his argument in the following way.   The  respondent
    is more vulnerable than other lesbians because of her past  persecution
    and therefore  would  be  frightened  to  live  anywhere  in  Zimbabwe,
    particularly because she would have to live on her  own  as  she  would
    have no family support.

 8. In discussion, I indicated to Mr Vokes that I accepted it is reasonably
    likely that the respondent would  have  a  subjective  fear  throughout
    Zimbabwe because of her past experiences, but reminded him that  I  had
    to consider whether such fear was also objective.  I reminded Mr  Vokes
    of  Judge  Fenoughty's  findings  that  the  previous   experience   of
    persecution was limited to the respondent's home area.   Mr  Vokes  was
    unable to point  to  any  objective  evidence  that  indicated  it  was
    reasonably likely the respondent would be targeted throughout Zimbabwe.
      His  argument  focused  on  the  subjective  elements  and  that  the
    respondent was reasonably likely to behave in a way that  would  result
    in her not expressing her  sexuality  to  avoid  the  risk  of  further
    persecution.

Submissions on behalf of the appellant

 9. Ms Aboni reminded me of the full head note of LZ (Zimbabwe), which  are
    recited by Judge Fenoughty  at  [47]  of  her  decision.   The  country
    guidance indicates that lesbians are not criminalised in  Zimbabwe  and
    that there is no general risk to gays or lesbians.  The  facts  of  the
    respondent's case, which are not disputed, did  not  establish  at  the
    lower  standard  that  she  had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    throughout Zimbabwe because Judge Fenoughty found at [56] that the risk
    to the respondent from her  uncle  did  not  extend  to  all  areas  of
    Zimbabwe where she could live.

10. Turning to the second ground, Ms Aboni submitted that it was not unduly
    harsh to expect the appellant to live in another part of Zimbabwe other
    than that area from where she originates.

11. I reserved my decision and reasons, which I now give.

Legal framework

12. I begin by reminding myself  of  the  relevant  legal  framework.   The
    appeal is brought on the grounds the respondent is  a  refugee  because
    she has a well-founded fear of persecution in Zimbabwe as a member of a
    particular social group.  The relevant law is contained in part  11  of
    the immigration rules, which along with the Qualifications  Regulations
    (SI 2006/2525) transpose the provisions of the Qualification  Directive
    (2004/83/EC). The burden of  proof  lies  on  the  respondent  and  the
    standard of proof is usually described in terms of reasonably likely or
    the lower standard.

Internal relocation

13. I remind myself of  the  proper  approach  to  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation.  Paragraph 339O of the immigration rules provides:

       339O (i) The Secretary of State will not make:

       (a) a grant of refugee status if in part of the country of  origin  a
       person would not have a well-founded fear of  being  persecuted,  and
       the person can reasonably be expected to stay in  that  part  of  the
       country; or

       (b) a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of the  country  of
       return a person would not face a real risk of suffering serious harm,
       and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part of the
       country.

       (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of origin or  country
       of return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of State,  when
       making  a  decision  on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or  humanitarian
       protection, will have regard to the general circumstances  prevailing
       in that part of the country and to the personal circumstances of  the
       person.

       (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles  to  return  to
       the country of origin or country of return

14. The House of Lords gave the following guidance  on  how  judges  should
    consider the reasonableness of internal relocation in Januzi v  SSHD  &
    Ors [2006] UKHL 5.

       20.  I would accordingly reject  the  appellants'  challenge  to  the
          authority of E and dismiss all four appeals so far as they rest on
          that  ground.  It  is,  however,  important,  given  the   immense
          significance of the decisions they have to  make,  that  decision-
          makers should have some guidance on the approach to reasonableness
          and undue harshness in this context. Valuable guidance is found in
          the UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection of 23 July  2003.
          In paragraph 7 II(a) the reasonableness analysis is approached  by
          asking "Can the claimant, in the context of the country concerned,
          lead a relatively normal life without facing undue hardship?"  and
          the comment is made: "If not, it would not be reasonable to expect
          the person to move there". In development  of  this  analysis  the
          guidelines address respect for human rights in paragraph 28:

             "Respect for human rights

             Where respect for basic human rights standards,  including  in
             particular non-derogable rights, is clearly  problematic,  the
             proposed area cannot be considered a  reasonable  alternative.
             This  does  not  mean  that  the  deprivation  of  any  civil,
             political or socio-economic human right in the  proposed  area
             will disqualify it from being an internal flight or relocation
             alternative.   Rather,   it   requires,   from   a   practical
             perspective, an assessment of whether the rights that will not
             be respected or protected are fundamental to  the  individual,
             such  that  the  deprivation  of   those   rights   would   be
             sufficiently  harmful  to  render  the  area  an  unreasonable
             alternative."

          They then address economic survival in paragraphs 29-30:

             "Economic survival

             The socio-economic conditions in the  proposed  area  will  be
             relevant in this part of the analysis.  If  the  situation  is
             such that the claimant will be unable to earn a living  or  to
             access accommodation, or where medical care cannot be provided
             or is clearly inadequate, the area may  not  be  a  reasonable
             alternative. It would be unreasonable, including from a  human
             rights perspective, to expect a person  to  relocate  to  face
             economic destitution or existence below at least  an  adequate
             level of subsistence. At the other  end  of  the  spectrum,  a
             simple lowering of living standards or worsening  of  economic
             status may not be sufficient to  reject  a  proposed  area  as
             unreasonable. Conditions in the  area  must  be  such  that  a
             relatively normal life can  be  led  in  the  context  of  the
             country concerned. If, for instance, an  individual  would  be
             without family links and unable to benefit  from  an  informal
             social safety net, relocation may not  be  reasonable,  unless
             the person would otherwise be able  to  sustain  a  relatively
             normal life at more than just a minimum subsistence level.

             If the person would be denied access to  land,  resources  and
             protection in the proposed area because he  or  she  does  not
             belong to the dominant clan, tribe, ethnic,  religious  and/or
             cultural group, relocation there would not be reasonable.  For
             example, in many parts of Africa, Asia and  elsewhere,  common
             ethnic,  tribal,  religious  and/or  cultural  factors  enable
             access to land, resources and protection. In such  situations,
             it would not be reasonable to  expect  someone  who  does  not
             belong to the dominant group, to take up  residence  there.  A
             person should also not be required to relocate to areas,  such
             as the slums of an urban area, where they would be required to
             live in conditions of severe hardship."

          These guidelines are, I think, helpful, concentrating attention as
          they do on the standards prevailing generally in  the  country  of
          nationality. Helpful also is a passage on  socio-economic  factors
          in Storey, op cit, p 516 (footnotes omitted):

             "Bearing in mind  the  frequency  with  which  decision-makers
             suspect certain asylum seekers to be simply economic migrants,
             it is useful to examine the relevance to IFA claims of  socio-
             economic factors. Again, terminology differs widely, but there
             seems to be broad agreement that if life  for  the  individual
             claimant in an IFA would involve economic annihilation,  utter
             destitution  or  existence  below  a  bare  subsistence  level
             (Existenzminimum) or deny 'decent means of  subsistence'  that
             would be unreasonable. On the other  end  of  the  spectrum  a
             simple lowering of living standards or worsening  of  economic
             status would not. What must be shown to be lacking is the real
             possibility to  survive  economically,  given  the  particular
             circumstances   of   the   individual   concerned   (language,
             knowledge, education,  skills,  previous  stay  or  employment
             there, local ties, sex, civil status, age and life experience,
             family  responsibilities,  health;  available  or   realisable
             assets, and so forth). Moreover, in the context of return, the
             possibility of avoidance of destitution by means of  financial
             assistance from abroad, whether  from  relatives,  friends  or
             even  governmental  or  non-governmental  sources,  cannot  be
             excluded."

15. Further guidance is provided by the Court of Appeal in AH (Sudan) & Ors
    v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 297, where at[32] and [33] we read:

       1. Lord Bingham also  quoted  with  approval  an  observation  by  Dr
          Storey:
              What must be shown to be lacking is the real  possibility  to
              survive economically, given the particular  circumstances  of
              the individual  concerned  (language,  knowledge,  education,
              skills, previous stay or employment there, local  ties,  sex,
              civil   status,   age    and    life    experience,    family
              responsibilities, health; available or realisable assets, and
              so forth)
          The indicia given by  Dr  Storey  show  that  the  possibility  to
          survive economically is an aspect of living  a  relatively  normal
          life as an economic  operator,  rather  than  as  a  recipient  of
          charity.
       1. An analysis of the judgment of Lord  Phillips  in  E  and  of  the
          speech of Lord Bingham in Januzi therefore  yields  the  following
          propositions as to the approach to whether internal relocation  is
          available in a particular case; bearing in mind  always  that  the
          standard for rejecting the  availability  of  internal  flight  is
          rigorous (per Brooke LJ in Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] 3 All ER  449
          at p 456, and Lord Carswell in Januzi [2006] 2 AC 426 [67]):
          i) The starting-point must be conditions prevailing in  the  place
          of habitual residence
          ii)  Those  conditions  must  be  compared  with  the   conditions
          prevailing in the safe haven
          iii) The latter conditions  must  be  assessed  according  to  the
          impact that they will have on a person with the characteristics of
          the asylum-seeker
          iv) If under those conditions  the  asylum-seeker  cannot  live  a
          relatively normal life according to the standards of  his  country
          it will be unduly harsh to expect him to go to the safe haven
          v) Traumatic changes of life-style, for instance from a city to  a
          desert, or into slum conditions,  should  not  be  forced  on  the
          asylum-seeker.
My findings

16. Because the  facts  found  by  Judge  Fenoughty  are  unchallenged  and
    conceded by the parties, I adopt them as my own findings.  The  summary
    I have included above at [5] sets out the essential findings and  I  do
    not need to repeat them.

17. In the absence of more recent country information, I am bound to  adopt
    the approach set out in LZ (Zimbabwe) and find that the respondent  has
    failed to  establish  it  is  reasonably  likely  she  would  encounter
    persecution throughout Zimbabwe because the country guidance  indicates
    that lesbians can live in adequate safety in more tolerant areas,  such
    as Bulawayo, which means the respondent would not have to  conceal  her
    sexuality to avoid persecution in  that  part  of  Zimbabwe.   She  may
    decide not to be open about her sexuality in that part of Zimbabwe, but
    that would not be because she had a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    there.  Although I accept the respondent has discharged the  burden  in
    relation to the subjective element  of  fear,  which  arises  from  the
    horrendous treatment she experienced, she has not discharged the burden
    in relation to the objective element.

18. Applying the guidance regarding internal relocation,  I  must  consider
    whether it is reasonable to expect the respondent to relocate to a more
    tolerant area, such as Bulawayo.  The question I must ask is, "Can  the
    claimant, in the context of the country concerned,  lead  a  relatively
    normal life without facing undue hardship?"

19.  In  her  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent
    described living with an uncle in Rusape, which from a map would appear
    to be a rural town, about 180 km south-east of Harare.  The  respondent
    has not provided me  with  background  country  information  about  the
    economic and social situation in that part  of  Zimbabwe.   As  I  have
    indicated, the only additional evidence provided by the respondent  for
    the resumed hearing is the CPIN report.  Part 7 of that report examines
    access to services by  members  of  the  LGBT  community  in  Zimbabwe,
    focusing on access to education, employment, housing and medical  care.
    The information is general and  does  not  describe  the  situation  in
    Rusape.  I am able to infer, however, from the facts accepted  in  this
    appeal, that the level of hostility to lesbians and  other  members  of
    the LGBT community in that part of Zimbabwe is likely to be high.   The
    respondent would be unlikely to secure employment or  housing  in  that
    area if her sexuality were known to the general population.

20. I mention, for clarification, that at this juncture  I  am  considering
    the issue of internal relocation and not the  issue  of  risks  in  the
    respondent's former place of residence.  I am making a finding  on  the
    prevailing conditions in that place.

21. The question I need next consider is the  prospect  of  the  respondent
    relocating to a more tolerant  area,  such  as  Bulawayo.   Again,  the
    background country information is limited to the CPIN report.  The  key
    item in relation to the situation in Bulawayo  is  found  in  paragraph
    7.1.1 and describes the successful appeal of  a  gay  man  against  his
    dismissal from the civil service.  I find this  is  evidence  that  the
    situation in Bulawayo is more tolerant than elsewhere in  Zimbabwe  and
    members of the LGBT community have a right to be employed even if their
    sexuality is discovered.

22. This is not to suggest the respondent would be able to find  employment
    easily because the fact the gay man who was successful  at  the  Labour
    Court was dismissed from his position in the  civil  service  indicates
    discrimination is present.  I have no evidence about the prevalence  of
    such discrimination and must bear in mind that the case  cited  in  the
    evidence relates to employment by the Zimbabwean government, which  has
    been openly hostile to members of the LGBT community.

23. Recalling the guidance in Januzi,  I  recognise  the  respondent  might
    encounter discrimination in Bulawayo as a lesbian but do not find  that
    discrimination would be sufficient to exclude her from  being  able  to
    support herself or seek assistance from others.  As a result -  and  my
    conclusion is based on the limited evidence provided - I  find that any
    societal restrictions on the respondent's ability to be open about  her
    sexuality would not be sufficiently harmful to render the  prospect  of
    internal relocation to be unduly harsh.

24.  I  turn  to  the  respondent's  own  characteristics.   She  has  been
    persecuted in the past because of her sexuality and  as  recognised  by
    Judge  Chalkley  it  would  be  unsurprising  if  it   has   left   her
    psychologically damaged.  I agree, and as I have  indicated  above,  it
    may be that the respondent will not be  open  about  her  sexuality  in
    Zimbabwe because of the subjective fear that has been instilled.

25. Judge Chalkley pointed out that there is no medical or  other  evidence
    to indicate the extent or the ways in which  the  respondent  has  been
    affected by what she suffered or how such experiences might affect  how
    she interacts with others and  her  ability  to  function  in  society.
    Despite the time given for the respondent to  obtain  further  evidence
    none has been provided.  I have not heard directly from the  respondent
    and she has not provided a statement regarding  the  impact  relocation
    within Zimbabwe would have on her.

26. Without evidence, I am unable to make findings  about  the  impact  her
    past treatment might have on how she conducts herself in the UK or  how
    she might conduct herself in Bulawayo or any other more  tolerant  part
    of Zimbabwe. I recall that it is for the respondent to  establish  that
    it is reasonably likely that it  is  unduly  harsh  to  expect  her  to
    relocate to Bulawayo or another more tolerant part  of  Zimbabwe.   The
    evidence I have is limited  to  inferences  drawn  from  what  she  has
    previously suffered.  I do not find such inferences  to  discharge  the
    lower standard of proof that applies  because  the  general  background
    information indicates there is a place in Zimbabwe where the respondent
    could lead a relatively normal life without undue hardship.

Decision

As found by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley,  there  is  legal  error  in  the
decision and reason statement of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fenoughty  and
her decision is set aside.  Therefore, the Secretary of  State's  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal succeeds.

I remake the decision and find the respondent is not a refugee or  a  person
otherwise in need of international protection and I find her appeal  against
the Secretary of State's refusal of protection decision  dated  15  December
2017 is DISMISSED.



Signed                                       Date         1 May 2019

     Judge McCarthy
     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the respondent.  The respondent can  be  referred  to  as
"LK".


Signed                              Date         1 May 2019

     Judge McCarthy
     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

