





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01703/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 12 August 2019                   | On: 02 September 2019               |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                                     S M
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, counsel, instructed by JD Spicer ZEB
                    (Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


                             Anonymity Direction

    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier tribunal, promulgated on 10  April  2019,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision, refusing his humanitarian protection
    and human rights claims.

 2. The appellant was referred to the National Referral Mechanism (NRM).  A
    positive reasonable grounds decision was made on 24 February 2016. That
    was followed by a positive conclusive grounds decision made on 17 March
    2017.

 3. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  "now
    considerably older" with the ability to relocate in  Albania.  She  was
    not persuaded that all the police in Albania are corrupt. Nor  was  she
    persuaded that the appellant '... would be at risk of serious harm  due
    to his involvement of serious criminal activity on return if he were to
    relocate to an area outside of Tirana' [43].

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on all  grounds:
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge arguably erred in  her  analysis  of  the
    appellant's ability to internally relocate  outside  Tirana  'with  the
    reasoning at [43] and [44] being brief'. It was also arguable that  she
    failed to engage with the issue of how the appellant's  siblings  could
    assist in his internal relocation in circumstances where it is  unclear
    whether they were able or willing to assist him before.

 5. Ms Jones on behalf of the respondent conceded  at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing that there were material errors  of  law.  She  submitted  that
    there was an inconsistency and lack of clarity between the findings  at
    [38] that the evidence of the appellant was  consistent  and  credible,
    albeit there were aspects found to be less persuasive.  She  stated  at
    [42]  that  she  accepted  that  the  appellant  genuinely  feared  the
    trafficker, and found that there is  a  real  risk  that  he  would  be
    subjected to inhumane and degrading treatment on return to  Albania  as
    he had faced prior to his leaving in September 2015. She found that  he
    was effectively used as child labour with a criminal  association  with
    no means of protection from his mother or the police in the surrounding
    area.

 6. However, Ms Jones noted that at [45], the Judge went on to  state  that
    she did not find all aspects of his  evidence  to  be  credible.  There
    appeared to be no credible reason why the appellant  could  not  remain
    with his father who frequently travelled between Greece and Albania  if
    he feared for his safety rather than risk travelling through France for
    a period of two months.

 7. Mr  Burrett,  who  represented  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, referred to the evidence that was before  the  Tribunal:  The
    appellant had been forced to work for a man,  [B],  who  had  formed  a
    relationship with his mother. He was forced to deliver packages and was
    threatened with violence when he refused, after becoming aware that  he
    was delivering cocaine. He was regularly abused and threatened by  [B].
    He saw how [B] exerted influence over others including  officials  whom
    he believed had been  bribed  by  him.  The  system  he  witnessed  was
    corrupt.

 8. On three occasions the appellant was caught by  the  police  whilst  he
    held parcels for delivery. On each occasion when stopped, he  mentioned
    he was working for [B]. Once he said this, the officers telephoned  [B]
    to verify this. He was then allowed to go free.

 9. The respondent acknowledged that the appellant was a  victim  of  human
    trafficking and did not seek to go behind that decision at  the  appeal
    hearing.

10. Mr Burrett submitted that the Judge accepted that the appellant was  at
    risk in his home area as he genuinely feared [B]  and  that  this  risk
    included his being subjected to inhumane  and  degrading  treatment  on
    return. In nonetheless concluding that he could safely relocate outside
    his home area, there was no consideration of the legal threshold as  to
    whether he could relocate. Nor did she assess whether it was reasonably
    open for him to relocate.

11. Moreover, he submitted that the Judge's finding that the appellant  was
    older and had family members for emotional support did not take account
    of the fact that the appellant had been trafficked and abused  and  had
    received no family support in Albania previously. She did not  consider
    how this might impact on the assessment of reasonableness. There is  no
    explanation or reasoning as to why the family would be in the  position
    to support him  now  when  there  had  not  been  effective  protection
    provided in the past.

12. Nor did the Judge consider why it would be reasonable  to  expect  that
    the appellant would have protection from the  police  in  circumstances
    where such protection had not been provided before. In  particular,  no
    regard was had to the fact that he had  complained  to  three  separate
    police officers in the past about [B] but was not given protection.

13. The Judge's reliance on the  fact  that  not  all  police  officers  in
    Albania may be corrupt, fails to consider the accepted evidence of  the
    appellant's own dealings with the police. The issue was not whether all
    police officers are corrupt but rather the level of corruption  and  in
    particular the levels of corruption outside Tirana.

14. Moreover, the finding that he could safely relocate is contradicted  by
    the finding that he could not safely relocate to Tirana, a place  where
    the respondent relied upon for safe relocation. In respect  of  support
    for male victims of  trafficking,  the  background  evidence  does  not
    provide any other suitable areas in Albania, other than Tirana.

15. Nor did the Judge adequately consider and apply the background material
    in  the  light  of  the  accepted  findings  of  fact.  That   material
    establishes that male  victims  of  trafficking  are  arguably  treated
    differently  in  Albania.  The  latest  CPIN  shows  a  lack   of   any
    governmental shelters in comparison to support for women who do receive
    such shelter. Whilst the NGOs offer some limited support, this is for a
    very small number of men  that  do  not  encompass  anything  like  the
    trafficking that the appellant has  been  subjected  to.  The  evidence
    establishes that no steps have been taken to  improve  the  issues  for
    male victims of trafficking.

16. Mr Burrett also submitted that there has been an inadequate  assessment
    of the appellant's claims under Articles 3 and 8 of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention. There has been no reasoned basis as  to  how  he  would  be
    protected from [B] or other criminal gangs, given that it was  accepted
    that it would not be safe for him to relocate to Tirana and that  there
    may be some adverse attention to him on return.




    Assessment

17. I am satisfied that Ms Jones has properly conceded that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law.

18. Apart from the lack of clarity with regard to the credibility findings,
    there has not been adequate reasoning in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    ability to internally  relocate  outside  Tirana.  In  particular,  she
    failed to engage with the issue as to how his siblings could assist him
    when he had no family support in Albania previously when  he  had  been
    trafficked and abused.

19. Moreover, the background evidence does not provide any  other  suitable
    areas in Albania other than Tirana for safe  relocation.  Nor  has  the
    Judge provided satisfactory reasons as to why it  would  be  reasonable
    for the appellant to expect protection from the police in the light  of
    his three unsuccessful  complaints  against  [B]  where  no  protection
    resulted.

20. The parties agreed that in the circumstances, the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal should be set aside and re-made. Both agreed that this is
    an appropriate case to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision.

21. I accept that the extent of judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the  decision  to  be  re-made  is  extensive,  and  turns  on  the
    appellant's credibility.

22. The parties agreed that the findings by the  Judge  at  [42]  that  the
    appellant genuinely feared [B] and that there is a real  risk  that  he
    would be subjected to inhumane and degrading  treatment  on  return  to
    Albania as he had faced prior to his leaving in September 2015, are  to
    be  preserved.  In  addition,  her  finding  that  the  appellant   was
    effectively used as child labour with a criminal  association  with  no
    means of protection by his mother and no protection from the police  in
    the surrounding area, is also to be preserved.



    Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a  fresh  decision  to  be  made.  The
    findings set out in paragraph 22 above shall be preserved.


    Anonymity direction continued.






    Signed   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer  23 August 2019


