

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/01939/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at North Shields                                             Decision
& Reasons Promulgated
On 30th January 2018                                                  On
9th April 2018


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    MR MN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs. Brakaj of Iris Law firm
For the Respondent     Ms. Petersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who came to United Kingdom in
      January 2013 along with his wife. She had been granted entry clearance
      as a student and he was admitted as her dependant. They have no
      children.


   2. He claimed protection in August 2016 on the basis he would be at risk
      in Pakistan as he had converted from Islam to Christianity. He
      indicated his conversion occurred towards the end of 2015. Someone he
      knew here visited Pakistan in March 2016 and told his family about
      this and they have threatened him.

   3. His claim was refused, with the respondent not accepting the claim of
      conversion.

   4. His appeal was heard before First tier Judge Cope at North Shields on
      3 April 2017. In a decision promulgated on 4 May 2017 it was
      dismissed. The judge accepted the conversion and that this had become
      known to the appellant's father, who had threatened him. The judge
      accepted he had established by the low standard of proof applicable a
      subjective fear of persecution for a Convention reason. The judge went
      on to consider by analogy the approach set out in HJ Iran-v- SSHD
      [2010] UKSC 31 and the appellant's statement that he would not share
      his faith openly with others in Pakistan because of the likely
      reaction. Consequentially, the judge found that he would be modifying
      his behaviour. Regarding the country information, the judge noted a
      difference in the treatment between those who had been raised as
      Christians and those who had converted from Islam to Christianity.
      However, the judge did not find the appellant at risk of persecutory
      treatment outside his family. The judge concluded that there was
      sufficiency of protection and, in the alternative, he could reasonably
      relocate to avoid localised difficulties.

   5. The application for permission to appeal began by setting out the
      facts found by First tier Judge Cope. However, it was submitted the
      judge had unduly relied on the decision of AK and SK Pakistan [2014]
      UK UT00569 when applying it to a convert rather than a Christian from
      birth. Reference was also made to the country information about the
      difference in treatment between Christians by upbringing and from
      converts from Islam. It was argued the judge failed to adequately
      reflect the distinction in reaching a conclusion on the risk for this
      appellant. All of this impacted upon the application of the principles
      of HJ Iran-v- SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds advanced.

In the Upper Tribunal

   7. At hearing Ms Pettersen confirmed that there was no challenge by the
      respondent to the judge's finding of fact that the appellant had
      converted from Islam to Christianity.


   8. Mrs. Brakaj acknowledges that up to a point the judge recognised the
      difficulties the appellant would face as a Christian. I was referred
      to paragraph 62 to 69 of the decision. However, at paragraph 72,
      whilst accepting difficulties, the judge did not find this would
      amount to persecutory ill-treatment. The judge relied upon the
      decision of AK and SK and that in general the difficulties faced by
      Christians did not amount to persecutory treatment.

   9. Ms Pettersen accepted there was some force in the submissions made on
      behalf of the appellant. The judge had accepted that his conversion
      was known in his home area but that relocation was viable. Ms
      Petterson acknowledged that the difficulty would be if he were then to
      attempt to proselytise in the new area.

  10. Both representatives were an agreement that if there was an error of
      law I was in a position to remake the decision on the agreed findings
      of fact.

Conclusions.

  11. The decision of AK and SK Pakistan [2014] UK UT00569 concluded that
      Christians in Pakistan are a religious minority who, in general,
      suffer discrimination but this is not sufficient to amount to a real
      risk of persecution. They can in general practise their faith and have
      their own churches, schools and hospitals. Evangelical Christians face
      a greater risk and face the risk of a blasphemy charge. Given some
      charges are malicious and localised relocation can be  a viable option
      unless the charge is being seriously pursued.95% of the country is
      Muslim and less than 2 % are Christian.


  12. Whether a Christian will face persecution in Pakistan is very much
      fact sensitive. Clearly the risks escalate in the case of a
      prostelatising. The issue of relocation is also fact dependant. There
      is a distinction between the risks faced by someone who has been
      brought up a Christian than from a follower of Islam who has changed
      to Christianity. The decision of AK and SK Pakistan is directed
      towards the former. First tier Judge Cope acknowledged this at
      paragraph 68.

  13. First tier Judge Cope has clearly given careful consideration to the
      appeal. The judge dealt with a difficult issue as to whether the
      conversion was genuine and made clear findings which are sustainable.
      The judge also noted that the appellant had not undertaken any
      evangelical activity. However he talked about his faith to other non-
      Christians and indicated a wish to do so in his home country but was
      afraid.

  14. However, looking at the decision as a whole I find the rejection of
      the appeal does not square with findings made. This is  particularly
      so given the  comments at paragraph 69 wherein the judge recognises
      the difference between those born into a Christian community and
      converts from Islam. The judge refers to country information that is
      difficult for those known to be converts to live freely and openly in
      Pakistan and that this treatment is prevalent throughout Pakistan. The
      background information highlights the risk for an apostate. The judge
      has been significantly influenced by the guidance given in AK and SK
      in reaching the conclusion made. However, this conclusion appears to
      overlooks the fact that that decision is primarily concerned with
      individuals born in the Christian community.

  15. AJ (Risk - Christian Convert) Pakistan [2003] UKIAT 00040, as the
      title suggests, dealt with an appellant who claimed he had converted
      from Islam. Unlike here the Adjudicator had not accepted the
      conversion was genuine and the AIT agreed. In the alternative, the AIT
      referred to the then country information and concluded that he could
      relocate. The Scottish Court of Session decision of AHC (AP), Re
      Judicial Review [2012] CSOH 147 revisited this case and concluded
      recent country information suggested an escalation from societal
      discrimination to State abuses. The Court was of the view AJ (Risk -
      Christian Convert) Pakistan [2003] UKIAT 00040 had become out-dated
      factually and matters had to be considered in light of the decision in
      HJ (Iran) . The judge had acknowledged that the appellant would modify
      his wish to evangelise if returned out of fear.

  16. Given that there is no challenge to the finding the appellant has
      converted to Christianity I conclude the judge has materially erred in
      law in the assessment of the risk. The judge has not adequately
      reflected upon the distinction between Christians and converts and the
      fact that the appellant would want to evangelise but would be afraid
      to. It is my conclusion in light of the country information the
      appellant as a convert would face an enhanced risk and face
      persecution. That risk will exist throughout the country.
      Consequently, this is not a situation of a localised risk which could
      be avoided by relocation nor is there sufficiency of protection.
      Therefore, I would set the decision aside and remake it, allowing the
      appellant's appeal under the Refugee Convention.

Decision.

The decision of First tier Judge Cope materially errs in law and cannot
stand. I remake the decision allowing the appeal under the Refugee
Convention.


F.J.Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge            19th March 2018


