
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA016812017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 June 2017                               |On 23 June 2017                |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     HR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge A J M Baldwin) dismissing his appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 2 February 2017 refusing his  application  for
    asylum.

Background

2.   In a brief outline the background to this appeal is  as  follows.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on [ ] 1990.   He  is  Kurdish  and
    speaks Kurdish Sorani and comes from Sulaimaniya Province in the  Iraqi
    Kurdish Region ("KIR").  He claims that he left Iraq in either  January
    2015 or January 2016 passing through a number  of  countries  including
    Turkey, Greece and France, before making a clandestine entry  by  lorry
    into the UK on 19 August 2016 when he claimed asylum.

3.   He said that he would be at risk on return to Iraq because one  of  his
    uncles was injured fighting ISIS in 2014 and his son blamed him for the
    injuries because he had refused to fight alongside him  and  threatened
    to kill him.  After he left Iraq, the family had discovered that he had
    had a secret relationship with his uncle's  daughter  in  2012  and  he
    claimed that he would be killed or seriously ill-treated by  his  uncle
    or his uncle's son.  There was also a  background  difficulty,  so  the
    appellant claimed, between the family due to  the  division  of  family
    lands and he believed that his uncle  had  killed  his  father  as  the
    killer was never identified.  As a Kurd he could not  live  in  Baghdad
    and as a Sunni Muslim he would be at risk from Shia Muslims.   Were  he
    to relocate within the Kurdish area, it would only be a matter of  time
    before his uncle's family caught up with him.

4.   The judge summarised his findings as follows in [25]  of  his  decision
    as follows:

     "Having reviewed the evidence as a whole, I  find  that  the  Appellant
         has not proved to the low standard required that he  would  face  a
         well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  Iraq  on  account   of   a
         relationship with a young woman there, or on account of an historic
         land dispute, or because of his refusal to accompany his  uncle  on
         military duties, or because the uncle and son want revenge  because
         of the injuries the uncle suffered.  Even if there  is  ill-feeling
         between the Appellant and these  two  people,  I  do  not  find  it
         credible that the Appellant would be at real risk of  serious  ill-
         treatment from that quarter.  The area  from  which  the  Appellant
         comes is not a  contested  area  -  as  set  out  in  AA  UKUT  544
         (30.10.15) - and there is nothing to show why he will not  be  able
         to approach an Embassy to gain the documents he needs in  order  to
         return to Iraq.  If he wished to avoid what I find is at most  only
         ill-feeling, there is no reason why he cannot relocate  within  the
         Kurdish Region, well away from them if he so chooses - for  example
         in Dohuk or Sulaimaniya.  As a reasonably well-educated adult  male
         with work experience and in the prime of his life, there  would  be
         no reason why he should not be able to start afresh elsewhere if he
         does not wish to return to his home area.  The Appellant,  I  find,
         has not proved that he has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  or
         serious ill-treatment in Iraq and has made  out  no  case  for  the
         grant to him of humanitarian protection.  The Appellant  apparently
         has no partner, children or family members in the UK and  has  only
         been here  for  around  six  months.   Beyond  that,  there  is  no
         information  concerning  his  private  life  in  the  U.K.   Having
         rejected  his  claims,  he  has  identified  no  very   significant
         obstacles  to  him  returning  to  Iraq,  save  for  the  issue  of
         documentation which he should be able to  gain  from  his  Embassy.
         Whilst  there  are  many  reasons  to  be  concerned  about  events
         generally in Iraq, there is I find nothing which applies to him  in
         particular and no compelling circumstances have been identified for
         considering Article 8 outside the Rules."

     Accordingly, the appeal was  dismissed  on  asylum,  human  rights  and
    humanitarian protection grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

5.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the judge erred  in  law  by
    not dealing with the issue of the appellant lacking documentation which
    could leave him destitute if he  was  unable  to  be  documented.   The
    arguments in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  were  put
    before the Tribunal but the judge did not  mention  them  and  had  not
    engaged with the issue.   The  grounds  then  refer  to  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal by the Court of Appeal (at [2016]  EWCA  Civ  779)
    against the decision in AA (Iraq) on the basis that:

     "I have, however, come to  the  conclusion  that  AA  should  be  given
         permission to appeal on ground 1, namely  whether  as  part  of  an
         assessment as  to  whether  an  individual  required  international
         protection the decision maker is:

         (a)  bound to consider whether the individual concerned had in  his
             possession or could obtain a CSID either before he returned to
             Iraq or within a short  period  of  returning  there,  failing
             which (in the absence and alternative means  of  support)  his
             circumstances were likely to amount to a breach of Article  3;
             and


         (b)  not entitled to postpone any decision on that question  if  it
             was not feasible for him to be returned to Iraq".

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    following reasons:

         "2.  The grounds of application allege the judge failed  to  engage
             with or to follow the guidance provided in AA (Article  15(c))
             (Rev 2) [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) and AA  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 779.


         3.   The author of the  grounds  appears  to  have  overlooked  the
             judge's reference to AA in the middle of [25].   It  is  clear
             from the content of that paragraph that the judge was alive to
             the existence of AA.  However, the  grounds  are  accurate  in
             suggesting the judge failed  to  have  regard  to  the  issues
             identified in AA.  For example, the fact  that  the  appellant
             might be devoid of credibility in respect of his asylum  claim
             does not mean he had access to a CSID.


         4.   It is arguable, therefore,  that  the  judge  failed  to  make
             findings on  material  issues  and  permission  to  appeal  is
             granted."

7.   In her submissions Ms Fisher adopted the grounds.   She  accepted  that
    AA  (Iraq)  was  primarily  concerned  with  returns  to  Baghdad,  but
    nonetheless it was dealing with Iraqi nationals and this did  not  mean
    that Kurdish citizens would not need a CSID.  She  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred by not pursuing the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant
    would be able to obtain a CSID or what the consequences would be if  he
    failed to do so.  She referred to the Country Information and  Guidance
    of  November  2015  on  Iraq:   International   Relocation   (including
    documentation and feasibility of return) ("CIG November 2015")  and  in
    particular to para 9.1.10.  The judge had  failed,  so  she  submitted,
    properly to deal with and consider the implications of a return to  the
    Sulaimaniya area and  to  assess  what  the  risks  would  be  for  the
    appellant if he were unable to obtain documents such as a CSID.

8.   Mr Avery submitted that AA (Iraq) did not address the situation in  the
    KIR, but was about whether the lack of a CSID would lead to the risk of
    a breach of article 3 on return to Baghdad.  The respondent's intention
    was to return the appellant to the KIR and this would be done  by  pre-
    clearing his removal with the authorities there.   Issues  which  might
    arise if an appellant did not have a CSID if returned  to  Baghdad  did
    not arise in respect of a return to the KIR.

Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in Law

9.   Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge failed to have regard to the  issues  identified  in  AA
    (Iraq).  These were referred to in Counsel's skeleton argument prepared
    for the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, in particular at  paras
    20 and 21 which cite the first eight paragraphs of the italicised  head
    note.  The Tribunal in AA (Iraq) drew a distinction between cases where
    return was feasible and where it was not feasible.

10.  In [7] of the italicised head note the Tribunal said, in the  light  of
    the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) & Ors v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1276,  that  an  international
    protection claim made by  P  [an  Iraqi  national]  cannot  succeed  by
    reference to an alleged risk of harm arising from an absence  of  Iraqi
    identification document if the Tribunal finds that P's  return  is  not
    currently feasible,  given  what  is  known  about  the  state  of  P's
    documentation, and in [8] that it will only be  when  the  Tribunal  is
    satisfied that the return of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of an
    alleged risk of harm arising from an absence  of  Iraqi  identification
    documentation  will  require  judicial  determination.   Permission  to
    appeal has been granted against this part of the Tribunal's decision by
    the Court of Appeal for the reasons already set out above.

11.  Permission was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judgment in HF had failed to take into  account  and  was  inconsistent
    with the judgment of the Court of Appeal in JI  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2013] EWCA Civ 279 where the Court held that it had been unlawful  for
    SIAC, having expressed concern as to whether an appellant  returned  to
    Ethiopia could be effectively monitored by the Ethiopian  Human  Rights
    Commission, to leave it to the Secretary of State to determine  whether
    and when the necessary monitoring capability had  been  achieved.   The
    Court held that SIAC could not simply leave  it  to  the  Secretary  of
    State to decide when it would be safe for JI to return and  that  issue
    should be decided by the Court on the hypothetical basis of a return at
    the time of hearing.

12.  The Court of Appeal when granting permission to  AA  accepted  that  it
    was arguable with a realistic prospect of success that the  want  of  a
    CSID was not simply a technical impediment to return, but  was  capable
    of supporting an argument that, if a CSID could not be obtained,  there
    would be a reasonable likelihood of a breach of article 3.

13.  The rationale of the argument  is  that  an  applicant  should  not  be
    deprived of asylum or humanitarian protection  in  circumstances  where
    there would be a real risk of persecution or a breach of article  3  on
    return simply because at the date of decision or  hearing  it  was  not
    feasible or possible for him to be returned.  International  protection
    claims must be assessed by a  consideration  of  what  the  applicant's
    position would be on the hypothetical basis of a return at the time  of
    the hearing.

14.  Whatever the outcome of the appeal on the  issue  on  which  permission
    was granted in AA (Iraq), I am not satisfied that it has any bearing on
    the outcome of the present appeal.  The significant difference is  that
    it is not proposed to return the appellant to Baghdad but to  the  KIR.
    Returns to the KIR were considered in AA (Iraq) (where it  is  referred
    to as the IKR) and the country guidance is summarised at  [17]-[21]  of
    the italicised head note, which reads as follows:

         "17. The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if  P  originates
             from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the
             IKR authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not  require  P
             to have an expired or current passport, or laissez passer.

         18.  The IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article  15(c)
             risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

         19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate  from  the  IKR  can  obtain
             entry for 10 days as a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
             permission for a further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can
             remain for longer, although K will need to register  with  the
             authorities and provide details of the employer. There  is  no
             evidence that the IKR authorities  pro-actively  remove  Kurds
             from the IKR whose permits have come to an end.

         20.  Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected
             to avoid  any  potential  undue  harshness  in  that  city  by
             travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and  is  likely
             to involve an assessment of (a)  the  practicality  of  travel
             from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil  by  air);  (b)  the
             likelihood of K's securing employment in the IKR; and (c)  the
             availability of assistance from family and friends in the IKR.

         21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home
             area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR."

15.   I  was  referred  in  submissions  to  the  CIG  November   2015   and
    particularly to para 9.1.10 which deals  with  entry  arrangements  via
    Erbil International Airport and Sulaimaniya Airport.  There is  nothing
    to indicate that a return to the  KIR  requires  a  CSID  or  that  the
    information in the CIG undermines the guidance given by the Tribunal in
    AA (Iraq) on returns to the KIR.  I am therefore satisfied  that  there
    was nothing before the judge which required him to consider whether the
    fact that the appellant did not have in his possession a CSID  had  any
    bearing on the risk on return.   It  is  accepted  that  on  return  to
    Baghdad an applicant without a CSID and without third party support may
    be at risk of finding himself destitute.  However, the appellant is  to
    be returned to the KIR not Baghdad.

16.  In any event, the judge found that the appellant was a reasonably well-
    educated adult male with work experience, in the prime of his life  and
    that there was no reason why he could not start afresh in the  KIR  and
    his comment that the appellant could relocate in the KIR  was  made  in
    the alternative. He found that the appellant would not be at real  risk
    of serious ill-treatment from other members of his family but commented
    that if he wished to avoid what amounted at most to ill-feeling,  there
    was no reason why he could not relocate within the Kurdish region, well
    away from his home area.

17.  In summary, any problems the lack of a CSID might have in  obtaining  a
    passport do not arise so far as the appellant is concerned.  His return
    will need to be pre-cleared with the KIR authorities.   The  issues  of
    obtaining a CSID whilst in the UK were considered in AA (Iraq) at [173]-
    [176] and within Iraq  at  [178]-[203].   There  is  nothing  in  these
    paragraphs to support an argument that the appellant, even assuming  he
    did not have the evidence to obtain the issue of a CSID in the UK would
    have any difficulties in  obtaining  a  CSID  if  it  was  needed  when
    returned to the KIR. The risk that he might become destitute without  a
    CSID also has no bearing on the appellant's case as he  is  not  to  be
    returned to Baghdad.  In any event, the appellant at interview accepted
    at Q44 that he had had a CSID and an Iraqi nationality certificate, but
    he did not still have them.  He was asked at Q46 whether if required he
    would he be able to  go  to  an  Embassy  and  attempt  to  obtain  the
    documents and he replied that he did not know.  The judge was  entitled
    to comment that there was nothing to show that the appellant would  not
    be able to do so to gain the documents he needed to return to Iraq.

18.  The grounds do not therefore satisfy me that the judge erred in law  by
    failing to deal  more  fully  with  the  issues  of  documentation  and
    feasibility of return.  Even if he had, it  would  not  have  made  any
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.  The judge did not err in  law
    in any way requiring the decision to be set aside.

Decision

19.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  its  decision  stands.
    The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal  remains  in  force
    until further order.


Signed   H J E Latter                            Date: 21 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

