
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01743/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 27 April 2021                     |
|Remotely by Skype for Business       |                                     |
|On 15 April 2021                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    M J C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Gardiner, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant, who was born on  30  December  1996,  is  a  citizen  of
    Somalia.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 25 September 2017.

 3. On 26 September 2017, the appellant  claimed  asylum.   In  a  decision
    dated 20 December 2017, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and  under  the  ECHR.   The
    appellant unsuccessfully  appealed  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  His appeal was dismissed in a  decision  promulgated  on  11
    March 2018 and permission to appeal was refused on 2 May 2018  and  the
    appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 17 May 2018.

 4. On 18 December 2019, the appellant  made  further  submissions.   In  a
    decision dated 5 February 2020, the Secretary of  State  again  refused
    the appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  under
    the ECHR.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  His claim was  that
    he belonged to a minority clan, the Bajuni and sub-clan Khazraji.   His
    home area was Koyama island.  He claimed that he was at  real  risk  of
    serious harm in his home area, as a  minority  clan  member,  from  Al-
    Shabaab.  Further, he claimed that he could not safely  and  reasonably
    internally relocate to Mogadishu.

 6. In her determination sent on 5 October 2020, Judge M M  Thomas  allowed
    the appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and under Art
    3 of the ECHR.  However, she dismissed the appellant's appeal under the
    Refugee Convention.

 7. In reaching those decisions, the judge accepted that the appellant  was
    at real risk of persecution from Al-Shabaab as a member of the minority
    Bajuni clan in his home area, namely Koyama  island  -  his  home  area
    being an Al-Shabaab stronghold (para 68).  Secondly, the judge went  on
    to find applying MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT
    00442 (IAC) that if he relocated to Mogadishu there was  a  significant
    risk that he would be destitute and a real risk  of  suffering  serious
    harm such that he was  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  and  his
    return would breach Art 3 of the ECHR (see para 83).

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that given those two findings,  the  appellant  was  entitled  to
    succeed under the Refugee Convention.  He had established that  he  was
    at real risk of persecution for a Convention reason in  his  home  area
    and that internal relocation to Mogadishu was not reasonable.

 9. On 5 November 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew) granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on that ground.

10. The appeal was listed on 15 April 2021 at  the  Cardiff  Civil  Justice
    Centre for a remote hearing by Skype for Business.  The  appellant  was
    represented by Ms Gardiner and the respondent by Ms Pettersen, both  of
    whom joined the hearing by Skype for Business.

11. Ms Pettersen conceded that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  given  her
    findings in paras  68  and  83  of  her  determination.   Ms  Pettersen
    accepted that the judge  should  have  allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds given those two findings.  She invited  me  to  set  aside  the
    judge's  decision  on  humanitarian  protection  and  to  substitute  a
    decision allowing the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds.   It  was
    accepted that the judge's decision to allow the appeal under Art  3  of
    the ECHR should stand.

12. I agree with Ms Pettersen's concession.  Given the judge's findings  in
    paras 68 and 83, she found, in effect, that the appellant was  entitled
    to succeed under the Refugee Convention as there was  a  real  risk  of
    persecution for a Convention reason  in  his  home  area  and  internal
    relocation to Mogadishu was not a viable option.

Decision

13. For those reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
    making of an error of law.  I set aside the judge's decision to dismiss
    his appeal on asylum grounds and to allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

14. I re-make the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

15. The decision to allow the appellant's appeal under Art 3  of  the  ECHR
    stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               15 April 2021

