

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: PA/01058/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Centre  On 9 July 2019                |On 16 July 2019                  |
|                                      |                                 |


                                   Before



                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL





                                   Between


                         HAMID SALIH NASIR AL ANEZI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant



                                     and





                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent





Representation:


For the Appellant: Ms Naz of Kingswright Solicitors


For the Respondent: Ms E Groves Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mark Davies promulgated on 3 April 2019, which dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of a protection claim  on  all
    grounds in essence because the Judge did not accept that the  Appellant
    was an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon.

 3.  Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  arguing  that  his  assessment   of
    credibility was flawed; his assessment of the  witness  Obeid  Ali  was
    flawed; his assessment of risk on return was flawed.

 4. On14 May 2019 First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane  gave  permission  to
    appeal.

 5. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Ms  Naz  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that (a) She relied on the grounds of appeal.

 6. The reasons given by the Judge for his findings were inadequate.

 7. In assessing the credibility of the Appellants claim that he brought up
    a family and was able to procure a false passport to flee  from  Kuwait
    the Judge failed to take into  account  the  background  material  that
    Bidoons work illegally.

 8.  The  Judge  failed  to  assess  his  claim  to  have  participated  in
    demonstrations.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Groves submitted that:

10. The findings were more than adequate.

11. At paragraph 44 the Judge set out his overall conclusion and then  gave
    reasons for that decision.

12. Given the failure of the Appellant to answer a number of the  questions
    put to him the Judge was entitled to conclude he  was  not  a  credible
    witness.

13. This was a mere disagreement  with  findings  reasonably  open  to  the
    Judge.





The Law

14.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.

16. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by the
    Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

         "The duty to give reasons requires that  reasons  must  be  proper,
         intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court
         in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
         dispute in the present case relates to the last of those  elements,
         that is the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  for  its
         decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is  important  to
         appreciate that adequacy in this context is precisely that, no more
         and no less.  It is not a counsel of perfection.  Still less should
         it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment  of
         the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
         their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,
         to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also to
         enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the  reasons  for
         the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of
         approach has been committed."

17. I also remind myself of what was said by the Court of Appeal at para 18
    of Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412, that it is  necessary  to  guard
    against the temptation to characterise as errors of  law  what  are  in
    truth no more than disagreements  about  the  weight  to  be  given  to
    different factors, particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had
    the advantage of hearing oral evidence.

Finding on Material Error

18. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

19. The grounds  assert  that  the  Judges  assessment  of  the  Appellants
    credibility was flawed as he failed to give reasons for his finding  at
    paragraph 44 that the Appellant was an untruthful witness. The decision
    must clearly be read as a whole: what the Judges states at paragraph 44
    is his overarching conclusion in relation to the Appellants credibility
    and in the paragraphs that follow he sets out why he did not  find  the
    Appellant to be credible. It was open to the Judge  to  find  that  the
    Appellants failure to claim asylum in safe countries en route to the UK
    undermined his credibility and indeed he had earlier  noted  (paragraph
    22) that in fact the Appellant had refused to  answer  questions  about
    this initially which the Judge found undermined  his  credibility.  The
    Judge had heard that the Appellant had previously claimed in Belgium to
    be a Syrian and given that the  Appellants  claim  to  be  a  stateless
    Bidoon was at the heart of his case lying when in a safe country  about
    his nationality was a matter  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  find
    undermined his credibility. The Judge also found the Appellant to be  a
    poor witness  in  his  own  cause  noting  that  he  failed  to  answer
    straightforward questions when put to him (paragraph 49) and  he  notes
    that Ms Naz who represented the Appellant before him  acknowledged  his
    failure to answer simple questions that she put in re-examination.

20. The Judges approach to the supporting witness who gave oral evidence is
    criticised in the grounds suggesting 'there is not any analysis'.  This
    is wrong as the Judge addresses and gives reasons at paragraph 51 as to
    why he did not find  the  evidence  of  the  supporting  witnesses  was
    credible noting inconsistencies in the  evidence  of  Mr  Ali  and  the
    Appellant as to when they last met and he found his evidence vague  and
    unspecific as to how they met in the UK.

21. The Judge was entitled to reject the evidence  of  the  Kuwaiti  Bidoon
    Association. He was  entitled  to  note  that  no  one  attended  court
    (paragraph 53) to have the evidence challenged and that  there  was  no
    record of the conversation they had with the  Appellant  or  what  they
    discussed that enabled them to conclude that  he  was  an  undocumented
    Bidoon (paragraph 55)

22. I therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination  when  read  as  a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                                                  Date
11.7.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
