
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01777/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2018                           |                              |
|                                              |On 24th January  2018         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero of Counsel instructed by Gurney Harden
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Aziz  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 17th August 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  in  January  1989.   His
    initial asylum claim was refused and his subsequent appeal dismissed by
    Judge Hawden-Beal of the FTT in a  decision  promulgated  on  13th  May
    2015.  Thereafter the Appellant made  further  submissions  which  were
    treated as a fresh claim and refused by the Respondent on 1st  February
    2017.

 3. The Appellant appealed against that decision, and his appeal was  heard
    by the FTT on  25th  July  2017.   The  FTT  heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and his uncle.  The FTT took into account evidence  that  had
    not been before the previous Tribunal, in the  form  of  a  psychiatric
    report prepared by Dr Balasubramaniam dated 12th July 2017,  a  medico-
    legal report by Dr Sinha dated 21st April 2016, and documents which the
    Appellant had obtained from  Sri  Lanka,  including  a  letter  from  a
    lawyer, and a warrant of arrest.

 4. The FTT did not accept that the Appellant had given a credible account,
    and found that the fresh evidence  did  not  indicate  that  it  should
    depart from the findings made  by  the  previous  Tribunal,  and  those
    findings were that the Appellant had given an  incredible  account  and
    that taking into account the guidance in GJ and Others (Sri  Lanka)  CG
    [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC), would not be at risk if returned to Sri Lanka.

 5. The FTT did not find that the Appellant had undertaken  any  activities
    in the UK that would put him at risk if returned to Sri Lanka.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon three grounds which are summarised below.

 7. Firstly it was submitted that the FTT had erred in law  by  failing  to
    give reasoned findings in relation to the psychiatric reports, and  the
    evidence from the lawyer in Sri Lanka and the court documents.  It  was
    contended that the FTT had failed to engage with  the  opinion  of  the
    medical experts and failed to give reasons as to  why  weight  was  not
    placed upon their opinions.

 8. In relation to the court documents and the evidence from the lawyer, it
    was submitted that the FTT had taken a  negative  view  of  credibility
    before considering that evidence in the round.  It was  submitted  that
    the FTT had not considered that the Appellant  had  obtained  a  letter
    from the lawyer in  Sri  Lanka  and  there  was  e-mail  correspondence
    between the lawyer and the Appellant's representatives in the  UK,  and
    the lawyer in Sri Lanka was registered to practice at  the  Sri  Lankan
    Bar.

 9. The second ground contends that the FTT failed to  give  clear  reasons
    for finding that the Appellant would not be at risk because of his  sur
    place activities.  The FTT had accepted that  the  Appellant  had  been
    involved in rallies and demonstrations with the TGTE but failed to give
    any clear reasons why this would not place him at risk on  return.   It
    was submitted that the FTT failed to take into account UB  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2017] EWCA Civ  85  in  which  the  Court  of  Appeal  concluded  that
    proscription of the TGTE may be a relevant matter in relation  to  risk
    on return.

10. The third ground contends that the FTT  erred  by  accepting  that  the
    Appellant had given evidence to the ICPPG which was to  be  transmitted
    to the UN, but failed to engage with the legal case as it was  advanced
    by the Appellant as to how this related to risk on return.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Ford  of  the  FTT  on  6th
    November 2017.

12. Following the grant of permission,  the  Respondent  did  not  lodge  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

13. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Submissions

14. I have recorded the submissions in full in my Record of Proceedings and
    summarised them briefly here.

15. Mr Bonavero relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal.  In relation to the medical evidence, it  was
    submitted that the FTT summarised the evidence, but  did  not  reach  a
    conclusion upon it, and did not give reasons for not  attaching  weight
    to the medical opinion.

16. With reference to the arrest warrant and the letter from the lawyer  in
    Sri Lanka, it was submitted that the FTT had not assessed this evidence
    in the round, but had simply relied  upon  the  findings  made  by  the
    previous Tribunal.

17. With reference to sur place activities, the FTT  had  given  inadequate
    reasons for concluding that the Appellant's activities  would  not  put
    him at risk in Sri Lanka.

18. Mr Kotas submitted that the FTT had not erred in law, and observed that
    there had been no successful challenge to the conclusions made  by  the
    previous Tribunal.  The FTT found at  paragraph  17  that  the  factual
    basis of the appeal was the same as had been dismissed by the  previous
    Tribunal but appreciated that the fresh evidence  must  be  considered.
    It was contended the grounds simply amounted to a disagreement with the
    findings made by the FTT, and that the findings made by  the  FTT  were
    open to it, and supported by adequate reasons.

19. With reference to sur place activities, Mr Kotas relied upon  GJ  which
    found that attendance at one or more rallies would  not  be  enough  to
    found a sur place claim.

20. By way of response Mr Bonavero pointed out there was no reference to GJ
    in the FTT findings which related to sur place activities.  That was an
    indication that insufficient reasons had been given  for  finding  that
    the Appellant would not be at risk.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.





My Conclusions and Reasons

22. It is contended that the FTT erred by failing to give adequate reasons.
     Appropriate guidance on adequacy of reasons can be found in Budhathoki
    (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) the headnote  of  which
    is set out below;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

23. In my view the FTT adopted a correct approach in considering the  fresh
    evidence in this appeal.  It is relevant that there had been a previous
    appeal  hearing  and  the  FTT  correctly  applied  the  guidelines  in
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.  Findings made by the previous  Tribunal
    represented a starting point, but careful consideration must  be  given
    to evidence that was not before the previous Tribunal.

24. At paragraph 63 the FTT confirmed that the Appellant had  been  treated
    as a vulnerable  witness,  and  that  all  the  additional  documentary
    evidence had been taken into  account  and  considered  in  the  round,
    before the conclusion was reached not to depart from findings  made  by
    the previous Tribunal.

25. The FTT set out conclusions in relation to Dr Balasubramaniam's  report
    dated 12th July 2017 at paragraph 68.  It was  not  disputed  that  the
    Appellant suffered from PTSD and a depressive  episode  of  a  moderate
    degree.  In my view, the FTT was entitled to find that this  conclusion
    did not prove to the lower standard that the Appellant's mental  health
    issues were caused by what happened to  him  in  Sri  Lanka.   The  FTT
    correctly concluded that the  "mental  health  diagnosis  needs  to  be
    considered within the context of all of the evidence." If the  FTT  had
    reached a conclusion before considering the medical evidence that would
    be an error of law.  The FTT did  not  do  that.   The  FTT  took  into
    account the opinion of Dr Balasubramaniam, who  accepted  what  he  had
    been told by the Appellant, but it is for the FTT to decide whether the
    Appellant's account, and what he told the doctor, is credible.  The FTT
    is not obliged to accept the doctor's opinion at paragraph  8a  of  his
    report, that there are no other significant  traumatic  events  in  the
    Appellant's life to account for the PTSD.  The doctor may not be  aware
    of any other events, but it is the responsibility of the FTT to  assess
    all of the evidence, and reach a conclusion.  That is what the FTT  has
    done in this case.

26. Very much the  same  applies  to  the  report  of  Dr  Sinha  which  is
    considered by the FTT at paragraph 69.  The FTT notes that this  report
    is dated 21st April 2016  and  therefore  predates  the  report  of  Dr
    Balasubramaniam.  The FTT  notes  that  Dr  Sinha  did  not  conduct  a
    physical examination and reaches a somewhat different conclusion to the
    report of Dr Balasubramaniam.  I note  that  Dr  Sinha  is  in  fact  a
    general practitioner and not specialist psychiatrist.   Again,  I  find
    that the FTT correctly found the diagnosis made by Dr Sinha  "needs  to
    be considered against the backdrop of all  the  evidence  and  findings
    made."

27. I therefore reject  the  submission  that  the  FTT  erred  in  law  in
    considering the medical evidence.  That evidence was considered in  the
    round and it is not the case that the FTT reached a conclusion  on  the
    Appellant's credibility before considering the psychiatric reports.

28. The FTT considered  the  arrest  warrant  and  what  are  described  as
    court/legal documents from Sri Lanka  at  paragraphs  73-75.   The  FTT
    referred to Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 and correctly applied  the
    principles.  These principles are that in asylum and human rights cases
    it is for an individual claimant to show that a document  on  which  he
    seeks to rely can be relied on, and the decision maker should  consider
    whether a document is one on which reliance should properly  be  placed
    after looking at all the evidence in the round.  Therefore it  was  for
    the Appellant to prove that these documents could be relied  upon,  and
    the FTT was obliged to consider the documents with care,  and  also  to
    take into account findings made by the previous Tribunal in relation to
    the  Appellant's  credibility.   The  FTT  was  entitled  to  find  the
    documents produced, could not be relied upon to show that the  findings
    made by the previous Tribunal were wrong.  Those previous findings were
    that the Appellant was not credible, he had  never  been  detained  and
    tortured, and the authorities were not looking for him. The conclusions
    reached by the FTT were open to it on the evidence.   Adequate  reasons
    have been given for not accepting the documents as reliable.

29. The Appellant's sur place activities were considered by the Tribunal at
    paragraphs 76-77.  Findings of fact made by the  FTT  at  paragraph  77
    have not been challenged.  These findings are set out below;

         "Having had sight of  the  photographs  and  the  Appellant's  TGTE
         membership card (issued in April 2017), I  am  prepared  to  accept
         that the Appellant may have attended a small number of rallies  and
         demonstrations (as a protestor only) in the run up to this  appeal.
         I  do  not  accept  that  he  has  been   attending   rallies   and
         demonstrations and has been active in pro-Tamil causes within  this
         country since 2011.  He made no mention of  this  at  his  previous
         appeal hearing (despite stating in his evidence that he had)."

30. It is recorded in the previous determination at paragraph 41  that  the
    Appellant never had a significant role within  the  LTTE  and  "is  not
    perceived to be involved in post-conflict Tamil separatism  because  he
    has done nothing more in the UK than attend a few protests  because  he
    says he has been ill;" I set out below paragraph 336 of GJ and Others;

         "336.         Former Tamil  areas  and  the  diaspora  are  heavily
                  penetrated by the security forces.  Photographs are  taken
                  of public demonstrations and the GOSL may  be  using  face
                  recognition  technology:   it   is   sponsoring   a   face
                  recognition  technology  project  at  the  University   of
                  Colombo.  However, the question which concerns the GOSL is
                  the identification of Tamil activists  working  for  Tamil
                  separatism and  to  destabilise  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan
                  state.   We   do   not   consider   that   attendance   at
                  demonstrations in the  diaspora  alone  is  sufficient  to
                  create a real risk or a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
                  that a person would attract adverse attention on return to
                  Sri Lanka."

31. Although the FTT did not specifically refer to the above paragraph,  it
    followed the guidance set out therein.  The FTT was  entitled  to  find
    that having attended a small number of rallies and demonstrations as  a
    protestor, would not put the Appellant at risk by reason of  sur  place
    activities and did not err in law in so finding.  At  paragraphs  78-79
    the FTT considers a letter from the  ICPPG  dated  25th  November  2015
    which is at page 73 of the Appellant's bundle.  If  the  Appellant  had
    given evidence to the Lessons  Learned  and  Reconciliation  Commission
    implicating the Sri Lankan security forces or  authorities  in  alleged
    war crimes, he would fall within a category of individuals at real risk
    of persecution, as confirmed in the headnote to GJ and Others at  7(c).
    That however is not the case here.  The FTT noted that the letter  from
    the ICPPG was "somewhat vague".  There was  no  evidence  that  he  had
    given any oral testimony, neither was there  any  indication  that  any
    evidence he had given, had been  submitted  to  the  UN  or  any  other
    commission.  The FTT did not err in law in finding that the letter from
    the ICPPG dated 25th November 2015 was not evidence that the  Appellant
    would be at risk if returned to Sri Lanka.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
decision is not set aside and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FTT made an anonymity direction.  That direction is  continued.   Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Appellant or any member of his family.  This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.   This  direction  is
made pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.






Signed                              Date 12th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 12th January 2018.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
