
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/01754/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 May 2017                        |On 12 May 2017                       |
|Prepared on 11 May 2017               |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. A.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sanders, Counsel instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant says that he is a citizen of Afghanistan. He entered the
      UK illegally and made an application for protection on 26  June  2015.
      The Respondent refused that application on 7  January  2016,  and  the
      Appellant's appeal to the First tier  Tribunal  ["FtT"]  against  that
      decision was heard on  18  October  2016.  It  was  dismissed  on  all
      grounds, in a decision promulgated on 31 October 2016  by  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge MJH Wilson.
   2. The Appellant was granted permission to  appeal  that  decision  on  9
      February 2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on the basis that  it  was
      arguable the decision did not engage with the  evidence  relied  upon,
      or, the submissions that had been made on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
      Thus it was arguable the Appellant had not enjoyed a fair  hearing  of
      his appeal.
   3. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 Notice in relation to the grant  of
      permission dated 22 February 2017, although as Mr Diwnycz  accepts  it
      does not properly engage with the Appellant's case. Neither party  has
      made formal application to adduce further evidence.  Thus  the  matter
      comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   4. The refusal decision quoted a passage from  a  website  (the  link  to
      which was provided) which indicated from an interview in 2007, how  it
      was thought a Jirga might respond to a  situation  that  required  the
      Jirga to appoint individual(s) to carry out its will. Before the Judge
      the Appellant complained that when that website was  examined  it  was
      impossible to ascertain who had provided the information relied  upon,
      or their experience and expertise in relation to the issue - indeed it
      was impossible to see  whether  the  information  was  specific  to  a
      particular region, or applied  to  the  whole  country,  or  was  even
      current. Whilst neither representative had the  foresight  to  provide
      the Judge with a full copy of the website document in question, it  is
      accepted before me that this point was fully taken before the Judge by
      Ms Sanders orally, and, that it was set out in her  skeleton  argument
      for the hearing, which the Respondent also accepts was provided by her
      to the Judge at  the  hearing.  That  skeleton  argument  receives  no
      reference in the decision or in the  Judge's  record  of  proceedings,
      which gives rise to the inference its content was  not  considered  by
      him, an inference which is only strengthened by the  absence  of  that
      skeleton from the Tribunal file. Thus paragraph 5 of  the  grounds  is
      made out.
   5. There is a further complaint, which also  touches  upon  the  skeleton
      argument. It is accepted before me  that  Ms  Sanders  also  drew  the
      Judge's attention to a number of passages of objective  evidence  both
      in oral argument, and in her skeleton. The Judge has made no reference
      to this aspect of the Appellant's case, or to the evidence in question
      in his decision.
   6. In the circumstances, as the  Respondent  now  accepts,  the  decision
      discloses a material error of law that renders the  dismissal  of  the
      appeal unsafe, and the decision must in the circumstances be set aside
      and remade. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to
      remit the appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be  reheard,  or
      whether  to  proceed  to  remake  it  in  the   Upper   Tribunal.   In
      circumstances where it would appear that the relevant evidence has not
      properly been considered by the First Tier  Tribunal,  the  effect  of
      that error of law has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity
      for his case to be properly considered by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;
      paragraph 7.2(a) of the  Practice  Statement  of  25  September  2012.
      Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise is such that
      having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
      appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b)
      of the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.  Having  reached  that
      conclusion, with the agreement of the parties  I  make  the  following
      directions;
     i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
        Tier Tribunal for rehearing at the North  Shields  hearing  centre.
        The appeal is not to be listed before Judge MJH Wilson.
    ii) A Pushtu interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The time estimate is estimated to be 3 hours.
    iv) It is not anticipated by the Respondent that she  has  any  further
        evidence to be filed. The Appellant anticipates that  a  review  of
        the evidence is required and that a short further witness statement
        may be filed. The Appellant is therefore  to  file  and  serve  any
        further evidence to be relied upon at his appeal by 5pm 25 May 2017
     v) The appeal may be listed at short notice as a filler on  the  first
        available date at the North Shields hearing  centre  after  29  May
        2017 for final hearing, but given the location of  the  Appellant's
        representatives it shall only be listed after consultation with the
        Appellant's solicitors. Whilst it is desirable that Ms  Sanders  be
        available to present the appeal it is not necessary that she should
        do so.
    vi) No further  Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
        necessary.  Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
        change, they must inform the Tribunal immediately,  providing  full
        details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.
   vii) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

   7. The decision promulgated on 31 October 2016 did involve the making  of
      an error of law sufficient to require the decision to be set aside and
      reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal
      with the directions set out above.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 11 May 2017
