
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Pa/01047/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 11 April 2016                             |On 14 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     ma
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Patrick Asimwe of Pillai and Jones Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on  19  August  2015  refusing  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain and to remove him to Nigeria.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1975. He claims  that  he
    is bisexual and that his wife has informed the authorities. He has  had
    gay relationships in the UK. He came to the UK  in  2008  and  has  two
    children here.

 4. The respondent rejected the asylum claim  on  credibility  grounds  and
    decided that there was no evidence of contact with the children.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 19 January 2016. The judge did not find  the
    appellant or his witnesses to be credible and  the  appellant  had  not
    proved that he was bisexual. The appellant  was  in  contact  with  his
    children  but  any  interference  with   his   protected   rights   was
    proportionate.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 24 February 2016.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade on
    7 March 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge failed to
    give adequate reasons. All grounds were arguable.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

 9. Ms Fijiwala conceded the appeal at the outset. The reasoning  was  very
    short and inadequate. There was  no  consideration  of  the  Article  8
    rights of the children.

10. The judge set out the credibility findings at paragraphs 84-86  of  the
    decision. No  reasons  are  given  for  finding  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and his witnesses to lack credibility  or  plausibility.  The
    failure to give adequate reasons is a material error of law.

11. The judge found at paragraph 93 of the decision that the appellant  was
    in contact with his young children. No reasons are  given  for  finding
    that any interference  with  the  appellant's  protected  rights  under
    Article 8 was not disproportionate. There is no  consideration  of  the
    best interests of the children or  section  117B-D  of  the  2002  Act.
    Again, the reasons are inadequate and that is a further material  error
    of law. The children's Article 8 rights are not considered at  all,  as
    conceded by Ms Fijiwala.

12. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

13. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.



Signed   [pic]                      Date 11 April 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

