
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01982/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 April 2019                     |On 26 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     NA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Chirico, Counsel instructed by Wilsons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity:
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By his decision promulgated on the  25  January  2019,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Rintoul set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.    A
    copy of that decision is attached as an annex to this decision. We  now
    remake that decision.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan against  whom  a  deportation
    order was made in 2011 following his conviction in 2008 for  committing
    a serious sexual offence. He is appealing against the decision  of  the
    respondent dated 19 October 2015 to refuse  his  protection  and  human
    rights claim.

 3. The appellant's claim, in summary, is that:

      1) Even though he committed a serious crime, he should not be excluded
         from protection under Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention  (or
         Article 17 of the Qualification Directive in respect of  subsidiary
         protection) because he is not a danger to the community in the UK;

      2) He is at risk of persecution  in  his  home  area  of  Afghanistan,
         arising from threats made by a  former  co-worker  in  the  UK  who
         returned to Afghanistan in or around 2011;

      3) The level of indiscriminate violence in his home area is such  that
         the threshold of Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  is
         met;

      4) Relocating to Kabul is not reasonable and would be unduly harsh;

      5) Removal from the UK would breach Article 3 ECHR because of the high
         risk he will commit suicide once returned to Afghanistan; and

      6) Removal from the UK would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR because the
         "very compelling circumstances" test in Section  117C  (6)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act ("the 2002 Act") is met.

Factual Background

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1 January 1984.  His
      home area in Afghanistan is Jalalabad in Nangahar Province.

   2. In 2001 he entered the UK and made  an  unsuccessful  application  for
      asylum.  He was subsequently granted exceptional leave to  remain  and
      in 2005 was granted indefinite leave to remain.

   3. In the summer of 2006, he met his wife (whom we shall refer to as NS).
      NS, who is originally from Somalia, became a British citizen in 2005.


   4. In September 2006 the appellant committed the crime of having sex with
      a 15-year-old boy. He was subsequently (in  July  2008)  convicted  at
      Snaresbrook Crown Court and given an indeterminate sentence, which, on
      appeal, was varied by the Court of Appeal to five years' imprisonment.
      The trial judge's recommendation for deportation  was  upheld  in  the
      Court of Appeal where it was said that this was "the plainest case  in
      which to make a recommendation for deportation".


   5. In April 2007, the appellant entered  into  an  Islamic  marriage  and
      began living with NS.  The appellant and NS married  in  2009  (whilst
      the appellant was in prison).  They now have 3 children, aged 5, 3 and
      6 months, all of whom are British citizens.


   6. The appellant was released from prison in 2011.  Since his release, he
      has not been  arrested  or  convicted  of  any  crimes.  However,  two
      incidents involving the police have occurred. In 2017  he  slapped  NS
      across her face because he heard her speaking to a male neighbour  and
      in 2018 he placed a piece of paper with  his  phone  number  into  the
      shopping basket of a woman at a supermarket.  He was not  arrested  on
      either occasion.


   7. NS suffers from mental health problems. The  unchallenged  opinion  of
      consultant forensic psychiatrist Dr P Sen, as  set  out  in  a  report
      dated 15 January 2019, is  that  NS  has  a  combination  of  symptoms
      (including  fluctuating  moods  and  poor  sleep)   that  satisfy  the
      criteria of a diagnosis of emotionally unstable  personality  disorder
      of the borderline type;  and  that  her  most  significant  protective
      factor is the appellant. Dr Sen  stated  that  without  the  appellant
      there is a risk of self-harm, which could seriously impact her ability
      to  care  for  her  children.   This  view  is  consistent  with   the
      unchallenged opinion of independent social worker Ms Pearce who, in  a
      report dated 23 March 2019, expressed the view  that  separation  from
      the appellant would likely lead to a significant deterioration in NS's
      mental health with the risk of the children needing to  be  placed  in
      care.

   8. The appellant  also  suffers  from  mental  health  problems.  He  has
      previously  attempted  suicide  and  is  considered  by  his  treating
      psychiatrist and two independent psychiatrists who prepared reports on
      his behalf to be at risk of committing  suicide  in  the  future.  The
      appellant's mental health and suicide risk is discussed below.


   9. The appellant's mother and siblings live in the UK. NS's family do not
      live in the UK.

  10. The procedural background to this  case  is  complex  and  it  is  not
      necessary to set out the full history as it is  not  material  to  the
      appeal. That said, in short, in 2011 the  appellant  appealed  against
      the deportation decision. His appeal was dismissed, first in the First-
      tier Tribunal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coates and then on remaking
      in the Upper Tribunal (Judge Coates' decision having been  set  aside)
      by  Upper  Tribunal    Judge  Goldstein   in   2012.   Following   the
      commencement of judicial review proceeding, the  respondent  consented
      to   reconsider   further   submissions   by   the   appellant.   This
      reconsideration is set out in the respondent's decision of 19  October
      2015, which is now being appealed.

  11. Before us, neither party placed any reliance upon  (or  even  referred
      to) the decision of Judge  Goldstein.  We,  too,  have  not  found  it
      necessary to refer to his decision in detail, as although,  consistent
      with the guidance in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  702  it  is  a  starting
      point, nearly all of the facts and evidence that are material  to  our
      decision have arisen since Judge Goldstein's decision.

Witness Evidence and Findings of Fact

  12. In addition to his own evidence, the appellant relied on  the  witness
      evidence of his wife, his elder brother (whom we  shall  refer  to  as
      KA), his mother, and two friends of his elder brother,  whom  we  will
      refer to as NG and GA. The appellant, NS, KA and NG gave oral evidence
      at the hearing.

  13. The factual background, as summarised above in paragraphs 4 -  12,  is
      not in dispute.


  14. There are, however, three areas where Mr  Avery  did  not  accept  the
      evidence of the appellant and his witnesses.


  15. The first area of contention is the appellant's relationship with  his
      family and the extent to which  they  provide  (or  would,  if  asked,
      provide) him and NS with support and assistance. The appellant  claims
      that he only sees his family infrequently (once every few months)  and
      they are unable (or unwilling) to provide  him  and  his  family  with
      significant assistance. The appellant's evidence was that, because  of
      his mental health problems, it is difficult for  him  to  travel;  and
      because they are busy with their own lives (and his mother is  unwell)
      his family visit only occasionally.


  16. NS gave a similar account - of seeing the appellant's family only from
      time to time and not feeling able to ask (or rely on) them for day  to
      day help.


  17. KA's evidence was that he is busy with his own  family  and  business,
      leaving little time to visit (or provide assistance to) the  appellant
      and NS.


  18. Mr Avery suggested that the witnesses  were  intentionally  minimising
      the connection between the  appellant  and  his  family  and  he  drew
      attention to the witness statement of  the  appellant's  mother  which
      indicated that  she  saw  the  appellant  frequently.  Mr  Avery  also
      maintained  that  if  the  visits  by  the  appellant's   family   are
      infrequent, this is the choice of the appellant and his wife.


  19. Having heard oral evidence from the  appellant,  NA  and  KA,  we  are
      satisfied that they have given a truthful and  consistent  account  of
      the nature and extent of the relationship with the appellant's family.
      The statement of the appellant's mother was written several years  ago
      (in May 2016) and circumstances  (in  particular  in  respect  of  the
      appellant's  mental  health)  have  changed  since  then.   We   find,
      therefore, that the appellant's  wider  family,  although  emotionally
      close to the appellant, see him and NA infrequently and do not provide
      any significant practical assistance as they are busy with  their  own
      lives (and in the case of the appellant's mother, elderly  and  unwell
      such that she is unable to provide meaningful assistance).


  20. The second aspect of the factual evidence that was not accepted by  Mr
      Avery was the statement by KA that if the  appellant  is  deported  he
      would not travel to Afghanistan to assist him.  KA's  explanation  for
      this is that he has four children (ranging in age from 2  to  16),  is
      busy with his family and business commitments, and Afghanistan is  not
      safe. He acknowledged that he had recently travelled to Afghanistan to
      assist his mother-in-law with a medical emergency but maintained  that
      he would not do the same for the appellant.


  21. Mr Avery submitted that KA would be able to - and would  -  travel  to
      Afghanistan to assist the appellant.


  22. In our view, KA's significant family and business commitments  in  the
      UK mean that he  would  have  only  limited  capacity  to  assist  the
      appellant in Afghanistan and at the most he would make a brief trip to
      help the appellant in his first few  weeks.  He  would  not  be  in  a
      position to provide the appellant with ongoing practical assistance in
      Afghanistan.


  23. The third area of contention is the appellant's claim that a man  with
      whom he previously worked and lived in the  UK  and  who  returned  to
      Afghanistan in or around 2011 (referred to by him and his witnesses as
      "Habib") has been spreading rumours about his sexual offence  and  has
      threatened to either kill him or have him killed  by  the  Taliban  or
      other militia.


  24. The basis for the appellant's claim is the evidence of KA, NG  and  GA
      about conversations they say they had with Habib. KA  claims  to  have
      seen, and been threatened by, Habib in a bazaar in Jalalabad in  2012;
      and he stated that Habib said he wanted to kill the appellant  because
      he had destroyed his life.  KA also stated that he thought that  Habib
      has links to the Taliban because of how he was dressed and who he  was
      with.


  25. GA, in his witness  statement,  described  seeing  Habib  in  2014  in
      Peshawar.  He stated that Habib said that if the  appellant  comes  to
      Afghanistan he would kill him or have him killed.


  26. NG stated in his statement that he saw Habib in the UK at  KA's  house
      and that Habib threatened to kill the appellant if he saw him again.


  27. Although Mr Avery cross-examined  KA  about  Habib,  no  reasons  were
      advanced in his submissions as to  why  KA  should  not  be  believed.
      Rather than challenge the evidence, Mr Avery's  contention  (discussed
      below at paragraph 55) was that the evidence, even  if  accepted,  was
      insufficient to establish the appellant' asylum claim.


  28. Given that the witness evidence about Habib  was  consistent  and  not
      implausible - and that the challenge to  it  was  very  limited  -  we
      accept, and find as a fact, that  in  2012  and  2014  a  man  in  the
      appellant's home area  of  Afghanistan  who  knows  about  his  sexual
      offence threatened to spread rumours about the appellant and kill  him
      (or take steps to have others kill or harm him).

The Appellant's Mental Health and Suicide Risk


  29. The appellant relies on:

   1) An expert report from Consultant Psychiatrist and General Practitioner
      Dr C Maloney, dated 19 April 2017;


   2) An expert report from Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist Dr P Sen, dated
      22 January 2019; and


   3) A detailed letter from  his  treating  Consultant  Psychiatrist  Dr  H
      Rutherford, dated 24 April 2019.

  30. The evidence of Dr Rutherford (who attended the hearing and gave  oral
      evidence) is that the  appellant,  who  is  prescribed  antidepressant
      medication (mirtazapine) and antipsychotic medication (risperidone and
      haloperidol), suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder  and  severe
      depression with psychotic symptoms (where  he  hears  voices  and  has
      visual hallucinations).

  31. She summarised a history of  attempted  suicide,  comprising  of  four
      attempts as an inpatient in 2016 and an incident in February 2018 when
      the appellant purchased  flammable  liquid  with  the  intent  to  set
      himself alight.

  32. Her opinion, as expressed in her letter of 24 April 2019 and orally at
      the hearing, is that the  appellant  would  deteriorate  rapidly  upon
      being removed from the UK and would be at risk of "completed  suicide"
      in Afghanistan.

  33. At  the  hearing,  in  response  to  questions  from  Mr  Chirico,  Dr
      Rutherford expressed the opinion that  the  appellant  would  find  it
      challenging (and would be unlikely) to engage with any  mental  health
      provision available in Afghanistan  because  he  would  not  have  the
      support of his wife (or others) to encourage him  to  access  it.  She
      commented that the appellant had limited insight into his  psychiatric
      condition and had been very reluctant to access services in the  UK  -
      only doing so because of the insistence of his wife, who  ensures  his
      attendance at appointments and that he takes his medication.

  34. In response to questions from Mr Avery, Dr Rutherford stated that  the
      appellant would need 1:1 supervision in a secure unit  in  Afghanistan
      to  mitigate  against  the  risk  of  suicide.  She  stated  that  the
      separation from his family and his fear of being harmed in Afghanistan
      were drivers of the risk and she was in no doubt  that  the  appellant
      genuinely fears for his safety  in  Afghanistan.  Dr  Rutherford  also
      expressed agreement with the opinions of Dr Maloney and Dr Sen.

  35. Mr Avery did not challenge the core of Dr Rutherford's opinion but  he
      did question whether she had improperly relied on  her  perception  of
      the circumstances in Afghanistan. We see no evidence of this. She  did
      not comment on the nature  and  extent  of  psychiatric  provision  in
      Afghanistan. Rather, she  expressed  a  view  on  the  difficulty  the
      appellant would face accessing or engaging with mental health services
      without the support and assistance of his wife. This falls  within  Dr
      Rutherford's expertise. Dr  Rutherford  was  a  clear  and  consistent
      witness whose assessment of the appellant is based on  her  experience
      of treating him as a patient, rather than merely meeting  him  on  one
      occasion in order to prepare an expert report. We have  no  hesitation
      in accepting her evidence.

  36. Dr Maloney's opinion, which was not challenged, is that the  appellant
      suffers from a major depressive disorder and complex PTSD. Dr  Maloney
      stated that he had no concern that the appellant  was  fabricating  or
      exaggerating his symptoms. He described  the  appellant  as  having  a
      "chronically high" risk of self harm or  suicide  which  would  become
      acute upon removal to Afghanistan appearing inevitable or the  process
      of removal beginning. Dr Maloney stated that the appellant would  need
      intensive supervision during the process of removal.  He  also  stated
      that upon return to Afghanistan the suicide risk would be even  higher
      because of the loss of protective factors (his wife and children)  and
      the additional risk factors of loss, separation and social isolation.

  37. Dr Sen's opinion, which was also not challenged, is that the appellant
      meets the  criteria  for  a  diagnosis  of  complex  PTSD  and  severe
      depressive episode with psychotic symptoms. He described the appellant
      as being at  risk  of  self  harm.  He  stated  that  the  appellant's
      relationship with his children is a protective  factor  and  that  the
      risk  of  suicide  and  self  harm  will  be  extremely  high  if  the
      relationship is disrupted.


  38. Dr Sen also expressed the opinion that the appellant's  risk  of  self
      harm will be very  high  at  the  time  he  is  served  with  concrete
      directions to leave the UK, during the process of deportation  and  on
      and after arrival in Afghanistan. At paragraph 5.8 of his  report,  Dr
      Sen stated:

         "The mechanisms which could  be  put  in  place  after  removal  to
         Afghanistan to reduce risk would  be  for  [the  appellant]  to  be
         assessed and immediately admitted to a psychiatric unit and kept on
         1:1 observations without access to any risk items  which  he  could
         use to self harm, which would mean nursing him in what  we  call  a
         sterile environment with staff watching  him  at  all  times.  This
         would  be  the  only  way  to  manage  his  high  suicidal  risking
         Afghanistan.  This  would   thus   require   prior   planning   and
         coordination with relevant services in Afghanistan, as it would  be
         an extremely challenging endeavour."

  39. Also relevant to our consideration of the appellant's mental health is
      the evidence of his wife  (which  was  not  challenged  and  which  we
      accept) that the only time the appellant leaves the house is  to  take
      his children to school; and he is only able to  do  this  because  she
      accompanied him on the route until he was sufficiently comfortable  to
      undertake the task himself.

  40. Drawing together the evidence concerning the appellant's suicide  risk
      we find that:

   1) Although there is an ongoing risk  that  the  appellant  will  attempt
      suicide, as he has done several times in the  past,  he  is  currently
      stable. This  is  because,  at  the  current  time,  he  is  receiving
      appropriate mental health care, complying with a regime of therapy and
      medication, receiving support and encouragement  from  his  wife,  and
      benefiting from the protective factor of his involvement in  the  life
      of his children.


   2) Upon the process of deportation starting (or  the  appellant  reaching
      the conclusion that deportation  is  inevitable)  the  appellant  will
      deteriorate rapidly and the risk of suicide will become acute and very
      high. It will be necessary, in order for the risk  of  suicide  to  be
      mitigated, for the appellant to be in  a  "sterile  environment"  with
      staff watching him at all times, as described by Dr Sen  at  paragraph
      5.8 of his report (see paragraph 41 above).


   3)  The  risk  of  suicide  will  remain  very  high  during  transit  to
      Afghanistan, and therefore close  1:1  supervision  will  be  required
      during this process.


   4) Upon release from the UK  authorities  in  Afghanistan,  the  risk  of
      suicide will remain very high. Mitigation of the risk will  require  a
      "sterile environment" with staff watching the appellant at all  times,
      as described by Dr Sen.


   5) Without the support and encouragement of his wife (or  another  person
      who takes on her current role) the appellant is unlikely to  have  the
      insight, willingness and capability to take the practical and physical
      steps necessary (such as telephoning and travelling to  a  clinic)  to
      access any mental health service provision in Afghanistan  that  would
      be available to him.

Asylum


  41. Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention provides that:

         "the benefit of the present provision [prohibition of  refoulement]
         may not, however, be claimed by a  refugee  ...  who,  having  been
         convicted by a final judgment  of  a  particularly  serious  crime,
         constitutes a danger to the community of that country."

  42. Section 72(2) of the 2002 Act provides that:

         "A person shall be presumed to  have  been  convicted  by  a  final
         judgment of a clearly serious crime and to constitute a  danger  to
         the community of the United Kingdom if he is (a) convicted  in  the
         United Kingdom of an offence, and (b)  sentenced  to  a  period  of
         imprisonment of at least 2 years."

  43. Section 72(6) of the 2002 Act provides that the presumption in Section
      72(2)  that  a  person  constitutes  a  danger  to  the  community  is
      rebuttable.

  44. The appellant seeks to rebut the presumption under  Section  72(2)  on
      the basis that even though he has been  convicted  of  a  particularly
      serious crime he does not constitute a danger to the community.


  45. A substantial body of evidence was submitted  by  the  appellant  that
      supports his position.  This includes:

      i) A letter from his probation officer  dated  27  August  2013  which
         describes the appellant as being at low  risk  of  reoffending  and
         states that his risk  of  harm  continues  to  diminish.   This  is
         consistent with a risk  assessment  by  his  probation  officer  in
         December 2011 which  found  him  to  present  a  low  risk  of  re-
         conviction.  The 2011 risk assessment also stated that  it  is  not
         considered the appellant has a sexual preference  for  children  or
         that sexualised violence is a risk factor.


     ii) The appellant's treating psychiatrist Dr Rutherford in  her  letter
         dated 24 April 2019 described the appellant as posing  a  very  low
         risk towards children.


    iii) A letter from the appellant's social worker dated 5 April 2019  did
         not express any concerns about the appellant's  children  being  at
         risk because of his offence.


     iv) A child and family assessment by Hackney local authority  dated  20
         September 2018 stated in respect of the appellant's sexual  offence
         with a child that "he is remorseful and there  is  no  evidence  to
         indicate he poses a risk to his children".

  46. Mr Avery did not  challenge  any  of  the  evidence  described  above.
      However, he argued that the presumption that the appellant constitutes
      a danger to the community has not been rebutted  because  although  he
      has not been convicted of a crime since leaving prison  in  2011,  two
      incidents have occurred that involved the police. The first  is  where
      the appellant slapped his wife for talking  to  another  man  and  the
      second is where he placed his  phone  number  in  a  woman's  shopping
      basket.  Mr Avery also argued that the absence  of  offending  may  be
      linked to the fact that the appellant has been under scrutiny  as  any
      offence would undermine his attempts to resist deportation.


  47. Mr Chirico argued that the two incidents relied upon by Mr Avery  need
      to be understood in light of the appellant's mental health problems at
      the time they occurred and that, in any event, they fall  a  long  way
      short of indicating a danger to the community.


  48. We agree with Mr Chirico.  The appellant has not been convicted  of  a
      crime since his release from  prison  in  2011.   His  social  worker,
      psychiatrist and probation officer are  consistent  in  their  opinion
      that there is a low risk (Dr Rutherford describes the  risk  as  "very
      low") of the appellant committing another offence against a child; and
      Social Services appear to have no concern as to the appellant posing a
      risk to his own children.


  49. The incidents where the appellant hit his  wife  and  left  his  phone
      number in a woman's shopping basket did not result in his  arrest  and
      fall short of the type of conduct that would indicate  that  he  is  a
      danger to the community in  the  UK.   Moreover,  the  opinion  of  Dr
      Rutherford that the appellant poses a "very low" risk was given after,
      and in the knowledge of, these two incidents.  In  the  light  of  the
      opinions  of  Dr  Rutherford,  Social  Services  and  the  appellant's
      probation officer, we are satisfied that the presumption under Section
      72(2) of the 2002 Act that the appellant constitutes a danger  to  the
      community is rebutted. We find, therefore, that the appellant  is  not
      excluded from protection against refoulement under  Article  33(2)  of
      the Refugee Convention.


  50. It is therefore necessary for us to consider whether the appellant  is
      at risk of persecution in his home area of Jalalabad in  the  Nangahar
      Province, as he claims.

  51. The appellant claims to be at risk either directly from Habib, who has
      threatened to kill him; or via Habib who has (or will) spread  rumours
      about him and may convince the authorities  or  the  Taliban  to  take
      action against him because of the nature of his sexual offence  which,
      amongst other things, could lead to the perception that he is gay.


  52. We accept that the appellant has a genuine fear of Habib killing  him,
      spreading rumours about him, and informing  the  authorities  and  the
      Taliban about  the  nature  of  his  crime;  and  that  he  fears  the
      authorities  and  Taliban  as  a  consequence.  However,  it  is   not
      sufficient that the appellant's fear is genuine; it must also be  well
      founded.  In our view, it is not; as the evidence does  not  establish
      that there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  the  appellant
      will be at risk in his home area. There are several reasons for this:

   1) Firstly, the evidence of Dr A  Giustozzi,  an  expert  on  Afghanistan
      relied upon by the appellant, is that authorities in Afghanistan would
      be unlikely to prosecute the appellant for his sexual offence as there
      are no precedents, as far as he knows, of individuals being  sentenced
      in Afghanistan for crimes  committed  abroad  unless  they  relate  to
      national security.  Dr Giustozzi identified  a  potential  risk  of  a
      Taliban court convicting the appellant.  However, he stated that  such
      a court would require witness evidence and Habib's word would  not  be
      enough to convict the appellant. In  our  view,  the  evidence  of  Dr
      Guistozzi indicates that Habib would be unlikely to  influence  either
      the government or the Taliban to take action against the appellant.


   2) Secondly, there is no evidence that Habib has any  connection  to  the
      Taliban or other militia that would enable him to carry out his threat
      against the appellant. The appellant's brother speculated  that  Habib
      may have links to the Taliban but there was not a reasonable basis for
      this and he acknowledged that it was no more than a thought.


   3) Thirdly, Habib has not contacted or threatened the appellant in UK  by
      letter,  email  or  social  media  (even  though  he  would  know  the
      appellant's brother's address and contact details).


   4) Fourthly, the last contact any of the witnesses had with Habib was  in
      2014 and his current whereabouts and circumstances are unknown.

  53. Whilst it is possible that Habib is residing in the  appellant's  home
      area, would learn of his return to Afghanistan, would  spread  rumours
      about the appellant's sexual crime, and would be in a position to kill
      him or arrange  for  others  to  kill  him;  the  likelihood  of  this
      occurring is, in our view, remote.  The  asylum  appeal  is  therefore
      unable to succeed.

Humanitarian Protection

  54. The appellant argues that he faces a real  risk  of  serious  harm  by
      reason of indiscriminate violence in Jalalabad within the  meaning  of
      Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC).

  55. However, Article 17(1)(b) of the Qualification Directive (the  wording
      of which corresponds to Paragraph 339D(iv) of the  Immigration  Rules)
      excludes from eligibility for subsidiary protection persons  who  have
      committed a serious crime.  There is no need, in contrast  to  Section
      33(2) of the Refugee Convention, to show the appellant is a danger  to
      the community as  well.  It  is  sufficient  that  the  appellant  has
      committed a serious crime. The appellant, as he accepts, has committed
      a   serious   crime.   He    is    therefore    not    eligible    for
      subsidiary/humanitarian protection.

Article 3 ECHR

  56. Although the  appellant  is  excluded  from  humanitarian  protection,
      nonetheless we must consider the conditions that will exist  in  Kabul
      on the appellant's deportation there. We accept  that  AS  (Safety  of
      Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) has been set aside,  but
      the information  set  out  in  that  decision  is  still  relevant  in
      identifying any difficulties the appellant will face on arrival.


  57. The Upper Tribunal in AS found that although it is relatively uncommon
      and outside the social norm for a man to live alone in Kabul, a man in
      good health can be expected to manage  without  family  or  a  support
      network. However, this is not the case for a man in poor health,  such
      as the appellant.  In AS at [213] it is stated:

         "We do not find that it is an essential requirement for a person to
         have an existing support network in Kabul for them to  be  able  to
         access housing or employment there and that conclusion is supported
         Dr Giustozzi's evidence and by the UNHCR's position that there  are
         possible exceptions to the need for a support  network  for  single
         able-bodied  men  and  married  couples  of  working  age   without
         identified specific vulnerabilities in urban and  semi-urban  areas
         with the necessary infrastructure and livelihood  opportunities  to
         meet  the  basic  necessities  of  life  and  are  under  effective
         Government control.  For the reasons set out below,  we  find  that
         Kabul is such a place where a support network is not essential, and
         that internal relocation is generally reasonable without one for  a
         single male in good health. [emphasis added]"

  58. Even though unemployment in Kabul is high, the Upper  Tribunal  in  AS
      found that a single male, even without connections, would most  likely
      be able to find irregular unskilled work such as a day labourer. In AS
      at [228] the Upper Tribunal found:

         "We find that there  are  livelihood  opportunities  available  for
         single men in good health on return to Kabul such that there is  no
         real likelihood that they would be forced  to  turn  to  crime,  be
         subject to exploitative work or join an armed AGE".

  59. However, the appellant is not a man in good health, and it is, in  our
      view, unlikely that he would be able to obtain any form of employment.


  60. Given the appellant's poor mental  health,   reliance  on  others  (in
      particular his wife) to function even minimally in  the  UK,  and  the
      absence of any family or support network available to  assist  him  in
      Kabul, we find that it is reasonably likely the appellant will not  be
      able to access accommodation and  employment  in  Kabul  and  will  be
      destitute. It is against this backdrop that we turn  to  consider  the
      appellant's mental health and suicide risk.


  61.  The  unchallenged  psychiatric  evidence  (which  we  have  accepted)
      establishes that once the appellant believes that his  deportation  is
      inevitable, he  will  be  at  an  acute  high  risk  of  suicide,  the
      protection against which  will  require  a  "sterile  environment"  as
      described by Dr  Sen  (see  above  at  paragraph  41).  The  need  for
      substantial and intensive management of the suicide risk will continue
      whilst the appellant is in transit to Afghanistan (during  which  time
      the UK authorities will be in a position to manage the risk) and after
      he is released in Afghanistan (whereupon the UK  authorities  will  no
      longer have the capacity to manage the suicide risk).

  62. It is necessary to consider separately  whether  the  UK  will  be  in
      breach of Article 3 ECHR because of what may happen to  the  appellant
      whilst he is in the UK or in transit to Afghanistan (referred to in  J
      v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ  629  as  a  "domestic  case")  and  after  the
      appellant is released in Afghanistan (referred to in J as  a  "foreign
      case").


  63. We are satisfied that there will not be a breach of Article  3  whilst
      the appellant remains in the UK or is in transit to Afghanistan.  This
      is  because,  although  the  risk  of  suicide  will  be  acute,   the
      appellant's medical team in the UK (as well as the respondent) will be
      able to manage the risk.  The appellant benefits  from  extensive  and
      comprehensive medical care in the UK  where  the  risks  ensuing  from
      deportation (and the ways to mitigate that risk) have been  documented
      and  considered.   The  appellant's  psychiatrist  will  be  able   to
      implement appropriate mechanisms to manage the suicide risk whilst the
      appellant remains in the UK; and whilst on route to  Afghanistan  (and
      in any period of detention prior to departure) the respondent will  be
      able to take appropriate steps through, for example, the provision  of
      appropriately trained escorts.


  64. Our conclusion  in  respect  of  the  Article  3  "domestic  case"  is
      consistent with the analysis of Dyson LJ in J (paragraphs 57-62) where
      he found that the IAT was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  risk  of
      suicide in the UK would be adequately managed  and  to  take  judicial
      notice of the arrangements the respondent makes to  escort  vulnerable
      persons being removed from the UK.


  65. The appellant's stronger argument  (and  the  focus  of  Mr  Chirico's
      submissions before us) concerns the "foreign case"; that  is,  whether
      the risk of suicide is such that Article 3 will be breached because of
      the appellant's suicide risk after he is released in Afghanistan.


  66. It is well established that risk of suicide in the country  of  return
      can give rise to a breach of  Article  3.  The  leading  authority  on
      Article 3 and suicide is J where, at paragraphs 25 - 31, Dyson LJ  set
      out six factors to be applied in "foreign cases".  He stated:

         "25. In our judgment, there is no doubt that in foreign cases the
             relevant test is, as Lord Bingham said in Ullah, whether there
             are strong grounds for believing that the person, if returned,
             faces a real risk of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment
             or punishment. Mr Middleton submits that a different test is
             required in cases where the article 3 breach relied on is a
             risk of suicide or other self-harm. But this submission is at
             odds with the Strasbourg jurisprudence: see, for example, para
             [40] in Bensaid and the suicide cases to which we refer at
             para 30 below. Mr Middleton makes two complaints about the
             real risk test. First, he says that it leaves out of account
             the need for a causal link between the act of removal and the
             ill-treatment relied on. Secondly, the test is too vague to be
             of any practical utility. But as we explain at para 27 below,
             a causal link is inherent in the real risk test. As regards
             the second complaint, it is possible to see what it entails
             from the way in which the test has been applied by the ECtHR
             in different circumstances. It should be stated at the outset
             that the phrase "real risk" imposes a more stringent test than
             merely that the risk must be more than "not fanciful". The
             cases show that it is possible to amplify the test at least to
             the following extent.


          1. First, the test requires an assessment to be made of the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the applicant
             would suffer if removed. This must attain a minimum level of
             severity. The court has said on a number of occasions that the
             assessment of its severity depends on all the circumstances of
             the case. But the ill-treatment must "necessarily be serious"
             such that it is "an affront to fundamental humanitarian
             principles to remove an individual to a country where he is at
             risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].


          1. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal or expulsion and the inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating the applicant's article 3
             rights. Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:


                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by the extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of its having taken action
                  which has as a direct consequence the exposure of an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).


                  See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the court said
                  that the examination of the article 3 issue "must focus on
                  the foreseeable consequences of the removal of the
                  applicants to Sri Lanka..."


          1. Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the article 3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a foreign
             case. And it is even higher where the alleged inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of the
             public authorities of the receiving state, but results from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.


          1. Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).


          1. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a breach
             of article 3 in a suicide case, a question of importance is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to be based is
             objectively well-founded. If the fear is not well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real risk that
             the removal will be in breach of article 3.


          1. Sixthly, a further question of considerable relevance is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has effective
             mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide. If there are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily against an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights.

  67. The fifth factor must be considered alongside paragraph 16 of Y and  Z
      (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 392 where Sedley LJ stated:

         "One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in J that what may
         nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any genuine fear
         which the appellant may establish, albeit without an objective
         foundation, is such as to create a risk of suicide if there is an
         enforced return."

  68. We apply the factors set out in J, as modified by Y and Z, as follows:

      a)  The  severity  of  harm  the  appellant  may  face  on  return  to
         Afghanistan is very high as  the  evidence  indicates  that  he  is
         likely to commit suicide and die unless he is confined to a sterile
         environment with supervision, as described by Dr Sen (see above  at
         paragraph 41). Moreover, the method by which he planned  to  commit
         suicide at his most recent attempt  in  2018  (setting  himself  on
         fire) indicates that the consequence of a  failed  suicide  attempt
         may be severe injury.


      b) There is a causal link between the appellant's deportation and  the
         risk of suicide. The consistent view of the three psychiatrists who
         have assessed the appellant is that his suicide risk will  increase
         significantly as a consequence  of  deportation,  because,  amongst
         other things, he will no longer have the protective factors of  his
         wife and children and  he  will  be  in  an  environment  where  he
         believes he is in danger (even if that belief is not well founded).


      c) We recognise that the Article  3  threshold  is  particularly  high
         because this is a  "foreign  case"  and  even  higher  because  the
         alleged inhuman treatment stems from the appellant's mental illness
         rather than the conduct of the authorities in Afghanistan.


      d) We recognise that an Article 3 claim can in principle succeed in  a
         suicide case.


      e) The appellant has a genuine  fear  of  being  persecuted  and  ill-
         treated in Afghanistan, but  that  fear  is  not  objectively  well
         founded.


      f) Effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of the appellant committing
         suicide are unlikely to be available in Afghanistan. In AS) it  was
         stated at paragraph 142 that there was only  one  dedicated  mental
         health hospital in Kabul and that a study in 2016 referred to there
         being only three trained psychiatrists and ten psychologists in the
         whole of Afghanistan.


      g) The appellant's  lack  of  insight  into  his  mental  health,  his
         reluctance to seek treatment in the UK, and his reliance on  others
         to function outside of the home (as illustrated by his only leaving
         the family home to take his children to school because his wife has
         guided him in doing this) indicates that even if sufficient  mental
         health  provision  were  available  in  Afghanistan,  it   is   not
         reasonably likely that the appellant would engage with and  benefit
         from it.


      h) The appellant does not have family or friends  in  Afghanistan  who
         would support  him.  Whilst  a  sibling  (most  likely,  his  older
         brother) may travel to Afghanistan for a few  weeks,  there  is  no
         family member who will  be  able  to  provide  the  appellant  with
         ongoing or substantial support.  Moreover, even if a family  member
         would spend a substantial period of time in  Afghanistan  with  the
         appellant, he or she would not have the expertise or capability  to
         provide the appellant with the type of "sterile  environment"  that
         will be necessary to prevent suicide.  A family member could assist
         the appellant in accessing appropriate mental health services  but,
         as stated above, it is not reasonably likely that there will be any
         such services to access.

  69. Mr  Chirico  argued  that  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant  are
      analogous to those of the appellants in Y and Z, a case in  which  the
      Court of Appeal, applying J, found that the Article  3  threshold  was
      met because of the high  risk  that  the  appellants  (a  brother  and
      sister) would  commit  suicide  upon  being  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.
      However, there is an important difference between  the  appellant  and
      the appellants in Y and Z, which is that the appellants in Y and Z had
      been subjected to (and their subjective fear of return emanated  from)
      brutal treatment of the most extreme kind by the  authorities  of  the
      returning country. The appellant, in contrast,  although  he  has  had
      traumatic experiences in his life (both as a young child  and  in  his
      journey to the UK from Afghanistan)  has  never  suffered  torture  or
      abuse at the hands of the Afghan State.


  70. Sedley LJ in Y and Z placed considerable weight on the fact  that  the
      appellants in that case had been brutally abused by  the  authorities.
      However, he did not find that it was necessary, in  order  to  succeed
      under Article 3, for there to have been such abuse. What mattered (and
      underpinned the significance  attached  to  the  previous  abuse)  was
      whether the appellants had a genuine subjective fear of return to  Sri
      Lanka (the fifth factor in J, as modified) and whether they  would  be
      able to access appropriate psychiatric care (the sixth  factor).  This
      is clear from paragraph 61, where Sedley LJ stated:

         "The upshot of the material findings and of the expert evidence
         which (for reasons I have given) stood unshaken, is that, although
         some psychiatric care is available in Sri Lanka, these two
         appellants are so traumatised by their experiences, and so
         subjectively terrified at the prospect of return to the scene of
         their torment, that they will not be capable of seeking the
         treatment they need. Assuming (what cannot be certain) that they
         come unscathed through interrogation at the airport, with no known
         family left in Sri Lanka and no home to travel to, the chances of
         their finding a secure base from which to seek the palliative and
         therapeutic care that will keep them from taking their own lives
         are on any admissible view of the evidence remote."

  71. Although the appellant was not abused by the Afghan  authorities,  he,
      like the appellants in Y and Z, genuinely fears the authorities in his
      home country and would not be able to access  appropriate  psychiatric
      care.  Therefore, the fifth and sixth factors in J (as supplemented by
      Y and Z) weigh in the  appellant's  favour  even  though  he  was  not
      tortured and abused by the Afghan authorities.


  72. This is an appeal where there is a very high risk that the  appellant,
      after being returned to Afghanistan, will die or suffer  very  serious
      injury  because  he  will  not  receive  the  psychiatric  care  that,
      according to the undisputed evidence of three psychiatrists,  will  be
      needed to prevent  him  from  committing  (or  attempting  to  commit)
      suicide. We consider also that, even were he not  to  commit  suicide,
      his mental ill-health is  likely  to  affect  his  ability  to  obtain
      accommodation and a means of sustenance to such an  extent  that,  for
      the reasons set out above, he would be driven into destitution in  any
      event.


  73. In these  circumstances,  we  find  that  the  appellant's  return  to
      Afghanistan would reach the high threshold of inhuman  treatment  that
      is prohibited unconditionally by Article 3 ECHR.  We  therefore  allow
      the appeal under Article 3 ECHR.


  74. As we have allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  3  ECHR,  it  is  not
      necessary for  us  to  address  the  appellant's  other  human  rights
      arguments.

Notice of Decision

   1. The decision of the First tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and we set it aside.


   2. We remake the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.


    |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 19 June 2019                  |
                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01982/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 November 2018                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     na
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S Rodger promulgated on 13 June 2016 in  which  she
    dismissed his human rights and asylum appeal against a decision of  the
    Secretary of State made on 19  October  2015  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order, that deportation order  having  been  issued  on  13
    October 2011.  There is a long and complex history to this  case  which
    is set out in Judge Rodger's decision from paragraphs 3 to 26, which is
    not in dispute.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who is married to  a  British
    citizen. They have three children.  On 28 July 2008 the  appellant  was
    convicted at Snaresbrook Crown Court of sexual  activity  with  a  male
    child under 16 for which he received a sentence which was later  varied
    by the Court of Appeal to  a  sentence  of  five  years'  imprisonment.
    After that the appellant was released from custody, he was on  licence.
    This case raises a number of inter-related and complex  issues  arising
    out of the conviction and out of the mental health problems from  which
    both the appellant and his wife suffer.

 3. Briefly, Judge Rodger concluded:-

      1) that the Section 72 certificate should be upheld in  this  case  as
         she was not  satisfied  that  the  relevant  presumption  had  been
         rebutted

      2) that in any event the appellant was not at  risk  of  serious  ill-
         harm, that is harm of a sufficient severity  to  engage  under  the
         Refugee Convention or Article 3 of the Human Rights  Convention  in
         his home area;

      3) that even if that were  so,  there  was  no  real  barrier  to  him
         relocating elsewhere in Afghanistan.

 4. The judge also concluded with regard to the Article 8 aspects  of  this
    case:-

      1) that this was a case which fell outside the Immigration Rules; and

      2) that removal in this case was proportionate.

   5. It is important to note at this juncture that  many  of  the  findings
      with respect to Article 8 were predicated  on  assumptions  about  the
      ability of the appellant to continue to provide support  to  his  wife
      and also her actual medical condition.

   6. Subsequent to Judge Rodger's appeal the appellant sought permission to
      appeal which was refused, first by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  then
      again by the Upper Tribunal.  It was only  after  an  application  for
      permission for a judicial review that a  "Cart"  judicial  review  was
      brought culminating in a grant of permission in the Court  of  Appeal,
      the High Court having refused permission, that this matter was ordered
      to come back to the Upper Tribunal.  It was at that point  that  Vice-
      President Ockelton directed that permission should be granted  on  all
      grounds and it is on that basis that this  decision  comes  before  me
      today.


   7. I am grateful to both representatives today for assisting me  in  what
      is an exceptionally complex set  of  facts  arising  from  the  inter-
      related issues and the lengthy process that has taken for this case to
      come to the Upper Tribunal again on this occasion, both in the earlier
      proceedings ending in 2012 and in the current set of proceedings which
      began in 2015.


   8. In terms of the challenges  to  Judge  Rodger's  decision,  these  fit
      broadly into three categories.  First, that the  judge  erred  in  her
      assessment that the Section 72 certificate was to be  upheld;  second,
      in her assessment that there was no serious harm of risk and/or a risk
      pursuant to Article 15(c) of the Directive; and  third,  in  assessing
      that deportation would, on the facts of this case, be proportionate.


   9. The first challenge proceeds from the submission that the judge  erred
      owing to a mistake of fact with regard to when the  index  offence  of
      which the appellant was convicted had been committed.  The judge found
      that the appellant had not been consistent about this and  this  casts
      doubt, both on his reliability as a witness, carrying over  both  into
      the assessment of the risk on return when the Section  72  certificate
      was rebutted, and in respect of the Article 8 issue.


  10. The judge made a number of findings with regard to this which are  set
      out in her decision, but in brief she assumed that the  appellant  had
      not told the truth about the date  of  the  incident.   She  noted  at
      paragraphs [98] to  [101]  an  inconsistency  as  to  the  date.   The
      appellant was recorded as saying that the offence had taken  place  in
      2006 prior to meeting his wife, whereas the evidence, she said, showed
      that the offence had been committed on 4 September 2007.  It is not in
      dispute that the appellant had met his wife by that point.


  11. On a careful examination of the material, in particular the  probation
      report from 2011 at paragraph 4.4, it appears  that  the  offence  was
      reported on 4 September 2007 which resulted  in  the  appellant  being
      interviewed on 5 September.  It is recorded in paragraph 4.4 that  the
      victim had, in fact, after the incident, returned to  the  shop  on  a
      number of occasions and that  some  months  had  elapsed  between  the
      incident and him reporting it to the police.  The delay in reporting a
      crime is relatively common in the case  of  sexual  offences,  and  it
      appears that the appellant was correct  about  the  offence  occurring
      before he met his wife, and, that the judge  did  not  make  a  proper
      appreciation of all the evidence in concluding without  giving  notice
      to the appellant or his representatives that inferences adverse to him
      were taken from the chronology, about which she was mistaken.


  12. On that basis the finding as to the  discrepancy  in  the  appellant's
      evidence is unsafe and it renders unsafe the Section 72  analysis  for
      that reason.   The  Section  72  assessment  is  also  unsafe  because
      although the judge did go on to consider what the position would be if
      the risk assessment had been correctly assessed as low  (at  paragraph
      [102]), she declined to make any findings stating that she was not  an
      expert with regard to the assessment of risks and in effect failed  to
      make findings of fact on a relevant issue.  It follows from that  that
      the assessment of the  risk  under  Section  72  is  flawed  and  that
      therefore the assessment that the certificate was made  out  and  that
      humanitarian protection could not be considered was incorrect.


  13. A second challenge is made again on the assessment of facts reached by
      the judge as to the risk to the appellant on return to Afghanistan, in
      particular to his home area of Nangarhar and/or  that  the  appellant,
      were he at risk there, could be expected to return  to  Kabul.   There
      are therefore two aspects to this issue.


  14. The evidence regarding the risk came primarily from oral  evidence  of
      witnesses  who  were  called  to  give  evidence  before  the   judge.
      Importantly on this occasion the Presenting Officer did not  challenge
      that evidence and accordingly no  submissions  were  made  as  to  the
      reliability or otherwise of that.  Whilst it may have been open to the
      judge to identify reasons why she did not accept the evidence  of  the
      witnesses, she could do so only by having notified the  appellant  and
      given him an opportunity to address those concerns given that they had
      not been put in doubt at that stage by the respondent  and  these  are
      adversarial proceedings.  It therefore follows that those findings are
      unsafe and must be set aside.


  15. Equally, it is clear that  the  judge's  failure  to  assess  internal
      relocation expressed in the alternative is  also  flawed  because  the
      judge wrongly stated that because the appellant had been excluded from
      protection that internal relocation and the reasons of that  were  not
      matters which needed to be considered.  That is a clear error  of  law
      and for these reasons the findings with respect to the risk on  return
      to Afghanistan are flawed and need to be re-evaluated.


  16. The third area of  concern  raised  in  the  grounds  is  the  judge's
      assessment of the difficulties that  would  flow  in  respect  of  the
      appellant's wife's mental ill-health and consequent ability or lack of
      ability to deal with the children were the appellant to  be  deported.
      The judge had a number of medical reports before  her,  but  noted  at
      paragraph [121] that the  wife  appeared  to  be  comfortable  in  the
      presence of other family members that came  into  the  room,  did  not
      appear to express any stress or concern, and did not appear to express
      a distress or concern when there was a direct reference to her  mental
      health condition and possible consequences.


  17.  In  essence,  these  findings  which  were  taken  into  account,  in
      particular at paragraph [123] and again at paragraphs [157] and  [159]
      of assessing the risk on return of the protective elements that  there
      may or may not be are flawed, because they are flawed from what is  in
      effect an assessment of the appellant's wife's demeanour which, as the
      Court of Appeal has recently indicated, is something which is not safe
      and should not have been done.


  18. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the findings with respect to  Article
      8 must also, for these reasons and the other  reasons  given,  be  set
      aside.


  19. With regard to how this should be done and how this decision should be
      remade, I bear in mind the policy of the guidance whereby it is  often
      the case that where there is an extensive fact-finding  exercise  that
      the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I  conclude
      that that would be inappropriate in this  case  for  several  reasons.
      First, the history of this case where there has already  been,  albeit
      an earlier appeal, consideration of the matter by the Upper  Tribunal.
      Second, this is a particularly complex matter which will  require  the
      evaluation of the mental health  and  possibly  the  capacity  of  the
      appellant and his wife which will need careful consideration of  their
      ability properly to give evidence and consideration with regard to the
      relevant guidance as to what steps should be put in  place  to  ensure
      that their testimony  is  properly  received  and  considered  by  the
      Tribunal.


  20. There are also a number of complex inter-relating legal  issues  which
      cross-cut between Article 3, Article  8  and  the  Refugee  Convention
      which  cannot  easily  be  teased  out  and  which  will   require   a
      considerable analysis.  The issue also raises a number of issues which
      arise out of the recent decision of the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)
      with regard to the proper approach to be taken where the index offence
      as is here, an offence where  the  sentence  is  over  four  years  in
      duration.


  21. Taking all of these considerations into account  I  conclude  that  it
      would be appropriate in the facts of this case to retain it within the
      Upper Tribunal on a date to be set.


Directions


   1. The appeal will be set down with a time estimate of two days.


   2. The appellant is to produce updated witness statements of any  witness
      on whose evidence he seeks to rely to be served, such statements to be
      served 14 days before the hearing.


   3. The appellant is at liberty to adduce further expert  and  documentary
      evidence, such evidence to be served 14 days before the hearing.


   4. The appellant must produce and serve a consolidated bundle to  include
      all the material previously served and on  which  he  still  seeks  to
      rely, and also any new material. It will  be  assumed  that  that  the
      appellant no longer  wishes  to  rely  on  any  material  not  in  the
      consolidated bundle. The consolidated bundle must be  served  14  days
      before the hearing.


   5. The Upper Tribunal would be assisted by the production of  a  schedule
      of issues to be agreed so far as is  possible  by  both  parties,  the
      schedule to be served 5 days before the hearing.


   6. Both parties must draft and serve skeleton arguments 5 days before the
      hearing


Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
