

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01916/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 February 2017                         |On 3 February 2017             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     ZAM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 11 February 2016. Her  appeal  against  this
       was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Myers  ("the  Judge")
       following a hearing on 18 October 2016.

    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify ZAM or any of her family members. This direction
       applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with
       this direction could give rise to contempt of court  proceedings.  I
       do so in order to preserve the anonymity of ZAM's children.

    3. In summary the Judge found that the Appellant  had  not  established
       she had been the victim of ill treatment by her family,  had  no  ID
       documents, had no contact  with  her  family  in  Sulemanya  in  the
       Kurdish Autonomous Region of Iraq (KAZ), or that  her  family  would
       have any adverse interest in her or  ability  in  finding  her.  The
       Judge found that it would not be unduly harsh for her to  internally
       relocate if  she  wished,  and  there  would  be  no  insurmountable
       obstacles to family life continuing for the family in the KAZ. It is
       in the best interests of her child (then aged 14 months) to be  with
       his parents, but it was a matter for the parents if the  child  went
       with  her  or  stayed  here  with  his  father.  There  was  nothing
       compelling such as to engage Article 8,  and  there  was  no  strong
       likelihood that an application for entry clearance would necessarily
       succeed.

The grant of permission


    4. Judge Astle granted permission to appeal (28 November 2016)  on  the
       ground that it is arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to
       consider  the  Appellant's  individual  situation  when  considering
       relocation. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted.


Appellant's position

    5. The Judge materially erred in concluding that ZAM could relocate  to
       the KAZ with her British child and while heavily pregnant. The Judge
       had ignored  the  fact  that  her  child  was  entitled  to  British
       nationality. ZAM could not enter the KAZ as she had  not  been  pre-
       cleared (AA  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC))
       headnote [17]. ZAM's son did not originate from the  KAZ  and  could
       only stay 10 days (AA headnote [19]).  The  Judge  did  not  address
       ZAM's difficulty in getting to the KAZ, getting work given she had a
       young child and was heavily pregnant, or  what  assistance  she  had
       available. There was no "stand alone" Article 3 assessment.


Respondent's position

    6. It was submitted in the Rule 24 notice (12 December 2016) that there
       was insufficient evidence the child was British, but if he  was,  he
       would not be forcibly removed. Adequate reasons were given  for  the
       findings on internal relocation and failure to establish she had not
       brought her ID. There is no reason to suppose she would not be  pre-
       cleared for entry to the KAZ.


    7. Mrs Petterson submitted that ZAM would not have been  removed  until
       declared medically fit following her confinement.  Her  older  child
       could remain with his father. She accepted  that  the  Judge  should
       have considered the impact this would have had  on  his  ability  to
       work and consequently whether that would  adversely  impact  on  his
       ability  to  earn  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  relevant  financial
       threshold to support a spouse entry clearance application.


Discussion


    8. In relation to the Article 3 claim, I am satisfied  that  the  Judge
       materially erred in not considering  the  adverse  impact  on  ZAM's
       ability to  work  in  having  at  least  one  very  young  child  as
       exacerbated by the statistical likelihood she would  have  a  second
       infant to care for, given the successful birth rates, and she  being
       9 months pregnant when the Judge heard the appeal. The fact that she
       had failed to establish a lack of contact with or  adverse  interest
       from her family did not equate  to  a  finding  that  she  had  that
       support available to her. It was a material error of law to find not
       to  make  positive  findings  prior  to  determining   whether   her
       individual circumstances were such that it would be unduly harsh  to
       expect her to internally relocate.


    9.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  Judge  materially  erred  in  not
       considering specifically whether her (then) only child would  obtain
       pre clearance assessment for entry to the KAZ as he originated  from
       there and there was no reason to suppose his identity would  not  be
       established and he would not be pre-cleared.

   10.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  Judge  materially  erred  in  not
       considering specifically whether her (then) only  child  would  lose
       the benefits  of  British  nationality  as  it  had  not  then  been
       established that he was a British national.

   11. I agree with Mrs Petterson that the Judge should have considered the
       impact the older child remaining here would have had on his father's
       ability to work and consequently whether that would adversely impact
       on his ability to earn sufficient to satisfy the relevant  financial
       threshold to support a  spouse  entry  clearance  application.  This
       amounts to a material error of law as it  affects  the  question  of
       whether it would be reasonable to require them to make a decision as
       to whether she should separate her from her child.


   12. Both representatives agreed that the matter should  be  remitted  to
       the First-tier Tribunal for an assessment of the  Article  3  and  8
       claims only and in light of the findings  summarised  in  the  first
       sentence of [3] above which stand. The factual matrix has of  course
       have changed in the interim given the birth of her second child  and
       as by the time of the re-hearing the older child may  have  obtained
       his British nationality.


Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the  Article  3  and  8  decisions,  but  not  the  asylum
decision which stands.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  rehearing  on  the
    Article 3 and 8 matters only, with the matter to be heard  by  a  Judge
    other than Judge Myers.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
3 February 2017
