
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01784/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On : 13 January 2017                 |On: 16 January 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    hAOF
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire, instructed through Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision  of  2
February 2016 to refuse her protection and human rights claim, further to  a
decision to deport her made on 22 June 2015.

The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 13 July 1961.  Her  immigration
history is long and protracted but I shall  endeavour  to  summarise  it  as
follows.


The appellant arrived in the UK initially from Rome in April  1986,  in  the
name of AS, having been sentenced to a term  of  imprisonment  in  Italy  in
1985 for providing false information and having been charged  for  receiving
a stolen British visitor visa. She was  given  leave  to  enter  and  remain
until April 1987, following which she made an unsuccessful  application  for
leave to remain on the basis of her marriage to a British citizen,  WS,  and
was then issued with a notice of intention to deport. She  appealed  against
that decision, including an asylum claim in her grounds of appeal,  and  her
appeal was dismissed. Her marriage to WS was annulled and in  December  1993
she married TJO, also a British citizen, and made an application  for  leave
to remain on the basis of her marriage in  January  1004.  That  application
was refused and a signed Deportation Order was issued and served on  her  on
2 June 1995. On 6 June 1995 she was deported to Ghana as AO.


On 6 September 1995  the  appellant  returned  to  the  UK  in  a  different
identity, as HS, with  a  different  date  of  birth.  She  married  another
British citizen, ECF, and applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of  her
marriage, as HF. Her application was refused and a notice  of  intention  to
deport her was issued. She appealed against the  decision,  claiming  asylum
again, but then withdrew her claim and was unsuccessful in  her  deportation
appeal. On 12 August 1999 a Deportation Order was signed against her as  HF,
which was served on 21 February 2000.


On 11 May 2000 the appellant was convicted of indecent assault on a 16  year
old boy with cerebral palsy  whilst  working  at  a  hospital  and  she  was
sentenced to 15 months imprisonment. Her pervious identity  and  deportation
came to light whilst she was in prison and she was  served  with  a  removal
notice as an illegal entrant in breach of a deportation order. She  appealed
against the removal decision, raising human rights grounds which  were  then
considered, together with further representations, as a human rights  claim.
Her appeal was heard and dismissed in October 2005 and the appellant  became
appeal rights exhausted in April 2006. On 31 January  2014  a  liability  to
deportation notice was issued to  the  appellant  and  on  22  June  2015  a
decision was made to deport her. Further  representations  were  made  in  a
section 120 notice, on family and private life grounds under Article  8  and
on medical and protection based grounds under Article 3. On 2 February  2016
the respondent refused the appellant's protection  and  human  rights  claim
and the appellant appealed against that decision.

In refusing her claim, in her decision of 2 February  2016,  the  respondent
concluded that the appellant was at no risk on return  to  Ghana,  that  she
was excluded from humanitarian protection because of her criminal  offending
and that her removal to Ghana would not breach Articles 2 or 3 of the  ECHR.
With regard to Article 8, the respondent noted that the appellant had  three
children, CS born in 1988 (whose father was WS), and AF born in  March  1997
and SF born in August 2001, both of whom were  daughters  of  the  appellant
and ECF. The respondent noted that CS and AF were  no  longer  children.  As
regards SF, the respondent accepted  that  the  appellant  had  at  least  a
limited relationship with her and considered that it  would  not  be  unduly
harsh for her to relocate Ghana or to remain  in  the  UK  with  her  father
whilst the appellant was deported to Ghana.  The  respondent  accepted  that
the appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  ECF  but
considered that  the  relationship  was  formed  when  she  was  in  the  UK
unlawfully. In the absence of any evidence  that  the  appellant's  previous
marriage had been dissolved, and that her  marriage  to  ECF  was  therefore
valid, ECF was considered only  as  her  partner.  The  respondent  did  not
accept that it would be unduly harsh for ECF to live in Ghana or  to  remain
in the UK whilst the appellant was deported to  Ghana.  The  respondent  did
not, therefore, accept that the appellant  met  the  criteria  in  paragraph
399(a) or (b) and neither was it accepted that she could meet  the  criteria
in paragraph 399A on the basis of private life, given that she had  been  in
the UK in breach of  a  Deportation  Order  and  that  there  were  no  very
significant obstacles to  her  integration  into  Ghana.  Consideration  was
given  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  the  main  carer   to   her
granddaughter KF, the daughter of AF, who was subject to a Child  Protection
Plan under London Borough of Newham owing to concerns as to the  ability  of
AF to care for her. Newham Social Services had assessed the appellant  as  a
suitable special guardian for KF and  the  long-term  plan  was  for  KF  to
remain in her care, although there was an outstanding application by ECF  to
be granted a Special Guardianship in light  of  the  appellant's  precarious
immigration status. The  respondent  considered  that  there  were  no  very
compelling circumstances outweighing the public interest in the  appellant's
deportation.

The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision was  heard  in  the
First-tier Tribunal on 9 September 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Moore.
An adjournment application was made on the basis of uncertainty  as  to  the
care arrangements for KF and  the  Tribunal  was  informed  that  the  local
authorities had reluctantly supported the making of a  Special  Guardianship
Order application in favour of  only  ECF,  given  the  uncertainly  of  the
appellant's immigration status and the fact that she may  be  deported.  The
adjournment request was refused and the appeal proceeded,  on  human  rights
grounds only. The judge heard from the appellant, her husband  ECF  and  her
daughter SF (aged 15). The evidence given before the Tribunal was that  KF's
mother AF was not permitted to see KF unsupervised due  to  substance  abuse
and that KF had therefore been living with the  appellant  and  her  husband
and was like their daughter. It was claimed that  ECF  would  be  unable  to
provide adequate care for KF as well as SF if the  appellant  were  deported
as he was the sole breadwinner and worked full-time and feared that  KF  and
SF would end up in care.  In relation to the index  offence,  the  appellant
maintained her innocence and it was noted that she had  not  been  convicted
of any other offences since then. 16 years had  elapsed  since  the  offence
and the appellant was not a risk to the public. The  judge  noted  that  the
appellant was not pursuing the  grounds  of  appeal  based  on  her  medical
condition, which she had unsuccessfully pursued in her previous  deportation
appeal in October 2005. He gave consideration to the findings  made  by  the
judge in that previous appeal.

Judge Moore considered the provisions of paragraph 399(a) and  (b).  He  did
not accept that it would be unduly harsh for SF and KF to remain in  the  UK
whilst the appellant was deported, as they could remain  with  ECF.  He  did
not accept the evidence of ECF that he would  be  unable  to  care  for  the
children. He did not accept that it would be unduly harsh for ECF to  remain
in the UK if the appellant was deported. With regard to paragraph  399A  the
judge noted that the appellant had not been lawfully present in the  UK  for
most of her life, he did not accept that she  was  socially  and  culturally
integrated  in  the  UK  and  did  not  accept  that  there  would  be  very
significant obstacles to her integration in Ghana. The judge did not  accept
that the situation with KF was a very  compelling  circumstance  outweighing
the public interest in the appellant's deportation. He dismissed the  appeal
on all grounds.


The appellant sought permission to appeal  Judge  Moore's  decision  to  the
Upper  Tribunal  on  the  grounds  that  he  had  failed  to   give   proper
consideration to the rights of the  appellant's  husband  and  children  and
that his consideration of  the  best  interests  of  the  children  was  not
realistic.


Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
was subsequently granted on 5 December 2016 by Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer
on the grounds that the  judge  had  arguably  failed  to  assess  the  best
interests of the appellant's daughter and granddaughter and  had  failed  to
consider the impact of the appellant's deportation on her  granddaughter  as
at the date of the hearing.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before me on 13 January 2017. Mr  Claire  sought  to  adduce
further evidence, namely a draft order of the East London  Family  Court  to
the effect that a Special Guardianship Order was being  made  in  favour  of
ECF following judgment of the Court on 25 November 2016, a letter from  KF's
social  worker  at  Newham  Children's  Services  confirming  cessation   of
involvement  with  the  family  further  to  the  making  of   the   Special
Guardianship Order and a letter addressed to the  appellant  confirming  the
same. However, as I advised  Mr  Claire,  that  was  only  relevant  if  the
decision of Judge Moore was set aside and was  to  be  remade  and  was  not
relevant to the error of law issue.

Mr Claire relied on an email exchange at page T1 of the respondent's  appeal
bundle in regard to the care of KF, referring to the current  care  plan  in
which the appellant and ECF were her carers and suggesting  that  that  care
plan would have  to  change  if  the  appellant  were  deported.  Mr  Claire
submitted that the assessment of KF's circumstances if  the  appellant  were
deported was so stark that it could only  lead  to  one  conclusion,  namely
that it would be unduly harsh for KF if the appellant were deported  as  she
would be put into care. He submitted that Judge Moore had not  given  proper
consideration to the consequences of the appellant's  deportation,  on  both
KF and SF. The judge had  also  failed  to  consider  that  the  appellant's
offence had been committed 16 years previously and that  she  had  committed
no further offences since then.


Mr Kotas objected to the last point made by Mr Claire as it had  not  formed
part of the grounds of appeal nor the basis for  the  grant  of  permission,
which was restricted solely to the consideration of the  best  interests  of
the children. Mr Kotas submitted that the grounds and  submissions  made  by
Mr Claire were simply a disagreement with the judge's  decision.  The  judge
had given specific consideration to KF's situation at [46] and [47]  and  to
SF's situation at [44]. He had conducted a balancing  exercise  in  consider
the issue  of  "unduly  harsh",  as  consistent  with  the  approach  in  MA
(Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the application of) v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration
and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705, which approved KMO  (section
117 - unduly harsh) [2015] UKUT 543. The judge was entitled to  conclude  as
he did.


I advised the parties that  I  found  no  error  of  law  in  Judge  Moore's
decision and was upholding the decision. My reasons  for  so  doing  are  as
follows.

Consideration and findings.

Before turning to the substantive matters I have noted that  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Plimmer, in granting permission, omitted to deal with  the  timeliness
issue that had arisen with respect to the permission application before  the
First-tier Tribunal. This was not raised at the  hearing  me,  but  for  the
sake of completeness it needs to be addressed and I have therefore  extended
time in relation to the permission application in light of  the  explanation
provided by the appellant and in the interests of justice, pursuant to  rule
21(7) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

I also agree with Mr Kotas that it was  not  open  to  Mr  Claire  to  raise
further grounds in his submissions which had not formed part of the  grounds
of appeal or the grant of permission. The basis upon  which  permission  was
granted was in relation to the judge's consideration of the  best  interests
of the children. That was the relevant issue before me.

The appellant's case is that Judge Moore erred by  failing  to  give  proper
consideration to the best interests of the children, SF and KF.  However  it
seems to me that the judge plainly did give full and  careful  consideration
to the best interests of the  children.  Indeed  the  judge's  decision  was
largely devoted to that particular issue,  with  his  consideration  of  the
matter commencing at [43] subsequent to his consideration  of  the  findings
made by the Tribunal in the appellant's previous deportation  appeal  and  a
consideration of the nature of the appellant's offending.

At [41] and [44] the judge considered  the  circumstances  relating  to  SF,
noting at [41], in terms  of  the  principles  in  Ruiz  Zambrano  (European
citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-34/09, that the  appellant's  deportation  would
not result in SF being required to leave the UK as she could remain  in  the
UK living with her father ECF. The judge concluded, at [44], that  it  would
not be unduly harsh for SF to remain in the UK without her  mother,  and  he
gave cogent reasons for so concluding, rejecting the claim made by ECF  that
he would not be able to care for her.


At  [46]  and  [47]  the  judge  gave   detailed   consideration   to   KF's
circumstances, considering in particular the care  protection  plan  put  in
place by Newham Social Services and the correspondence  referred  to  by  Mr
Claire at Annex T in regard to KF's care. Mr Claire submission  was  to  the
effect that the appellant's deportation would result  in  KF  having  to  go
into care, which he said could not  be  found  to  be  anything  other  than
unduly harsh, but the evidence he referred to at Annex T  and  the  evidence
before the judge did not confirm that that was the  case.  On  the  contrary
the judge noted the evidence that Newham Social Services had  supported  the
making of a Special Guardianship Order application in favour of  ECF  alone,
given the uncertainty of the appellant's immigration  status  and  the  fact
that she may be deported, suggesting that KF could  remain  in  ECF's  care.
The judge also noted, in any event, the relevance  of  the  local  authority
being aware of KF's  needs  and  the  possibility  of  the  appellant  being
deported so that plans would be put in place for her care if that  occurred.



Furthermore, and as Mr Kotas submitted, Mr Claire's approach was  consistent
with the case of MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") [2015] UKUT  435,  which  he
had relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal. That  case  had  since  been
discredited in MA  (Pakistan)  in  favour  of  KMO,  in  which  the  correct
approach to the question of "unduly harsh" was  not  to  consider  the  best
interests of the child as determinative, but to consider it  as  part  of  a
balancing exercise, albeit as a primary consideration. That is exactly  what
the judge did at  [48].  There  were  clearly  significant  public  interest
considerations in the appellant's case weighing against her,  including  her
seriously adverse immigration history and breach  of  a  deportation  order,
her use of different identities and her criminal offending.  The  judge  was
entitled to consider these factors when assessing the  question  of  "unduly
harsh", although it is  clear  that  the  best  interests  of  the  children
remained in the forefront of his mind and a primary consideration.

It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  judge  gave  full   and   careful
consideration to all relevant matters and  reached  a  conclusion  that  was
open to him on the evidence before him. For all of these reasons I  conclude
that the grounds of appeal do not disclose any errors of law in  the  First-
tier Tribunal's decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law,  such
that the decision has to be set aside. I do not set aside the decision.  The
decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal therefore stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  I  maintain  that
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.






                               Signed   Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
