
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01766/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 7 February 2020                            |On 16 March 2020             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                           Randjar Khalid Mohammed
                           Anonymity NOT DIRECTED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Pennington (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. On 11 February 2019 the Secretary of State refused the claimant's
   application for international protection which he had made on behalf of
   himself, his wife and the couple's two infant children. He appealed to
   the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) but in a decision of 6 May 2019 it
   dismissed the appeal. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was
   subsequently granted and, on 30 December 2019, I set aside the tribunal's
   decision because it contained errors of law and I gave directions for the
   decision to be remade by the Upper Tribunal after a further hearing. In
   doing so, I preserved nothing of the tribunal's findings and conclusions.
   That hearing took place on 7 February 2020. What follows amounts to my
   explanation as to how I have remade the decision.

2. Shorn of all but the essentials, the background circumstances are as
   follows: the claimant is a national of Iraq and is Kurdish. He was born
   on 1 November 1983. His home area in Iraq is Kirkuk. He is married. His
   wife is also both Iraqi and Kurdish. She was born on 1 January 1987. The
   children were born on 12 August 2014 and 14 November 2017 respectively.
   The eldest was born in Iraq and the youngest was born in the United
   Kingdom (UK).  Both children are nationals of Iraq and neither is a UK
   national.

3. The claimant, his wife and the child who had then been born, left Iraq
   in August of 2016 and travelled to Turkey and then to Italy. There is a
   record of the claimant having been fingerprinted by the Italian
   authorities on 7, 19 and 22 September 2016. He and his family left Italy
   on 22 September 2016 and travelled by train to France and then by lorry
   to the UK. The claimant says that during his journey he was under the
   control of an agent. He entered the UK illegally on 1 December 2016,
   along with his family, and he claimed international protection. As to why
   he asserted a need for such protection, he explained that he had been
   educated at a University in Erbil (which is located in the part of Iraq
   under Kurdish administrative control and which I shall now call the IKR)
   and that he had then worked as a lawyer in Kirkuk. Whilst doing so he was
   instructed to assist a man called Abdullah who was embroiled in a land
   dispute with a man called Kattaf. Kattaf is not Kurdish, is a member of
   the Jubur tribe and is closely related to a former Iraqi vice-president.
   On 27 July 2014 some men came to the office where the claimant worked and
   told him it would be in his interests to withdraw from the case. Indeed,
   he says he was told that if he did not do so he and his family would be
   killed. He also says he was severely beaten on that occasion (paragraph
   13 of his witness statement of 17 April 2019). He initially decided to
   withdraw from the case but resumed working on it because he needed the
   money and because given the instability then prevailing in the area due
   to the activities of the organisation sometimes called ISIL, work was in
   short supply. But on 1 October 2015 armed men raided his home. He says he
   and his family were able to flee via the rooftop of his house and that he
   went to the home of a friend before going to Erbil.

4. The claimant says that, in due course, he started to work as a lawyer in
   Erbil. Whilst doing so, he started to assist a man who was embroiled in a
   land dispute with a man called Fatim who he describes as a high-ranking
   member of the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP). But at the time, he says,
   he did not fully understand the seniority of Fatim's position. On 3
   August 2016 his friend told him not to go to his office because a group
   of men had raided it and had been looking for him. They were threatening.
   They returned the following day, when they were armed, and they beat
   others and took away the office manager. The claimant says he realised he
   was at significant risk and so obtained the services of an agent so that
   he and his family could leave Iraq.

5. Additionally, the claimant says he has annoyed various politicians in
   Iraq through his writing of articles which complain about corruption and
   injustice. He would put his written views on his Facebook page under an
   alias but there came a time when his Facebook account was hacked.

6. The above represented the claimant's position before me. At the hearing,
   he adopted witness statements of 17 April 2019 and 31 January 2020. He
   said his close family members had left Iraq. His eldest child is now at
   school in the UK. He could not relocate to the IKR because the persons
   who wish to harm him have contacts there. He had studied in the IKR but
   not in Baghdad. He has his CSID card (an important Iraqi identification
   document). He had not claimed asylum in Italy because he had been under
   the control of the agent and because he thought those who wish to harm
   him might find him there. The same was true of France.

7.  In addition to the claimant's account of the events said to underpin
   his claim for asylum as given orally and in writing, I have had the
   benefit of 3 bundles of documents prepared by his representatives
   (including the helpful consolidated bundle sent on 29 January 2020); a
   bundle prepared by the Secretary of State for the purposes of the
   original hearing before the tribunal but relied upon before me; and
   helpful oral submissions from each representative.

8. Ms Pennington told me that it was her case that the claimant was
   entitled to international protection on asylum grounds; on humanitarian
   protection grounds (including under article 15c of Qualification
   Directive 2011/95/EU; and was also entitled to leave under article 3 and
   article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) albeit that
   she did not rely on any of the provisions of the Immigration Rules in an
   article 8 context. I have approached the case accordingly.

9. In considering the international protection issues, I have reminded
   myself that the burden of proof is located with the claimant and that the
   standard of proof is the lower standard often described as the "real
   risk" test. That is so with respect to asylum, humanitarian protection
   and article 3 of the ECHR. As to article 8, I have assessed matters on
   the basis that, once again, the burden is located with the claimant and
   that the standard is one of a balance of probabilities.

10. As to my approach to the evidence and the way in which I must make my
   factual findings, I have considered all of the evidence as one composite
   whole before making any findings, notwithstanding that certain of the
   considerations are (inevitably) set out sequentially below. I have
   reminded myself throughout, of the lower standard of proof applicable in
   the context of international protection. I have reminded myself that I
   should be cautious in rejecting as incredible an account offered by an
   inexperienced and anxious asylum seeker.

11. Having done all the above I have concluded that I am not able to accept
   the claimant as a credible witness. I shall now explain why I have
   reached that view.

12. The claimant, as noted above, has said that notwithstanding some delay
   and hesitation on his part, he resumed work on Abdullah's case against
   Kattif because of a pressing need to earn and because of the scarcity of
   other work. According to his account, the decision to resume work on the
   case was made against a background of his having been threatened and
   severely beaten and a threat having been made against his family.
   However, I do not accept that he would have done so if he had actually
   been beaten and if his family had been threatened. Even if not so
   concerned about his own safety he would surely have been concerned for
   his wife and child. Further, the fact he had been severely beaten would,
   if true, have demonstrated that those seeking to harm him were prepared
   to follow up threats with action. In those circumstances I conclude that
   he did not receive such threats from Kattif, persons associated with him,
   or the tribe of which Kattif is said to be a member. I appreciate the
   claimant has provided some photographs of himself which do show some
   physical injuries. But there is no independent confirmation as to when
   they were taken and injuries such as those shown can arise through
   numerous causes. So, that evidence attracts only limited weight. The
   claimant's contentions in this regard are not credible.

13. The claimant says his family home was raided by "five masked armed men"
   (paragraph 16 of the witness statement of 17 April 2019). Nevertheless,
   he says he, his wife and his then very young child were able to escape
   unscathed. He seeks to explain this by pointing out that houses in Iraq
   including his and neighbouring houses, have rooftops attached to one
   another and that they were, therefore, able to make their way to a
   neighbour's house (paragraph 5 of the witness statement of 31 January
   2020). However, taking an overview, it is really not credible that three
   people including a young child would be able to escape, with such ease, a
   determined effort to harm them (or to at least harm the claimant) by five
   armed individuals. I do not find this part of the claimant's account to
   be credible and, even to the lower standard, I reject it.

14.  The claimant then recounts not dissimilar difficulties whilst working
   as a lawyer in Erbil. To my mind, someone who had had such acute
   difficulties consequent upon involvement in land disputes would be most
   cautious in getting involved in further litigation of a similar nature. I
   do note the claimant says that he did not appreciate the extent of
   Fatim's importance and influence as a high-ranking member of the KDP at
   the time he became involved in the litigation. But I do not believe him.
   He is clearly an intelligent man and, according to his account,
   sufficiently interested in political affairs to write articles and/or
   express views about corruption and injustice on his Facebook page. He was
   living in the IKR at the time and, of course, that is where the KDP has
   influence. Against that background I believe that he would have known,
   when invited to get involved in the litigation, who Fatim was and what
   influence he had. I believe he would, therefore, have declined to get
   involved in light of his earlier claimed experiences. Further, if Fatim
   and those associated with him had intended to harm the claimant I do not
   think they would have chosen to raid the office where he worked at a time
   when he was not present, thereby warning him of the danger he was in and
   alerting him so that he could contemplate an escape. It would not have
   taken much for them to verify whether he was there or not and, if not,
   when he would be there, before taking action. Again, this part of the
   account is not credible.

15. The claimant attended a screening interview. According to the record,
   he was asked to briefly explain all the reasons why he was seeking
   asylum. He said "I cannot return as me and my family are unsafe. We face
   persecution. It's all political issues. We fear people in authority". He
   did not, according to the record, say anything about being at risk due to
   his work as a lawyer and his consequent involvement in land disputes. It
   is right to be cautious when considering the content of a screening
   interview as part of an assessment as to credibility. There are good
   reasons for that. A claimant might be tired and unprepared when such an
   interview takes place. The purpose of such an interview is not to afford
   an opportunity to set out the basis for a claim in any detail. But
   nevertheless, the lack of reference to land disputes is surprising. This
   is far from a determinative point but I do regard the claimant's
   credibility as being damaged to an extent by his failure to refer to such
   matters at all.

16. The claimant did not seek international protection in either Italy or
   France. That is behaviour which potentially falls within the scope of
   section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act
   2004. Section 8 does not require disbelief and is not at all
   determinative with respect to a credibility assessment. But behaviour
   specified therein must be taken into account. The claimant accepts that
   he did not claim in either country. His explanations for not doing so
   have been set out above. But I do not accept them. One reason he gave was
   that the people he fears might track him down in one or other of those
   countries because they are "Schengen countries" so he could be pursued.
   But even if his claimed enemies might be able to gain access to Italy or
   France with ease, it is very difficult to see how, in such large
   countries with such large populations, they could even begin to make
   realistic efforts to track him down. It might be said he would have a
   subjective fear of such happening even if it were not objectively likely
   but, again, he is an intelligent man and I find that, having reached
   Italy and then France, he would have felt safe. The other explanation was
   that he was under the control of an agent and that, as I understand it,
   the agent did not want him to claim in either country because the further
   he was taken the more money he would have to pay. But I do not accept
   that. If the agent was as controlling as claimed and wanted more money he
   could have simply taken it from the claimant without transporting him any
   further, and absent any financial incentive, it is difficult to see why
   an agent would be bothered whether the claimant ceased his journey in
   Italy or not. So, the claimant's credibility is damaged by his failure to
   claim in France or Italy and by his willingness to provide misleading
   explanations about why he did not do so.

17. I do appreciate the claimant has provided some photographic and
   documentary evidence and I have considered that along with and at the
   same time as the various other considerations I have mentioned. I have
   already referred to the photographs showing injuries. As to other items,
   it does not seem to me that the photographs of the houses take matters
   further because whatever the setting out of the houses the claimed escape
   from five armed men is incredible. Whilst court documents have been
   provided, the content does not make it clear that the claimant was
   involved in any proceedings and in any event, his lack of general
   credibility impacts adversely upon the weight which can be given to them.



18. Having found the claimant not to be credible, I will now set out and
   where necessary explain my relevant factual findings.

19. I find the claimant is Iraqi, is Kurdish, is from Kirkuk, has been
   educated at a University, and has worked in Iraq as a lawyer. Such is
   accepted by the Secretary of State. But I find the claimant has not
   encountered any difficulties as a result of his becoming involved in
   litigation concerning land disputes. As such, he is not at risk at the
   hands of Kattaf, the Jubur tribe, Fatim, the KDP, or any other individual
   or organisation. I find that whilst the claimant might have expressed
   views anonymously through social media, there is no reason to suppose he
   has been targeted for this, still less that he would upon return now,
   given the passage of time. As to matters relevant to article 8, I find he
   and his family have resided in the UK since December 2016, that his
   eldest child is now at school, that the youngest child was born in the UK
   and has not known any other country, and that the claimant and his wife
   have obtained a number of ESOL qualifications since coming to the UK.

20. Having made my findings, I must now remake the decision in the case in
   light of them. It follows from the above findings that the claimant has
   failed to establish entitlement to international protection on the basis
   of claimed risk at the hands of the individuals and any associates either
   tribal or political, referred to above. That leaves any risk under 15c.
   As to that, the claimant is from Kirkuk. It had been previously decided
   in an earlier Country Guidance decision of the Upper Tribunal that Kirkuk
   was in a "contested area" and that there was a 15c risk because of that.
   But in SMO, KSP and IM (Article 15c; identity documents) Iraq CG [2019]
   UKUT 00400 (IAC) which replaces all previous country guidance on Iraq, it
   was decided that, generally speaking and subject to specific exceptions
   not including Kirkuk, the internal armed conflict which continued in Iraq
   was not so intense, as a general matter, to lead to a conclusion that
   there are substantial grounds for believing that any civilian returned to
   Iraq would, solely on account of his or her presence there, face a real
   risk of being subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious
   harm within the scope of article 15c. It was said that the situation in
   Kirkuk did require a fact-sensitive sliding scale assessment and it was
   said certain considerations might be relevant to such an assessment. But
   it was not specifically argued before me that any of those considerations
   weighed in favour of this claimant in his particular situation. Anyway,
   in looking at them, there is nothing to suggest he would be thought to
   have links with ISIL, he would not obviously fall within an ethnic
   minority category in Kirkuk given that he is Kurdish, he is not an LGBTI
   individual nor a member of the humanitarian or medical staff of a Western
   organisation, and it is not asserted that he or any family member has any
   significant disability. Whilst he may once have made criticisms of those
   in authority via Facebook, that was done anonymously and some years ago.
   So, I find he will be able to return to Kirkuk without any 15c risk
   arising for himself or any family member. As to article 3, it was not
   argued that he could rely upon it due to prevailing social or economic
   conditions. And in the decision of the Upper Tribunal in what I shall now
   simply call SMO, it was said that, generally speaking, circumstances were
   not such as to lead to an article 3 breach even in the formerly
   "contested areas" of which Kirkuk is one. I am sure that life can be very
   tough in Iraq but the claimant is well educated and it is accepted he has
   worked as a lawyer in the past. He has his CSID card so will be able to
   travel within and access services in Iraq., I would conclude, therefore,
   that he is not able to successfully rely upon article 3 of the ECHR on
   the basis of prevailing country conditions in Iraq generally or
   specifically in Kirkuk.

21. The above means I must conclude the claimant is able to return to his
   home area of Kirkuk with his family without the risk he claims to fear
   arising and that he has not shown entitlement to international protection
   on any basis. Since he can return to Kirkuk I do not need to consider
   internal flight.

22. That leaves only article 8 of the ECHR outside of the Immigration
   Rules. Ms Pennington reminded me of the content of section 55 of the
   Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. She says, and I agree,
   that I must consider that provision and consequently what is in the best
   interests of the children, as a key component of my article 8 assessment.



23. As to more general considerations, the claimant and his wife have been
   in the UK since the end of 2016. They have, however, spent most of their
   lives in Iraq. They speak Kurdish-Sorani which is widely spoken amongst
   the Kurdish population in Iraq. They are familiar with life in Iraq.
   Further, given my general credibility finding I am not able to accept
   that they will be entirely without family support upon return. Turning
   then to the children, it cannot be said they have put down extensive
   roots independently of their parents though I do take account of the fact
   that the eldest child is attending school. Given the ongoing instability
   in Iraq as compared to the stability of life in the UK I would accept
   that it would be in the best interests of the children, if making a
   simple comparison, to remain in the UK so long as their parents do so
   too. But the point of real importance is that it is in their best
   interests to remain with their parents. In looking at the factors
   mentioned in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
   2002, the maintenance of immigration controls is in the public interest,
   and neither of the children fall within the definition of "qualifying
   child". I would accept that on the facts of this case article 8 is
   engaged but, ultimately the matter boils down to an assessment as to
   proportionality and taking all the above into account I would conclude
   return to Iraq would be proportionate.

24. In light of the above, in remaking the decision, I must dismiss the
   claimant's appeal from the Secretary of State's decision of 11 February
   2019.

25. Finally, I have not directed anonymity. The tribunal did not do so and
   I was not invited to do so by the claimant's representative.

Decision

The claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed.

Signed:                                      Dated: 12 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
