
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01949/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11 July 2017                              |On 20 July 2017                |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Patnya, Counsel, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Turkey born in 1997, as the  appellant
    herein.

2.   The appellant left Turkey in February 2013 and  travelled  in  a  lorry
    arriving in the UK on  20  February  2013.   He  was  fingerprinted  in
    Austria en route.  He  applied  for  asylum  on  4  March  2013.   This
    application was refused but  he  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain until 14 September 2016.  An appeal  against  the  decision  was
    dismissed by First-tier Judge Boyes on  19  May  2014.   The  appellant
    submitted a further application for leave to remain on 16 August  2016.
    This application was refused on 3 February 2017 and gives rise  to  the
    appeal proceedings herein.

3.   The Secretary of State in the refusal decision referred  to  Devaseelan
    [2004] UKIAT 00282 and noted that the findings of Judge Boyes were  the
    starting point for considering any further evidence.  In  paragraph  16
    the respondent summarised the conclusions of Judge Boyes as follows:

         "You were found to be broadly credible, Judge Boyes accepting  that
         you:


         a)   are a Kurdish as claimed


         b)   that you were detained for a period of 24 hours or less  on  4
             October 2011 and ill-treated as claimed


         c)   that you were stopped and questioned about the PKK on  several
             further occasions


         d)   that you were not a member of  the  BDP  but  had  distributed
             leaflets, posters and flags."


4.   In paragraph 17 of the letter the respondent  noted  that  Judge  Boyes
    had not accepted


         (a)  that the appellant's father disappeared in the manner claimed,


         (b)  that the appellant did not know his brother's whereabouts,


         (c)  that the appellant's  father  had  any  involvement  with  any
             Kurdish political parties,


         (d)  that the appellant's older brothers  were  arrested,  detained
             and tortured as claimed,


         (e)  that the appellant's detention was in relation to distributing
             leaflets for the BDP,


         (f)  that the appellant was sentenced in absentia as claimed.


5.   The respondent noted that the appellant had not  appealed  the  finding
    of Judge Boyes and there were no substantial grounds for believing that
    the appellant would be of  interest  to  the  Turkish  authorities  for
    either membership or high profile support for  the  PKK,  BDP  or  HDP.
    Although those of Kurdish ethnicity might face some  unequal  treatment
    or discrimination this did not reach the level of persecution under the
    1951 Convention and the claims did not engage Articles  3  or  8.   The
    appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.

6.   The appellant appealed the decision and his appeal came before a First-
    tier Judge on  23  March  2017.   At  the  hearing  Counsel  sought  an
    adjournment on the basis  of  a  recent  handwritten  letter  from  the
    appellant's cousin which had not been translated but an application  to
    adduce this material or adjourn the proceedings was not permitted.

7.   The appellant relied on his witness  statement  before  the  First-tier
    Judge.  It was the appellant's case that the situation  in  Turkey  had
    significantly deteriorated for the worse and that President Erdogan and
    his ruling party were trying to gain more power in  Turkey.   Reference
    was made to the attempted military coup in Turkey which had  been  seen
    worldwide.  The appellant was now of military service  age  and  had  a
    genuine fear of return.  He did not want to serve in an army who  on  a
    daily basis continued to commit  atrocities  against  the  Kurds.   His
    family had received a letter from the military service stating  he  was
    now registered as an absconder and if returned to Turkey  he  would  be
    severely punished.  He had participated in many Kurdish projects in the
    United Kingdom.  He would not be able  to  internally  relocate  within
    Turkey as he would be required  to  register  with  the  local  Mukhtar
    wherever he moved to.  In cross-examination the appellant said that the
    President had taken draconian measures against the Kurds and  many  HDP
    leaders were now in jail and for  Kurds  Turkey  was  now  a  place  of
    oppression and brutality.  His mother and younger brother continued  to
    reside there together with  a  number  of  aunts  and  an  uncle.   The
    appellant did not wish to undertake national service in Turkey and join
    the military force that was brutal against his own ethnic group.

8.   Having correctly addressed himself on the burden and standard of  proof
    the First-tier Judge considered the case of Devaseelan  and  stated  in
    paragraph 46 of his decision:

         "... In light of the evidence now available  before  the  Tribunal,
         and in light of recent events in Turkey subsequent  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal's determination issued in May 2014, I find that there
         is a  proper  evidential  basis  upon  which  to  depart  from  the
         Tribunal's earlier findings in May 2014  in  relation  to  risk  on
         return to Turkey, and which cause me to conclude that the appellant
         is a credible witness and who faces a genuine risk  of  persecution
         and/or ill-treatment if returned to Turkey,  based  primarily  upon
         significant changes within the last twelve months in the  political
         and security situation in Turkey, especially  in  relation  to  the
         treatment of Kurds generally."


    The judge accepted in paragraph 47 of his decision that  the  appellant
    had provided credible  evidence  of  actual  and/or  imputed  political
    opinion in connection with his Kurdish ethnicity.   There  had  been  a
    number of positive credibility findings made by Judge Boyes  and  since
    that decision there had been "comprehensive  and  widespread  objective
    evidence that the  political  and  security  situation  in  Turkey  has
    worsened,  with  significantly  increased  powers   of   the   security
    services."

9.   The determination concludes as follows:

         "49.  These  developments  have  been  widely   reported   in   the
             international  media.   I  have  considered   this   objective
             evidence.   Both  Kurdish   activists   and   supporters   are
             continuing to be arrested and detained including BDP  and  HDP
             activists and protesters.  I also accept  there  is  objective
             evidence referred to in the objective bundle indicating  waves
             of detentions together with large-scale  arbitrary  detentions
             now being commonplace.   In  addition,  anti-terror  laws  are
             routinely misused with countless unfair criminal  prosecutions
             under vague antiterrorism laws.


         50.  The objective bundle at pages 1 and 5  expresses  concerns  of
             torture and ill-treatment but in  particular  in  relation  to
             detention, both official  and  unofficial,  with  insufficient
             steps being taken to carry out efficient investigations.  Page
             11 of the objective bundle  quotes  an  Amnesty  International
             report stating that the coup  'unleashed  appalling  violence'
             with  an  'onslaught  on  Turkish  towns  and  neighbourhoods,
             including around-the-clock curfews'.


         51.  I consider the above political and security developments to be
             significant and to have  materially  exposed  and  raised  the
             appellants risk profile, as a Kurd, were he  to  be  returned.
             Indeed, the 2014 determination, when considered  as  a  whole,
             did not suggest at any stage that the appellant could  not  be
             considered as credible witness, and indeed for the  most  part
             all aspects of his claims were accepted,  as  detailed  above,
             determination finding the appellant had failed to  demonstrate
             aspects of his  claim  to  the  requisite  standard.   I  find
             however that the appellant has now demonstrated, to the  lower
             standard of proof, that in light of recent events  in  Turkey,
             his risk profile has increased significantly.


         52.  I have considered the letter provided by  the  appellant  from
             the military services, a translated copy of which  appears  at
             page 6 of the bundle.  Whilst Miss Sharma noted  that  it  was
             curious that there had been no follow-up letter issued to  the
             appellant  subsequent  to  May  2016,  it  was  not  suggested
             outright that this was simply a fraudulent or forged  document
             and that no weight could be placed upon it.


         53.  When applying  the  principles  in  Tanveer  Ahmed,  and  when
             assessing  the  evidence  in  the  round,  I  do   give   this
             documentary evidence some evidential weight, and I accept  the
             appellant is now of military age and  that  is  likely  to  be
             perceived as a draft evader.  I attach no evidential weight to
             the letter provided by the appellant at  the  appeal  hearing,
             dated 5 March 2017, which was untranslated.


         54.  In assessing  the  risk  on  return,  I  have  considered  the
             decision in IA (Turkey) [2003] UKAIT 00034 as confirmed in  IK
             (returnees-records-IFA  turkey  CG  [2004]  (UKIAT  00312.   I
             accept that the majority of the factors set out in IA (Turkey)
             are relevant to the appellants appeal, including the level  of
             the  appellants  known  or  suspected   involvement   with   a
             separatist organisation and his questioning  about  supporting
             the PKK.  Such factors include whether the appellant has  ever
             been arrested or detained and if so in what circumstances  and
             whether circumstances of past arrests and detentions  indicate
             the  authorities  viewed  the   appellant   as   a   suspected
             separatist.


         55.  Further factors I have  considered  are  the  degree  of  ill-
             treatment which the appellant has been subject to in the  past
             and whether the appellant has been charged or  placed  on  any
             reporting conditions.  I accept  that  the  appellant  is  now
             considered to be a draft evader and that he will  have  family
             connections  with  separatist  organisations  through   family
             members.  I also accept the appellant is Kurdish and  that  he
             has an expired passport.  I also  accept  the  appellant  risk
             profile is such that he is highly likely to be  questioned  by
             the authorities on  return  as  an  identified  failed  asylum
             seeker.


         56.  The case suggests the appellant is likely to be transferred to
             a police station where he will  be  interrogated  for  several
             hours.  The fact he will be required to  undertake  compulsory
             military service is a further risk factor which is  likely  to
             appear on the Turkish GBTS computer system  (Home  Office  CIG
             guidance March 2016 paragraph 28).


         57.  I have also noted that paragraph 47 of A (Turkey) observed  in
             the Upper Tribunal that the existing prescribed  human  rights
             context overall  is  always  a  matter  of  significance  when
             considering these relevant factors.  In all the circumstances,
             I therefore conclude that the appellant is a  genuine  refugee
             in need of urgent international protection."


10.  Accordingly the judge allowed the appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.  The Secretary of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal
    relying on IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.
     The appellant fell squarely within the category  of  "local  ne'er-do-
    well" identified in paragraphs 116 and 120 of IK.  The judge had  erred
    when considering internal relocation.  The judge had erred  in  finding
    that the situation in Turkey had worsened since 2014.  The case  of  IK
    was still good law and had been decided in 2004 "in a  period  of  time
    when the situation in the South East of Turkey was arguably worse  than
    now."  In any event there would have to have been substantial  evidence
    of a durable change to go behind IK.  Permission to appeal was  refused
    by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Permission  was  renewed.   The  Upper
    Tribunal granted permission on 31  May  2017.   The  reference  to  the
    deterioration of the situation in Turkey since 2014 was

         "explicable by the fact that the appellant had an earlier appeal on
         asylum grounds which was dismissed in that year.  It was  therefore
         appropriate for the judge to consider whether there was  reason  to
         depart from  the  judge's  findings  in  that  earlier  appeal  (in
         accordance with Devaseelan)."


11.  The Upper Tribunal Judge, however, considered  that  the  remainder  of
    the grounds were arguable.  It was arguable that the judge  had  failed
    to consider the level of the appellant's involvement with the  PKK  and
    whether the authorities' interest in him in his  home  area  was  based
    only on his position as a Kurd.  It was arguable  that  the  judge  had
    failed to have regard to what was said in IK and  to  consider  whether
    the appellant would be at risk elsewhere in  Turkey.   Insofar  as  the
    judge intended to depart from the decision in IK he had arguably failed
    to consider whether the change in the country situation amounted  to  a
    durable change.

12.  At the hearing Mr Clarke relied on DSG (Afghan  Sikhs:  departure  from
    CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC).

13.  At paragraph 20 of the decision  the  Tribunal  set  out  the  relevant
    parts of the Practice Direction to the  effect  that  country  guidance
    cases


         "shall be treated  as  an  authoritative  finding  on  the  country
         guidance issue identified in  the  determination,  based  upon  the
         evidence before the members of the Tribunal, the  AIT  or  the  IAT
         that determine the  appeal.   As  a  result,  unless  it  has  been
         expressly superseded or replaced by any later  'CG'  determination,
         or is inconsistent with other authority  that  is  binding  on  the
         Tribunal,  such  a  country  guidance  case  is  authority  in  any
         subsequent appeal so far as that appeal: -

         (a)  relates to the country guidance issue in question; and

         (b)  depends upon the same or similar evidence."


14.  The Tribunal went on to cite extracts from the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber Guidance Note of 2011  No  2  from  paragraphs  11  and  12  as
    follows:

         "If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the issue that has
         not  been  considered  in  the  country  guidance  case  or,  if  a
         subsequent  case  includes  further  issues  that  have  not   been
         considered in the CG case, the judge  will  reach  the  appropriate
         conclusion on the evidence, taking into account the  conclusion  in
         the CG case so far as it remains relevant.


         Where  country  guidance  has  become   outdated   by   reason   of
         developments in the country in question, it is anticipated  that  a
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  will  have  such  credible  fresh
         evidence as envisaged in paragraph 11 above."


15.  Mr Clarke submitted that  the  judge  had  departed  from  the  country
    guidance case  of  IK  with  no  reasons  given.   As  DSG  made  clear
    (referring  to  SG  (Iraq)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940),  country  guidance
    determinations should be followed "unless very strong grounds supported
    by cogent evidence" are adduced, justifying their not doing so.

16.  Reliance was placed on  paragraphs  116  to  119  of  IK.   The  proper
    approach was to decide first whether an individual had  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in his home area where the risk  would  be  highest
    for a variety of reasons.  In the home area a specific  gendarme  might
    have it in for an individual whom he considered to be a local "ne'er-do-
    well".

17.  The judge had given his reasons for departing from IK in  paragraph  46
    of the decision.  The judge had referred to the positive findings  made
    by Judge Boyes but had not mentioned the negative findings.  Mr  Clarke
    submitted  the  findings  were  largely  adverse.   The  appellant  had
    established no significant profile.  It was odd that the judge had said
    that Judge Boyes had not suggested at  any  stage  that  the  appellant
    could not be considered as a credible witness.   No  reasons  had  been
    given for saying  that  the  appellant's  risk  profile  had  increased
    significantly.  In paragraph 54  the  judge  had  considered  the  risk
    factors set out in IA which Mr Clarke accepted were relevant and should
    be taken into account.  The appellant  had  been  held  for  24  hours.
    Reasoning had not been given to support the finding that the  appellant
    had family connections with  separatist  organisations  through  family
    members.  There was nothing to support the finding that a  low  profile
    returnee who had been arrested and with no PKK connections would be  at
    risk.  The points relied on were not  sufficient  to  depart  from  the
    country guidance.  Reference should have been made to the  differential
    risk outside the home area as distinct from the risk in the  home  area
    as set out in the case of IK.  The appellant could not make out a  case
    based on an objection to undertake compulsory military service  in  the
    light of Sepet & Bulbul [2001] EWCA Civ 681.  Mr Clarke  accepted  that
    the appellant would be found to be a draft evader.  The judge had given
    no  reasons  why  IK  should  not  apply  to  the  appellant  and   the
    determination should be set aside.

18.  Counsel submitted that there had been  no  challenge  to  the  positive
    credibility assessment.  The judge had properly founded his decision on
    the basis of changes in the  country  situation  since  2014  when  the
    appellant's appeal had been determined by Judge Boyes.   There  had  in
    fact been no departure from the country guidance to which the judge had
    made reference in paragraph 54 of his decision.  The judge had referred
    at paragraph 56 to the country guidance suggesting  the  appellant  was
    likely to be transferred to a police station.  The country guidance had
    not  established  a  "two  stage  test"  when  dealing  with   internal
    relocation.  The claim involved fear  of  persecution  from  the  state
    authorities.  Reference was made to Counsel's  skeleton  argument.   IK
    did not establish fixed risk categories.  There needed to  be  a  fact-
    specific approach.  While normally an assessment should start with risk
    in the local area it was sufficiently clear from the determination that
    the judge had found that the appellant would be at risk given  what  he
    had said in paragraph 54 about the risk factors in IA (Turkey).   There
    had been a change in the appellant's position in that he had  now  been
    found to be a draft evader.  The appellant had said he had  not  wished
    to serve in the army under a repressive regime.  The appellant was  not
    just a person who had been rounded up in a mass clearance.   The  judge
    had not materially erred in law  when  taking  into  account  the  risk
    factors.  He had made a specific risk assessment.  He was not simply  a
    local ne'er-do-well.

19.  As a secondary or alternative submission  the  appellant  would  be  at
    risk on return as found by the judge in paragraph 56 of  his  decision.
    He would be transferred to a police station before  being  interrogated
    and required to undertake compulsory military service.

20.  Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant's profile had  not  changed  and
    no findings had been made about whether the appellant's  oral  evidence
    was credible. The question was whether the appellant had a well-founded
    fear in his home area.

21.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

22.  I have carefully considered all the material before me.

23.  The first point to note is  that  the  respondent  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred in considering the change of  circumstances  since  May
    2014 when the country  guidance  in  question  dated  from  2004.   The
    reference to May 2014 is of course a  reference  to  the  date  of  the
    previous decision and the judge needed to assess the circumstances  and
    any change in the  position  since  that  time.   The  judge  found  in
    paragraph 46 that there was a proper evidential  basis  upon  which  to
    depart from the Tribunal's earlier findings in May 2014 in relation  to
    risk on return to Turkey.

24.  As Counsel submitted,  the  judge  did  not  depart  from  the  country
    guidance, but applied it.

25.  I was referred to DSG (Afghanistan) by Mr Clarke.  It was in  fact  the
    position of the Presenting Officer (Mr Deller) "that  country  guidance
    cases were not set in stone" - the country guidance in  that  case  was
    acknowledged to be "a  comparatively  elderly  authority  albeit  still
    country guidance".  But nevertheless good reasons were needed to depart
    from such a case.  The Tribunal in that case indeed did depart from the
    country guidance and accepted the point made by Mr Deller that  country
    guidance cases were not  set  in  stone  -  see  paragraph  26  of  the
    decision.  That did not amount to "carte blanche for judges  to  depart
    from country guidance" since it was necessary to show why such guidance
    did not apply to the case in question under the Practice Direction.

26.  I accept that the judge did consider and apply  the  country  guidance.
    He makes reference in paragraph 57 of his decision to what was said  in
    paragraph 47 of A (Turkey).   As  the  judge  had  said,  the  existing
    political and human  rights  context  overall  was  also  a  matter  of
    significance.  The Tribunal had also commented that the  specific  risk
    factors it had enumerated should not be treated as some kind  of  check
    list.  Assessment of the claim had to be in the round.

27.  The summary of the generic conclusions are set out in paragraph 133  of
    IK.  The Tribunal sets out its findings in a non-prescriptive  fashion.
    For example in paragraph 12 of the guidance it does not state  that  it
    is always appropriate to  consider  first  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant is at risk in his home area.

28.  Mr Clarke sought to raise credibility issues - reference had been  made
    it was said to  the  positive  credibility  findings  in  the  previous
    determination but not the negative ones. The findings  it  was  claimed
    were largely adverse. This argument does not appear to feature  in  the
    grounds. It is a difficult argument to sustain for two reasons: one  is
    that the respondent in paragraph 16 of the refusal letter says that the
    appellant was "found to be broadly credible" and the second is that the
    judge was fully conscious of the matters  where  Judge  Boyes  had  not
    accepted the appellant's account and sets them  out  in  paragraphs  19
    (last three sentences) and 20 of the determination. Accordingly even if
    the point had featured in the grounds, it has no merit. As counsel says
    there was no credibility  challenge  in  the  grounds.  The  particular
    appellant has already experienced detention and  ill-treatment  at  the
    hands of the police and the judge's findings which are not the  subject
    of  challenge  is  that  the  appellant  will  soon  after  arrival  be
    transferred to a police station for interrogation.  The judge  accepted
    that the appellant had been detained for 24 hours or less on 4  October
    2011 and that he had been ill-treated and beaten as  a  consequence  of
    which he had scars on one of his arms and shoulder.  In paragraph 67 of
    his decision Judge Boyes, referring to the beating, stated:

         "It is deeply shocking that a child of around 14 years of age would
         be treated in such a way by the Turkish authorities.  He was beaten
         and rough-handled, and as a consequence of  this  was  bruised  and
         bleeding and had cuts on one of his arms and shoulder."

29.  Since that time the First-tier Judge accepted that  the  appellant  had
    evaded military service.  Matters  had  moved  on  since  the  previous
    decision. The appellant would on the judge's findings again end  up  in
    the hands of the police as a draft evader.   I  accept  the  submission
    that the appellant was more than a local ne'er-do-well  and  the  judge
    properly had regard to  past  ill-treatment  in  paragraph  55  of  his
    decision.  The  judge  refers  in  paragraph  54  to  relevant  factors
    including whether the appellant had ever been arrested or detained.  In
    paragraph 55 he refers to the degree of ill-treatment the appellant had
    been subjected to. Such treatment may be a relevant factor  bearing  in
    mind paragraph 339K of the rules:

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."


    The appellant would, as argued  in  counsel's  further  or  alternative
    submission, face risk on return at the hands  of  the  authorities  and
    questions of differential risk in or outside the home area would not be
    relevant.

30.  I do not find that when the determination is read as a whole  that  the
    judge materially erred in law in concluding that the appellant would be
    at risk on return for the reasons he gives.

31.  Accordingly the appeal of the Secretary of State  against  the  judge's
    decision is dismissed.  The decision of the judge to allow  the  appeal
    on asylum and human rights grounds (Articles 2 and 3) is confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The judge made a fee award in the sum of �140 which is confirmed.



Signed                                  Date 18 July 2017

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal






