
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01110/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                              |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 4 December 2017                              |On 11 December 2017        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                    [S C]
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Sinker, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Smith promulgated 2.5.17, dismissing on all grounds  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  20.1.17,
    to refuse his protection claim, based  on  claimed  membership  of  the
    Church of the Almighty God (CAG).

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 6.3.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird granted permission to appeal on 14.9.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 4.12.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons summarised briefly below, I found such error of law  in
    the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require  it
    to be set aside and remade, remitting  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in accordance with the directions below.

 6. In essence, the grounds  assert  that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
    consider the totality of the evidence in relation  to  the  appellant's
    faith and  in  particular  failed  to  take  into  account  answers  in
    interview between Q73-91, and  failed  to  consider  the  two  articles
    relied on by the appellant.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge  Bird  considered  the  grounds
    arguable, and observed that the decision appeared to be subjective  and
    inadequately reasoned.

 8. At [25] the judge considered that the appellant's account in  interview
    was not helpful in assessing whether his professed faith is genuine, as
    the information could have been accessed from the Internet  in  advance
    of the  interview.  However,  at  [26]  the  judge  asserted  that  the
    appellant was unable to  answer  theological  questions,  such  as  the
    doctrine of a female Christ  and  why  the  faith  disagrees  with  the
    mainstream Christian view of the Trinity.

 9. Mr Sinker pointed out that from Q73 the appellant was able  to  explain
    the female Christ, and at Q88 and Q111 was able to explain the  faith's
    view of the Trinity.

10. The second primary ground of appeal relied on at the hearing before  me
    was that the judge failed  completely  to  consider  the  two  articles
    written by the appellant for his church and posted  on  their  website,
    copies and translations of which are in  the  appellant's  bundle.  The
    appellant also had a church membership care at A8, and  photographs  of
    him attending church. None of this is addressed in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

11. Mr McVeety conceded that there clearly was relevant material relied  on
    by the appellant but not  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    agree, without consideration of the material relied  on,  the  decision
    cannot be objectively fair and thus disclosed an error of  law  in  the
    making of the decision. Even with this material considered, it does not
    necessarily follow that the appeal would be allowed, but I  cannot  say
    that it would not.

Remittal

12. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.

13. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusion & Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal in accordance with the directions below.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Consequential Directions

15.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester;

16. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

17. The ELH is 3 hours;

18. The appellant is likely to be the sole witness;

19. An interpreter in Mandarin will be required;

20. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Smith and Judge Bird;

21. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus no fee award can be made.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


