
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/01365/2015
                                                               PA/01366/2015
                                                               PA/01367/2015
                                                               PA/01368/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th January 2017                 |On 1st February 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               (1)  CTO
                               (2)  PPA
                               (3)  EDMA (A minor)
                               (4)  EDhA (a minor)
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Usman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first Appellant  was  born
    on 4th March 1980.  The second Appellant  is  the  Appellant's  spouse,
    born on 10th July 1972.  The third  and  fourth  Appellants  are  their
    minor children, born  respectively  on  26th  December  2010  and  21st
    December 2012.  The first Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  15th
    May 2005 with entry clearance as a student valid until 31st July 2008.

 2. On 25th July 2008 the Appellant submitted an application for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom outside the Immigration  Rules  which  was
    rejected due to payment issues on 28th October 2011.  That  application
    was resubmitted on 3rd November 2011 but was refused with no  right  of
    appeal as of 8th  February  2012.   Subsequently  the  first  Appellant
    completed the Statement of Additional Grounds on 29th October 2014  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her family and/or
    private life in the United Kingdom.  The Secretary of  State's  records
    show this application was refused on 10th March 2015.

 3. The Appellant made a subsequent application for asylum  on  21st  April
    2015.  The Appellants' claim for asylum is based  on  a  fear  that  on
    return to Nigeria the third Appellant would  be  subjected  to  FGM  by
    either her or her partner's family.  That application  was  refused  by
    the Secretary of State by notice of refusal dated 15th September  2015.
    The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Shergill sitting at Birmingham on 20th May  2016.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  3rd  June  2016  the  Appellants'
    appeals were allowed on protection grounds.

 4. On 3rd June 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:-

      i) that the Immigration Judge in the First-tier Tribunal had failed to
         take into account and/or resolve a conflict of fact or  opinion  on
         any material matter,

     ii) had made a material misdirection of law on a material matter and

    iii) had made perverse or  irrational  findings  on  matters  that  were
         material to the outcome.

 5. On 15th July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly found that the  first
    two grounds were not arguable because they were based upon the  premise
    that the practice of FGM was a criminal offence in Nigeria even  though
    there was no evidence to support it before the Tribunal at the time  of
    the decision.  Permission on those grounds was accordingly refused.

 6. However, Judge Kelly considered that it was arguable, as claimed in the
    third ground, that absent specific background  country  information  to
    support it (as opposed to the reference in paragraph 68 to "as set  out
    in  the  country  information").   The  Tribunal's  finding  that   the
    Appellants would be unable safely to relocate within a country the size
    of Nigeria was perverse.  Permission to appeal on that ground alone was
    accordingly granted.

 7. On 17th October 2016 the Appellants' instructed solicitors submitted  a
    response pursuant to Rule 24.  It was  on  the  above  basis  that  the
    appeal came before me to determine whether or not there was a  material
    error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The
    Appellants appeared by their instructed Counsel, Mr  Usman.   Mr  Usman
    was familiar with this matter, having appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State  appeared  by  her  Home   Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr McVeety.

 8. On 2nd November 2016 I found that there was a material error of law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  solely  so  far  as  it
    related to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment as to whether the
    Appellants could safely relocate within Nigeria.  I gave directions for
    the filing of skeleton arguments and objective evidence upon which  the
    parties intended to rely and for exchange of such documents.  It is  on
    that basis that the appeal comes back before me for re-hearing.   I  am
    assisted in this matter by the fact that both the  Appellants  and  the
    Home Office are represented by the  same  legal  representatives  -  Mr
    Usman and Mr McVeety - as appeared  before  me  on  the  Error  of  Law
    hearing.

Preliminary Issue

 9. As a preliminary issue I am referred by  Mr  Usman  to  his  additional
    bundle of documents.  That bundle, I understand, includes  two  witness
    statements from  the  first  and  second  Appellants.   There  were  no
    directions given for the filing of  additional  witness  evidence.   Mr
    McVeety notes that that additional evidence raises issues that were not
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Mr  Usman  withdraws  those
    statements insofar as he does not seek  to  rely  on  them  before  the
    Tribunal and proceeds merely by way of submissions as per  my  previous
    directions.

Submissions/Discussions

10. Mr Usman relies on the skeleton argument.  I have read  this  document.
    He reminds me, and I note, that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  allowed
    the appeal and the error of law was found  on  the  submission  of  the
    Secretary of State.  He reminds me that it is accepted that if a person
    has fear of harm from non-state agents then relocation to another  area
    of  Nigeria  is  likely  to  be  viable  depending  on  the  individual
    circumstances of the person as long as it would not be unduly harsh  to
    expect them to do so.  His submission is that in this instant  case  it
    would be so.  He takes me in consideration to the skeleton argument and
    the findings of the judge at paragraphs 51 and 60 to  73  and  contends
    that the Appellants would face undue hardship if ordered to relocate.

11. Mr Usman takes me  to  extracts  from  his  objective  evidence  bundle
    pointing out at paragraph 97 that  although  against  the  law  and  in
    decline, female genital mutilation (FGM) continues to be practised with
    differing prevalence rates and  types  across  Nigeria  and  by  ethnic
    social religion, residence, state, education and  socioeconomic  class.
    He refers to the objective report that states that in 2013 UNICEF noted
    that 27% of women had undergone FGM although he  acknowledges  that  in
    the last twenty years the prevalence among adolescent girls has dropped
    by half.

12. He notes that a number of laws  now  exist  to  protect  women  against
    violence and have been strengthened by  the  Violence  Against  Persons
    (Prohibition) Act 2015 and that whilst this shows  a  determination  to
    tackle violence against women  and  provide  stiffer  penalties  for  a
    number of gender based offences such as FGM, and makes  it  easier  for
    women to  seek  recourse  and  protection,  that  laws  are  often  not
    effectively implemented in practice.

13. He further takes me to the report of  the  US  State  Department  Human
    Rights Practices Report for 2015 which states:-

         "There is no  comprehensive  law  for  combating  violence  against
         women.  As a  result,  victims  and  survivors  had  little  or  no
         recourse to justice.  While  some,  mostly  southern,  states  have
         enacted laws prohibiting some form of gender violence or seeking to
         safeguard certain rights, a majority of states did  not  have  such
         legislation".

14. He notes, and it is conceded by  Mr  McVeety,  that  Nigeria  offers  a
    biometric card system of identification and that this would  assist  in
    the ability of the Appellant's aunt or any other such family member who
    seeks to impose FGM to trace the Appellant and her family.  He  submits
    that due to the extent of the tribal system in Nigeria it would not  be
    possible to relocate and that  the  First-tier  Judge  gave  sufficient
    reasons and he asked me to allow the appeal.

15. Mr McVeety starts by taking  me  to  paragraph  60  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision, noting that if it were not for the issue  of
    FGM raised by the Appellant the First-tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied
    that relocation was an option.  He emphasises however that this is  not
    a case of a lone person returning to Nigeria but a family unit  with  a
    male provider.  He points out that the starting point is that  FGM  has
    been criminalised and that if someone commits it then there has  to  be
    someone who actually carries it out.  He points out, and  agrees  with,
    the figures set out in the objective evidence that the numbers are  now
    down to some 27% of  people  affected  and  emphasises  therefore  that
    nearly three-quarters of the population are not affected and that it is
    now a criminal offence to commit it.

16. He accepts the position with regard to biometric ID  cards  but  points
    out that there was no evidence raised before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to show any connection between  the  Appellants  and  influential
    people and consequently their return to Nigeria would not  put  anybody
    on alert.  He further points out that there is a  total  population  of
    170,000,000 people in Nigeria and that  it  covers  a  vast  area.   He
    reminds me of the incident of the schoolchildren who were kidnapped  in
    northern Nigeria and the fact that despite the efforts made,  not  just
    by the Nigerian authorities but by western interveners, that  the  vast
    majority have gone untraced.  He merely uses this as an emphasis as  to
    the difficulty of tracing people within such a vast land mass.

17. He points out that it is not state interveners whom the Appellants fear
    but their aunt and that it would not be reasonable to expect her to  be
    able to trace the Appellants either  through  tribal  or  authoritative
    networks if they relocated.  He points out that there is  no  objective
    evidence available to show that that would in fact  be  a  possible  or
    practical scenario.

18. He refers me to  the  COIF  Report  pointing  out  that  the  objective
    evidence shows that the Appellant could, if she was in fear, go to  the
    police and seek their assistance, and that there is no evidence to  say
    that the Appellant could not go and  live  in  rural  areas  or  indeed
    cities.  He points out  that  methods  are  now  in  place  to  provide
    protection and that FGM is outlawed and reminds me that the only person
    seeking the Appellants is a family member.  He asked me  to  find  that
    the Appellants can relocate and that the appeal should consequently  be
    dismissed.

19. Mr Usman's brief response reiterates that although there is now  a  law
    in  force  the  objective  evidence  shows  that  laws  are  often  not
    effectively implemented in practice and reiterates his submission.

20. I pointed out to the legal representatives the objective evidence to be
    found at 2.48 of the COIF Report updated August 2016 which states:-

         "In general, it will not be unduly harsh for a woman to  internally
         relocate to escape localised threats from members of  their  family
         or  other  non-state  actors,  especially  if  single  and  without
         children to support, but the individual circumstances of each  case
         will need to be taken into account".

21. Because I raised this issue, I invited both parties as to whether  they
    would wish to comment.  Mr McVeety pointed out that this is not a  case
    of a single woman returning but a family  with  a  male  protector  and
    contends therefore that there is actual strength  to  his  argument  in
    that paragraph.  In response, Mr  Usman  reminds  me  that  the  second
    Appellant is also fearful from his tribe and has been  effectively  "on
    the run" from them for a number of years and that that therefore  would
    make the family more vulnerable.

Findings

22.  The  general  position  regarding  the  ability  to  relocate  is  not
    challenged, it is purely the specific  circumstances  of  this  family.
    The objective evidence makes it clear that relocation in general  terms
    within Nigeria is an option.  That  proposition  was  accepted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He departed from that finding purely  based
    on the factual circumstances  of  this  case,  namely  that  the  third
    Appellant would be at risk and that through her family connections  she
    could be traced by the wider family members who would be alerted by the
    community leaders wherever she moves within her family.

23. A review of the objective evidence and  the  submissions  made  by  the
    parties does not endorse that view for a re-hearing.  I accept that her
    case is face sensitive but the facts remain:-

      1) that Nigeria is a very large area;

      2) that it has a population of over 170,000,000;

      3) that it is not the state that pursues the Appellants but  a  family
         member;

      4) that there is no evidence  produced  objectively  to  show  that  a
         family member would be likely through the use  of  biometric  cards
         and a tribal grapevine to be able to trace the Appellants;

      5) that there  is  now  in  place  criminal  law  protection  and  the
         objective evidence shows that the police will assist.

24.  I  accept  that  the  Appellants  herein  rely   on   the   individual
    circumstances of this case.  This is however not a case of a lone  girl
    being returned on her own.  The family would return as  a  family  unit
    and even though it is contended the second Appellant is pursued by  his
    tribe he would be in a position to  be  a  male  protector.   The  fact
    remains that there is nothing exceptional about this case.  It could in
    some respects be argued that if this appeal succeeded, then any case in
    which there is an alleged fear of FGM by a family member would also  be
    in a position to succeed.  As a  matter  of  law  that  cannot  be  the
    correct approach.  I acknowledge it is necessary to look at  each  case
    on its facts.  For all the  reasons  given  above  that  has,  in  this
    instant case, taken place I have  considered  the  objective  evidence.
    The  objective  evidence  just  does  not  show  that  even  in   these
    circumstances  that  the  Appellants  cannot  relocate  and  whilst   I
    anticipate that this decision will of course be disappointing to  them,
    as a matter of law I find that the Appellants cannot succeed and  their
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

On a re-hearing of the appeal on  the  grounds  limited  by  the  directions
previously given, the appeal of the Secretary of State is  allowed  and  the
appeal of the Appellants from the decision of the Secretary of State in  the
Notice of Refusal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

