
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01286/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 19 August 2019                    |On 09 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    H m h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Islam, Solicitor from Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Groves, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the appellant  has  claimed  to  be  a  refugee  and
    publicity might create a risk.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision of  the  respondent
    refusing her international protection.

 3. This is the second time that there has been a decision  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the appellant's claim for asylum.  I have to say  that
    it was only when I was able to see and read the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mayall promulgated on 21 December 2015 that I  was  able
    to understand  properly  the  decision  that  is  before  me.   I  have
    reflected on this.  It would have been better if  more  had  been  said
    about that decision but for reasons that I hope will become apparent  I
    do not accept that there has been any error of law in the decision that
    I have to consider.

 4. In the instant case First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Cox directed  herself
    correctly that her starting point was the findings of the judge in  the
    earlier decision.  It was implied but not absolutely spelled  out  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mayall did not believe that the appellant had
    left Eritrea illegally.  This  is  important.   In  very  broad  terms,
    persons who leave Eritrea illegally risk persecution in  the  event  of
    their return but those who leave legally normally do not.

 5. There has been no successful criticism of Judge  Mayall's  decision  on
    the  information  before  him.   Judge  Cox  had  additional  evidence.
    Essentially it was in the form of a letter from Eritrea that  was  said
    to show that the authorities  were  looking  for  the  appellant.   For
    lawful reasons, Judge Cox did not find that letter to be genuine.   The
    problem with the letter is that although the Judge was satisfied it had
    come from Eritrea she was not satisfied  about  its  provenance  within
    Eritrea.  It was handwritten and stamped with a  round  ink  stamp  but
    there was no evidence to authenticate the stamp and no obvious  way  of
    telling if the stamp was an official stamp and/or if it had  been  used
    officially.  There was nothing that gave it any authority and no expert
    evidence to assist.  The Judge's conclusion that it was not a  document
    that was reliable was entirely open to her and her decision to maintain
    the decision that the appellant had not  left  Eritrea  unlawfully  was
    plainly consistent with that.

 6. Although I have read the grounds and the reasons for giving  permission
    when the decision is read with  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Mayall  those  criticisms  fall  away.   The  decision  was  not
    criticised for lack of clarity  but  for  lack  of  authority  and  the
    authority is that the  point  had  already  been  decided  against  the
    appellant and had not been undermined by later  evidence  because  that
    evidence was not reliable.

 7. The claim on Article 8 grounds  is  rather  different.   The  appellant
    relied on her relationship with her children, both girls, who were born
    in November 2016 and June 2018 respectively.  They are  small  children
    who have not established a significant private and family life  in  the
    United Kingdom on their own account and they would  be  returned  to  a
    country where it can be assumed that they  would  live  safely  because
    their mother's claim for international protection has been rejected.

 8. It is regrettable that there is not a clear finding  about  their  best
    interests.  Given that one of the children has  a  potentially  serious
    health problem and that they both have some kind of contact with  their
    father  (although  that  appears  to  be  intermittent)  it  would   be
    surprising if their best interests did not lie in staying in the United
    Kingdom with their mother but staying  with  their  mother  is  not  an
    option  but  only  the  best  interests  of  a  child  are  a   primary
    consideration  they  are  not  determinative.  The   mother   has   not
    established a right to remain and there is nothing to suggest that  the
    children should be allowed to remain  and  their  mother  benefit  from
    that. They are not British citizens and they  have  not  established  a
    strong private and family life. There is simply no  material  error  in
    the assessment of their rights and the impact of their rights, if  any,
    on the appellant's claim.

 9. It follows therefore that I see no material error  and  I  dismiss  the
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 October 2019                 |




