
[pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal number: PA/01339/2016         |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at:|Field House               | |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On       |21 June 2017              |    On 22 August 2017         |       |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral                                          |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |   Amrit Singh                                    |Appellant    |
|           |(Anonymity Order not made)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr E Wilford, of Counsel, instructed by M  &  K
                 Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer.

                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

Anonymity

   1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order. I have not
      been asked to make one and see no reason to do so.

Introduction

   2. The Appellant has been granted permission to appeal  the  decision  of
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Twydell (hereafter "the judge")  who,
      in a decision promulgated on 9  January  2017,  dismissed  his  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision of 29 January  2016  to  refuse  his
      protection claim.





Background

   3.   The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. He claimed international
      protection on the ground that he will be at real risk  of  persecution
      and ill-treatment in Afghanistan on account of his Sikh  religion.  At
      the core of the Appellant's account is an incident in  June  2015;  he
      claims he was severely beaten by the Taliban and that both he and  his
      father were threatened with death if they did not convert to Islam.

   4.   The judge rejected the credibility of the account and  gave  reasons
      for doing so [39]. The judge noted the evidence was  inconsistent  and
      concluded that the primary motive for the attack was  a  robbery.  The
      judge did not accept  the  police  failed  to  protect  the  Appellant
      following his report of the attack,  but  rather  that  he  failed  to
      pursue his complaint. The judge considered a  letter  from  Mr  Charan
      Singh  (a  family  member),  but  noted  he  simply   reiterated   the
      Appellant's account and  further  noted  the  original  had  not  been
      obtained and produced. The judge noted further  discrepancies  in  the
      evidence of the Appellant and his sister and found that both  were  in
      contact with their parents.  In  her  omnibus  conclusion,  the  judge
      rejected the Appellant's evidence that he did not intend  to  come  to
      the UK.

   5.   The judge was also satisfied that a sufficiency  of  protection  was
      available and that the Appellant  could  internally  relocate  without
      undue  hardship.  The  judge   accepted   the   Appellant   may   face
      discrimination on return but found that he  would  be  assisted  by  a
      number of factors. The judge referred to the number of Pashtuns living
      in Afghanistan and the respect for  freedom  of  movement.  The  judge
      noted that the Appellant could utilise his skills on return and  would
      be able to contact his parents.  The  family  had  assets  that  could
      provide financial support in addition to support being available  from
      a trusted friend. The judge found the Appellant would be supported  by
      the Sikh community and Mr Singh, and that he would be able  to  access
      places of worship on return. The judge  noted  the  Appellant  was  an
      active member at his local Gurdwara in  Afghanistan.  The  judge  thus
      concluded that it would not be intolerable for the Appellant to return
      to Afghanistan.

   6.   Finally, the judge considered Article 8, which does  not  appear  to
      have been advanced with any enthusiasm before her, and found that  the
      Respondent's decision was proportionate. The appeal was  dismissed  on
      all grounds.

Permission to Appeal

     7.     The grounds seeking permission attack  the  judge's  credibility
    findings and criticise her assessment of  risk  on  return.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hollingworth considered that the grounds  were  arguable
    and granted permission on 28 April 2017.

     8. There is a  Rule  24  response  from  the  Respondent  opposing  the
appeal.

Decision on Error of Law

      9.      At  the  hearing  both  representatives  made  submissions.  I
    indicated to Mr Wilford (who is not the author of the grounds)  that  I
    did not accept the judge materially erred in law by a single  reference
    to Bangladesh during the course of her findings. While the reference is
    clearly unfortunate, on a holistic reading of the decision, it is  also
    clear that the judge was aware that she was dealing with  a  Sikh  from
    Afghanistan and assessed  risk  on  that  basis.  Mr  Wilford  sensibly
    indicated that he did not pursue that ground or the ground arguing that
    there had been unfairness in the judge's consideration of the  evidence
    of Mr Charan Singh. He was right not to do so.

   10.      However, after hearing the submissions of  the  representatives,
    I am satisfied that the judge, in an otherwise well-reasoned  decision,
    erred in law in the following material respects.

   11.      The Appellant's claim for international protection was based  on
    his historic account of harassment living  as  a  Sikh  in  Afghanistan
    culminating in an attack in June 2015 by the Taliban. The  judge  noted
    the historical discrimination the Appellant claimed  to  have  suffered
    living as a Sikh in a mainly Muslim  community  and  acknowledged  that
    Sikhs may have difficulty living in Afghanistan [39]. In  relating  his
    account of the attack at interview the Appellant stated that they  told
    his father that if he wanted to stay in Afghanistan that he would  have
    to convert to Islam. They told him that they would be coming  soon  for
    them, and that they would  have  to  pay  them  money  and  accept  the
    conversion otherwise they would  kill  them.  The  Appellant  confirmed
    these events in his witness statement.

   12.      The judge gave several reasons for rejecting the credibility  of
    the Appellant's account. The judge did not accept that he was  attacked
    by the Taliban or at  all.  Central  to  the  judge's  finding  is  her
    reliance on the Appellant's response to a question at  interview  where
    he stated that the motivation for the attack was money  [at  39  (ii)].
    While the judge noted the Appellant also  stated  that  his  assailants
    asked his father to convert to Islam, she concluded  nevertheless  that
    the primary motive for the attack was for non-sectarian reasons.  That,
    in my judgement, is an impermissible view reached on a  narrow  reading
    of the Appellant's evidence. I find that the  Appellant's  account  has
    not been adequately assessed with the full historical context in  mind.
    While that is a material error, the judge  plainly  fell  into  further
    error by distinguishing between primary and secondary considerations as
    motives for the attack. I find the cumulative effect of the Appellant's
    stated account militates against such a construction.

    13.       Further,  I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  the  judge,  in  her
    assessment of the evidence, was  not  influenced  by  a  mistaken  over
    estimate of the number of Sikhs remaining in Afghanistan from whom  she
    found the Appellant could draw some support. While the  judge  recorded
    that it was drawn to her attention that there were about  20,000  Sikhs
    left in Afghanistan, the judge's record of proceedings  show  that  the
    figure stated to her was in fact 2,000. The  tribunal  in  the  country
    guidance case of TG and others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG
    [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC) also noted [at 84] that: "the numbers left  are
    unlikely to be above 3,000. We accept that as numbers shrink, remaining
    members may be more vulnerable to exploitation,  and  have  taken  this
    into account when making our findings." Further, the expert report that
    was  before  the  judge  suggested  that  there  had  been  a   further
    considerable decline in numbers. The judge's assessment of  credibility
    is not made with this context in mind and the expert evidence  to  this
    extent is not referred to at all.

   14.      Further, in assessing the credibility of the  claim,  the  judge
    also considered that there had been no failure of state protection, but
    rather it was the Appellant who failed to pursue his complaint. I agree
    with Mr Wilford that this is contrary to the tribunal's  conclusion  in
    TG that: "it is not established on the evidence that at a  local  level
    the police are willing, even if able, to provide the necessary level of
    protection  required  in  Refugee  Convention/Qualification   Directive
    terms,  to  those  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  who
    experience serious harm or harassment amounting to  persecution."  This
    evidence is not factored into the assessment.

   15.      In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the above  errors  are
    sufficient to render the credibility assessment unsafe. While I do  not
    say that the judge's decision to dismiss the appeal  was  not  open  to
    her, it is the manner and route  by  which  that  conclusion  has  been
    reached which is flawed.

   16.      Mr Nath agreed that if the  judge's  credibility  findings  were
    infected then her findings in respect of sufficiency of protection  and
    internal flight cannot stand. I agree.

   17.      For all the above reasons, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    judge. The effect of my decision is that the  Appellant's  appeal  will
    need to be determined on the merits on all issues.

   18.      In most  cases,  the  Upper  Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will be able to re-make the relevant decision itself. However,
    the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of  the
    Upper Tribunal at para 7.2 recognises that it may not be  possible  for
    the Upper Tribunal to proceed  to  re-make  the  decision  when  it  is
    satisfied that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
             that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
             is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

19.   In my judgment, this case falls within para  7.2  (b).  Given  that  I
      have decided that the Appellant's case will need to be decided on  the
      merits on all issues and  having  regard  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
      judgment in JD (Congo) & Others [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the  view
      that a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal  is  the  right  course  of
      action.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set  aside  in  its  entirety.  This
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing on the  merits  on
all issues by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Twydell.


Signed                                             Date: 15 August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

