
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01006/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 November 2020                           |On 14 January 2021            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     SAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Rodman Pierce
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born on 15 March 2003, who is from
the Oromo ethnic group.  On 25 January 2019 he applied for asylum.  The
appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Aziz ("the judge").
In a decision promulgated on 12 August 2020 the appeal was dismissed.  The
appellant is now appealing against that decision.

The Appellant's Claim

The appellant claims to be at risk because of his (and his family's)
sympathy for, and attendance at demonstrations in support of, the Oromo
Liberation Front ("the OLF").

He claims that in 2014 he attended a demonstration with his father and
brother where he, along with his brother, was arrested and detained for one
month and fifteen days; and his father was detained and, to his knowledge,
not released.  He claims that his father's whereabouts have not been known
since he was arrested in 2014.

The appellant also claims that in 2015 he attended a demonstration in
support of the OLF where police shot at protesters.  He claims that his
brother was arrested but that he managed to escape whereupon he travelled
to Addis Ababa at which point he discovered that he was wanted by the
authorities and fled the country.

He does not claim to have been a member of the OLF or to come from a family
with a significant political profile.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge stated that he took into account the extant country guidance case
of MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030 as well as more
recent country information, including the respondent's Country Policy and
Information Note Ethiopia: Opposition to the government July 2020 ("the
2020 CPIN") and the respondent's Country Policy and Information Note
Ethiopia: Oromos November 2019 ("the 2019 CPIN").

The judge accepted that the appellant had been detained for one and a half
months following a demonstration in 2014, as he claimed.  The judge did not
accept, however, that the appellant's brother was arrested in 2015 or that
his father had disappeared following the arrest in 2014.  The judge found
that the appellant had exaggerated this aspect of his evidence.

The judge found that the appeal would have succeeded if he had applied MB
(paragraph 41) but that there was "very strong evidence and cogent reasons"
to depart from MB (paragraph 50). The  reasons given by the judge for
departing from MB were that:

          i) there have been significant political changes in Ethiopia, as
             set out in the 2020 CPIN; and

         ii) the 2019 CPIN states that an Oromo who participated in
             protests between 2014 and 2016 (even if arrested) is unlikely
             to be of continuing interest to the authorities due to (a) the
             time that has elapsed and (b) the significant and fundamental
             reform since 2018.

The judge stated at paragraph 51:

"Had the appellant's claim been premised on a different basis it may be
that Ms Rutherford's reference to the country information would have
carried greater weight.  However, I have to assess the country information
in light of the findings made with regard to the appellant's profile and
his claimed fear upon return."

The judge concluded in paragraph 52 that:

"Whilst there is still ongoing discrimination and ill-treatment against the
Oromo people, I do not find that the country information supports the
appellant's assertion that he would be specifically at risk because of his
attendance at two rallies in 2014 and 2015."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

The appellant advanced two grounds of appeal.

The first ground, which was the focus of Ms Rutherford's submissions at the
hearing, is that the judge erred in his approach to assessing whether he
should depart from MB. It is argued that only objective evidence about the
conditions in Ethiopia is relevant to whether a country guidance case
should be departed from and the judge erred by taking into consideration
material relating to the facts of the appellant's case.

The grounds state that the judge fell into error in paragraph 51 by
referring to the facts of the appellant's case and by stating that had the
appellant's claim been premised on a different basis then the references
made by the appellant to the country information would have carried greater
weight.

At the hearing, Ms Rutherford submitted that any departure from country
guidance case must be on the basis of objective material and not the facts
of the claim.

She also argued that the judge failed to engage with the evidence
postdating MB, as found in the 2019 CPIN and 2020 CPIN, which shows that
notwithstanding the political changes in Ethiopia there remains a
significant risk to Oromos.

The second ground of appeal argues that the judge failed to give reasons
for rejecting the appellant's claim that his father had disappeared. The
grounds submit that this is material because if the appellant's father
disappeared following his arrest that would alter the background against
which the appellant's risk on return should have been assessed.

Mrs Aboni's response to Ms Rutherford's submissions was that the judge
directed himself correctly (at paragraph 42) on when it is appropriate to
depart from a country guidance case.  She submitted that it was open to the
judge to find that there were strong grounds to depart from MB, given that
MB was decided approximately thirteen years ago and there have been
significant changes in Ethiopia since then.  She argued that the judge was
required to consider the appellant's profile in order to determine whether
he would still be at risk and that, having found that he did not have an
intention to become involved in political activity on return to Ethiopia,
it was open to the judge to find that he would not be at risk.

Analysis

Ms Rutherford argues that the judge improperly took into consideration the
facts of the claim to determine whether a departure from MB was justified.
I disagree. The judge's reasons for departing from MB, as set out in
paragraphs 50 and 51 of the decision, are entirely grounded in the
objective evidence. In summary, they are that the 2019 CPIN and 2020 CPIN
make clear that since 2018 there have been significant and fundamental
changes in Ethiopia such that a person, such as the appellant, who
participated in and was arrested at demonstrations in 2014 - 2016 (but who
is not an OLF member, not politically active and not from a family with a
political profile) is unlikely to be of interest to the authorities.

It is apparent from reading the decision as a whole that the judge's
assessment of the appellant's account was not undertaken in order to
determine whether the political changes in Ethiopia since 2018 were
sufficient to warrant a departure from MA, but rather to decide whether a
person with the appellant's profile would still face a risk in the light of
the fundamental changes identified in the objective evidence as having
taken place since 2018.

This assessment of the appellant's account was necessary because, as the
judge acknowledged in paragraphs 51 and 52 of the decision, the objective
evidence set out in the 2019 CPIN and 2020 CPIN shows that Oromos continue
to face difficulties and discrimination  in Ethiopia. The judge recognised
that some Oromos, depending on their profile, may continue to face a risk.
However, the judge found that a person with the appellant's profile would
not. This conclusion was entirely consistent with, and open to the judge
based on, the objective evidence in the 2019 CPIN and 2020 CPIN.

I cannot identify any flaw in the approach taken to departing from the
extant Country Guidance case of MB. The judge based his assessment on the
objective evidence before him which, on any legitimate view, shows that
there have been very substantial changes since MB was decided; and he
recognised that there needed to be very strong grounds supported by cogent
evidence to depart from MB: see paragraph 50, stating that there was "very
strong evidence and cogent reasons to depart from MB" and the self-
direction in paragraph 42 of the decision referring to paragraph 47 of SG
(Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940.

For these reasons, I reject the first ground of appeal.

The second ground argues that the judge failed to give any, or adequate,
reasons for not accepting the appellant's account of his father's
disappearance. However, in paragraphs 37 - 40 of the decision, under the
heading "the appellant's father and brother's disappearance" the judge
described the appellant's evidence as inconsistent, contradictory and
problematic and gave reasons for reaching these conclusions. These
unchallenged findings in respect of the appellant's evidence constitute an
adequate explanation for rejecting the appellant's evidence about the
disappearance of his father. There is therefore no merit to the second
ground of appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of him family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed

D Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan
                                                         Date 5 January 2021

