
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01179/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 March 2019                      |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                      MICHAEL FATHY BOULIS ABDELMESSIH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Frantzis, instructed Howells, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 4 September 1985 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    Egypt. He claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 July  2017
    and claimed asylum. By a decision dated 10 January 2018, the  Secretary
    of  State  refused  the  appellant's  application   for   international
    protection. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in
    a decision promulgated on 5 November 2018, dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. After preaching the Christian faith in a shopping mall,  the  appellant
    and his wife claim to have been threatened  by  Muslim  extremists  who
    threaten to kill them.  A vehicle had been crashed into the appellant's
    car and the appellant himself beaten. The appellant and his  wife  left
    Cairo to live in a monastery but returned in July 2017. On 5 July 2017,
    they were again threatened the appellant attacked  with  a  metal  bar.
    Thereafter, the couple fled to the United Kingdom.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mensah) did  not  find  the  appellant's
    account of past events to be truthful. The appellant now challenges her
    decision. There are three grounds of appeal. First, the judge  had  not
    made a material finding of fact in  respect  of  the  attack  upon  the
    appellant  on  9  July  2017.  The  appellant  asserts  that  a  proper
    understanding of the correct factual matrix  is  important  because  it
    demonstrates the escalation in violence towards  the  appellant,  steps
    taken by the appellant to avoid the violence and continuing interest in
    the appellant evidenced through the  fact  that  his  family  has  been
    pursued. Judge does refer to 9 July 2017 at [42] but only with  regards
    to a complaint made by the appellant to the  police;  a  car  crash  is
    referred to following which there was 'verbal abuse by the  driver  and
    passengers.'  Secondly,  the  appellant  asserts  that  the  judge  has
    conflated or  misunderstood  a  number  of  incidents  referred  to  as
    account. Contrary to what the judge has stated, a staged car crash  was
    the subject of police report for the date 5 July 2017 not 30 May  2017.
    The police had been informed of incidents of intimidation, contrary  to
    the observation made by the judge at [43] ('it lacks  credibility  they
    would go to the police and report an incident and yet  not  disclose  a
    previous instance which would importantly demonstrate they  were  being
    targeted and it wasn't an isolated incident.')

 4. My reading of the decision  indicates  that  the  judge  has  conflated
    certain incidents and appears to have misunderstood the full extent  of
    the reporting of threats to the police.  However,  in  determining  the
    materiality of any errors, it is important to  understand  what  effect
    the errors may have had upon the judge's analysis and  the  outcome  of
    the credibility assessment. First, it  is  possible  that  the  judge's
    errors may have led her to find inconsistencies where none  existed  in
    the evidence. Secondly, the judge may have unfairly  held  against  the
    appellant failure to report incidents of intimidation  to  the  police.
    The question is; are those effects sufficiently serious for me  to  set
    aside the decision? At [36], the judge noted that the appellant's  wife
    told her that she had wished to proselytise her Christian faith and had
    spoken to her husband's brother who is a deputy in the Coptic Christian
    church. The judge found that he was  incredible  that  the  appellant's
    wife  would  decide  to  proselytise  when  it  was  not  part  of  the
    requirement of her church, when the brother who was a  senior  official
    in the church did not do so himself and that the brother would, knowing
    the risks involved, have advised his brother and the brother's wife  to
    expose themselves to risk by preaching in public.  The  judge  did  not
    accept that the brother would have given such advice at all. The  judge
    could not understand why '[the appellant and his wife] were [preaching]
    in the first place if none of the family undertook  such  activity  and
    even the appellant's brother's deputy in the church is not said to have
    proselytised.'

 5. The judge's findings at [36-37] represent a fundamental rejection, with
    reasons, of the appellant's claim to have preached at all. I find  that
    the judge has reached findings of fact available  to  her  following  a
    thorough analysis of the evidence. Furthermore, the findings at [36-37]
    are discrete and not affected in any way by  any  misunderstandings  of
    details of the evidence such as those discussed above. Considering  the
    extent and nature of the misunderstandings of the evidence which raised
    in the grounds of appeal and also the effects upon the judge's analysis
    of those misunderstandings, I am not satisfied that, had the judge  not
    misunderstood these details of the evidence, she would have come  to  a
    different conclusion. At the end of the day, the judge simply  did  not
    accept that the appellant and his wife, who are members of a church (of
    which a senior  official  such  as  the  appellant's  brother  did  not
    proselytise) would go into a shopping mall  and  expose  themselves  to
    serious risk  by  preaching.  Having  rejected  that  claim,  then  the
    subsequent detailed account of intimidation (which the appellant claims
    occurred because of the preaching and for no other reason)  evaporates.
    The final point made in the grounds that the judge had failed  to  take
    into account the appellant's evidence that his church  was  evangelical
    and that his brother encouraged him to start preaching fails to address
    the judge's concerns set out at [36-37].

 6. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 9 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

