
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01604/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 18th August 2016                  |On 2nd September, 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            IBRAHIM AHMED HAMMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as a citizen of Syria,  born  on  29th
    March 1993.  He had not asked for an anonymity order.

 2. The respondent does not accept  that  identity,  and  thinks  that  the
    appellant may be an Egyptian national.

 3. The respondent's reasons for refusing the asylum claim are explained in
    the letter dated 30th September 2015.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    for reasons explained in his decision promulgated on 28th April 2016.

 5. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are as follows:

         'Ground 1 - Error when assessing language analysis report.

         The FTT erred in law at paragraph 30 when  assessing  the  language
         analysis report ...  Although the FTT has regard to ... SSHD  v  MN
         and KY [2014] SC (UKSC) 183  it  failed  to  acknowledge  that  the
         Supreme Court agreed with the findings of the Inner  House  in  the
         decision below N v SSHD [2013] SLT 1143 at paragraphs 59 and 60 ...
          nothing is contained in the language analysis report  to  indicate
         that the linguist (not an Arabic speaker)  or  analysts  (who  held
         qualifications in medicine, journalism, and social  work)  had  any
         expertise in the identification of Syrian  dialects  ...   being  a
         native speaker of the language does not  confer  expertise  in  the
         identification of dialects ...  AA (Language  diagnosis  -  Use  of
         interpreters) Somalia [2008] UKAIT 00029.

         Ground 2 - Error by failing to make findings on the medical report.

         The FTT erred at paragraph 34 by  failing  to  make  a  finding  on
         whether the medical report supported the appellant's position.   If
         it did, that necessarily strengthened the  appellant's  credibility
         and ought to have been assessed in the round when assessing whether
         the appellant was from Syria or not.

         Ground 3 - Falling into impermissible speculation.

         The FTT erred in law at paragraph 31 ...  when inferring  that  the
         appellant learnt the knowledge  of  the  city  from  the  internet.
         There was no evidence to suggest  that  the  appellant  could  have
         learnt knowledge from the internet.  The  questions  asked  of  him
         were random ...  such an inference taints the FTT's decision making
         ...

         Ground 4 - Failure to know the name of the islands.

         The FTT erred at paragraph 32 by failing to take account or  assess
         the appellant's low level of education has on his  local  knowledge
         and/or his explanations at paragraphs 35 and 36  of  his  statement
         ...  Had the FTT taken account of these ... the FTT would not  have
         reached the findings that it did.'

 6. On 28th June 2016 UT Judge Smith granted permission, observing:

         "The central issue ... was whether the appellant is from Syria  ...
         or from Egypt ...  Whilst the judge may well have been entitled  to
         give limited weight to what is said in the medical report about the
         interpreter's view of the appellant's nationality, particularly  in
         the absence of any direct witness statement from that person, I  am
         (just) persuaded that the failure to have regard to  this  evidence
         is arguably an error of law.

         I am less persuaded by the other grounds but ... I do not limit the
         grant of permission."

 7. Mr Winter submitted along the lines of the  grounds,  and  as  follows.
    The analysts did not have academic expertise and the linguist  was  not
    qualified in Arabic.  Ground 2 was wide enough to incorporate the point
    about the medical report identified by the judge  granting  permission,
    although he  accepted  that  it  had  not  been  a  point  specifically
    intended.

 8. In a rule 24 response,  the  respondent  argues  that  the  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for finding that the appellant is not from Syria,  and
    was entitled to draw an adverse inference from his  failure  to  obtain
    another  language  assessment,  and  that  the   judge   recorded   the
    conclusions in the medical report, and was entitled to find  that  they
    did not assist the appellant.  Mrs Pettersen submitted further that the
    judge's view of the language aspect was made clear at paragraph 30, and
    the grounds contained no attempt to  rebut  it.   The  judge  correctly
    applied the case law.  The interpreter used in  preparing  the  medical
    report was prepared was not there as a linguistic expert and could  not
    substitute for one.  This  information  was  no  more  than  a  passing
    observation, reported as third hand hearsay.   The  respondent  had  no
    record of any relevant submission in the First-tier Tribunal but in any
    event it would not have been proper to take this as a significant point
    in the appellant's favour.  Two of the language analysts had  a  Syrian
    background, speaking the dialect of Damascus.  The report followed  the
    methodology approved in MN and KY, although  prepared  by  a  different
    organisation.  The medical conclusions were simply that  the  appellant
    was likely to have suffered trauma consistent with  his  account;  that
    said nothing about whether or not he came from Syria.  Grounds 3 and  4
    were disagreements on matters of fact, points on which  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude as he did, for the reasons given.

 9. In responding, Mr Winter advised that his  instructing  solicitor,  who
    had been the representative at  the  hearing  in  the  FtT,  said  that
    attention had been directed to the medical report, which  was  part  of
    the material on which the judge was bound to reach his conclusion.   He
    was not in a position to say that the passage about the interpreter had
    been subject of any specific submission.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. The linguistic report is based on the results of  three  analysts,  all
    speakers of Arabic at mother tongue level, two of them  from  Damascus.
    They have degrees in medicine from a university in Syria, in journalism
    from a university in Syria, and in social work  from  a  university  in
    Egypt.  The linguist has a master's degree in  general  linguistics  at
    the University of Stockholm.  His  languages  are  Farsi,  English  and
    Swedish.

12. The preparation of the report and the qualifications of its  respective
    authors are precisely along the lines of the methodology approved of by
    the Supreme Court in NM and KY in relation to  Sprakab.   That  is  the
    approach which the judge applied.

13. Paragraph 30 of the decision explains why  the  judge  takes  it  as  a
    serious point against the appellant that he has declined to counter the
    linguistic assessment by any  similar  evidence  obtained  on  his  own
    account.  The judge was entitled to find that the appellant's statement
    that he did not have faith in language analysis was "not a good  enough
    response to the cogent evidence adduced".

14. Injuries consistent with an  account  of  trauma  did  not  necessarily
    strengthen the appellant's credibility as to his country of origin.

15. Grounds 3 and 4 are only disagreement on factual matters.

16. The matter of the interpreter at the medical interview does not  appear
    to have been the subject of specific submission at the hearing, and the
    grounds of appeal do not criticise the judge for failing  to  refer  to
    it.

17. The first paragraph under the heading "Opinion" in the  medical  report
    is as follows:

         "Mr  Hammad  gave  his  history  through  the  aid  of  an   Arabic
         translator.  I have worked with the translator previously and found
         her to be excellent ...  She had  not  met  Mr  Hammad  previously.
         Whilst it is not the place for a medical report to  comment  on  Mr
         Hammad's ethnic background, the translator thought that he was from
         Syria.  She said that he used a number of  terms  and  phrases  and
         slang  expressions  which  he  had  noted   were   common   amongst
         individuals from Syria in her line of work.  She is from Iraq."

18. Nothing has been said which might persuade me that the judge was  bound
    to pay any specific attention to this passage.

19. For the reasons advanced by the respondent, it is difficult to see that
    the judge in any event might have made much of this passage  in  favour
    of the appellant, while there was strong evidence to contrary effect.

20. The author of the  medical  report  might  well  find  the  interpreter
    excellent, but he can know nothing of her ability to identify dialects.
     Something must have been said about the issues in the case  to  prompt
    the observations.

21. The judge reached conclusions which were open to him and for  which  he
    has provided a more than legally adequate explanation.   The  appellant
    has not shown the decision to have involved the making of any error  on
    a point of law, such as to require it to be  set  aside,  so  it  shall
    stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



                     [pic]


                  1 September 2016
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
