

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/01883/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                    |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 25 August 2017                     |On 29 August 2017                           |
|                                      |                                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                             Khaleefa Abass Adam
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:       Mr C Holmes, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
& Canter
For the respondent:      Mr C Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal to refuse him international protection  under  the  Refugee
   Convention or humanitarian protection grounds,  or  leave  to  remain  on
   human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Sudan.

2. The appellant's case is that he is a  member  of  the  Tunjur  tribe  who
   before coming to the United Kingdom was selling water in a place where  a
   political demonstration was taking place, and became caught up in arrests
   of demonstrators, was detained and  tortured  as  a  perceived  political
   opponent of the regime. The Tunjur tribe is said to come from Darfur  and
   the appellant's case therefore is that he is a non-Arab Darfuri.

3. I bear in mind that the former country of  Sudan  was  divided  into  two
   countries in July 2011, after the people of what is now South Sudan voted
   for independence.  The country now known as Sudan is the northern part of
   the former country, and has an Arab Muslim majority.

4. The relevant country guidance on the risk to non-Arab Darfuris  in  Sudan
   is contained in three decisions of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Tribunal
   and the Upper Tribunal (IAC).  The earliest  is  AA  (non-Arab  Darfuris)
   Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan  CG  [2016]  UKUT  10
   (IAC).  The guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in  AA  (Sudan)  was  as
   follows:

         "All non-Arab Darfuris are at risk of  persecution  in  Darfur  and
         cannot reasonably be expected to relocate elsewhere in Sudan.  HGMO
         (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00062 is no longer
         to be followed, save in respect of the guidance summarised  at  (2)
         and (6) of the headnote to that case."

5. That was clarified further in MM (Sudan):

         "In the country guidance case of AA (Non-Arab  Darfuris-relocation)
         Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056, where it is stated that if a  claimant
         from  Sudan  is  a  non-Arab  Darfuri  he  must   succeed   in   an
         international protection claim, "Darfuri" is to be understood as an
         ethnic term relating  to  origins,  not  as  a  geographical  term.
         Accordingly, it covers even Darfuris who were not born in Darfur."

6. Finally, in IM and AI (Risks - Beja tribe, Beja Congress and  JEM)  Sudan
   CG [2016] UKUT 188 (IAC) at [216]- [217], the Upper Tribunal  upheld  the
   above finding, in part on the evidence of Mr Peter Verney, who  has  also
   provided a report in the present appeal.  At  [234],  the  Tribunal  held
   that:

         "234.      Where the claim is based on events in Sudan in which the
         claimant has come to the attention of the authorities,  the  nature
         of  the  claimant's  involvement,  the  likelihood  of  this  being
         perceived as in opposition to  the  government,  his  treatment  in
         detention, the length of detention  and  any  relevant  surrounding
         circumstances and the likelihood of  the  event  or  the  detention
         being made the subject of a record are all likely  to  be  material
         factors."

7. That is the legal basis on which I approach this claim.

Refusal letter

8. The respondent's refusal letter is unimpressive.   At  [9]-[21]  thereof,
   the respondent set out the appellant's answers  to  questions  about  his
   claimed home area of Bahri, near Khartoum.  Bahri, and Khartoum, are  not
   in Darfur, but  the  appellant's  claim  is  based  on  his  ethnic,  not
   geographical origin.   It is his case that Darfuris do live elsewhere  in
   Sudan.

9. Almost all the appellant's recorded answers about  Sudan  generally  were
   correct, but at [22] the respondent  referred  to  'negative  credibility
   findings...no credence is given to the evidence which you  have  supplied
   in support of this aspect of your claim.   It  is  considered  that  this
   aspect of your claim remains unsubstantiated'.  In contrast, at [23], the
   respondent considered that the evidence and credibility  'points  in  the
   round it is accepted you are a national of Sudan'.   Mr  Bates  suggested
   that [22] was a standard paragraph left in the refusal letter  in  error,
   and  I  approach  this  appeal  on  the  basis  that  [23]  contains  the
   respondent's view of the appellant's nationality evidence.

10. Moving to the question whether the appellant is a member of  the  Tunjur
   tribe, the respondent's refusal letter  leans  heavily  on  a  number  of
   research papers, the summarised evidence in which is only to be found  in
   the respondent's 10 March 2011 Country of Origin entitled Sudan: non-Arab
   Darfurian  Tribes,  background  material,  Country  of  Origin   Evidence
   Information Service (the 2011 Guidance).  The  2011  Guidance  classifies
   the Tunjur as a sub-clan of the Zaghawa, who are a non-Arab Darfuri clan.
   At 3.16.10, the 2011 Guidance said  that  the  Tunjur  were  one  of  the
   'dynastic peoples of Darfur'.

11. The research which is most heavily relied upon in the 2011  Guidance  is
   a paper by R S  O'Fahey  and  Jerome  Tubiana:   Darfur:  Historical  and
   contemporary aspects, undated but probably written in 2006/2007.  No copy
   of that paper, or of the 2011 Guidance itself, was in evidence before the
   First-tier Tribunal.    Despite  repeated  requests  by  the  appellant's
   representatives for a copy of this document, the 2011  Guidance  was  not
   provided until today's hearing.

12. The respondent assessed the appellant's evidence  about  his  membership
   of the Tunjur sub-clan against  the  summary  in  the  2011  Guidance  of
   passages in the O'Fahey/Tubiana paper which explained that the Tunjur had
   lost their original language and speak the language of the  people  among
   whom they live, Fur, Beri-a (Zaghawa) and/or Arabic, depending  on  where
   they live'. The appellant speaks only Arabic.  The respondent regarded it
   as to the appellant's discredit that he did not know that the Tunjur, who
   now speak only Arabic, formerly had their own language.

13. There is also reference in the 2011 Guidance  at  3.16.11-3.16.12  to  a
   paper by Dr James Morton, dated 1985, reissued in 2005, entitled A Darfur
   Compendium:  A  review  of  the  Geographical,  Historical  and  Economic
   Background to Development in the  Region,  which  said  that  the  Tunjur
   claimed to be descended from the ancient Nubians, and to  be  centred  at
   Fera, north-west of Kuttum, in Darfur, and also further  west  in  Kanem.
   The Fur, or rather the Keira sub-clan of the Fur,  took  over  in  Darfur
   from the Tunjur empire, after the latter collapsed, for reasons  unknown.
   No copy of that paper  is  in  evidence  or  was  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

14. Dr Morton's evidence, as summarised in the 2011 Guidance, was  supported
   at 3.16.13 by a summary of a passage in a paper dated February  2005,  by
   Young, Osman, Aklilu and Dale, entitled Livelihoods  under  Siege,  Final
   report, which said that the centre of power for  the  Tunjur,  rulers  of
   Darfur up to the 17th century, was in Jebel Marra, where it was  replaced
   by the Keira sub-clan of the Fur tribe. That paper also was not  provided
   to the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.

15. The appellant did not know all this historical detail when  interviewed.
    His answers were short on detail. He did  not  know  when  the  conflict
   began in Darfur, whether his tribe had been targeted by any group, or  if
   so, the names of the groups.  He considered that Tunjur  could  be  found
   throughout, what is now Sudan and while he knew the Tunjur had a king  or
   shartai, he did not know that each shartai had at least five  maliks  who
   historically ruled certain areas.  He did know that the Tunjur tribe were
   farmers, and the crops they grew.  He did not know  that  they  had  lost
   almost all their crops in the last crisis.

16. The refusal letter refers to  an  internet  link,  which  when  followed
   leads to a document from the Refugee  Documentation  Centre  of  Ireland,
   compiled on 25 June 2010, which said that the houses of the  Tunjur  were
   'reed-walled, conical-roofed built on hilltops or elevated ridges'.   The
   appellant in his interview said they were covered with a type of  bamboo-
   like  straw  (not  a  bad  description  of  reeds,  particularly  via  an
   interpreter) and had clay bricks in their walls.  No reference is made in
   the refusal letter to a later passage in the same document which confirms
   that the Tunjur are 'other Darfuris of African descent  [who]  have  come
   under attack by the government of Sudan and the Janjaweed'.

17. As regards the demonstration at which  the  appellant  claimed  to  have
   been arrested, detained and tortured, the refusal letter finds it  to  be
   inconsistent that he said he had not attended it, but that  was  not  his
   case:  his  account  was  of  perceived  political  opinion,  whereas  in
   reality, he  said  he  was  selling  water  and  got  caught  up  in  the
   demonstration.   The respondent cited background  information  from  Eric
   Reeves on his website Sudan  Research,  Analysis  and  Advocacy,  for  10
   October 2013, which confirmed that a demonstration had taken place at the
   time and place mentioned by the appellant. Again, although the  link  was
   provided in the refusal letter, the document itself is not  in  evidence,
   but is available on the internet, where I have consulted it.

18. The respondent regarded it as inconsistent that the appellant could  not
   say why the authorities arrested him, if they did not want to ask him any
   questions, but that again fails to have regard to his account of being  a
   water-seller caught up in the demonstration, not a demonstrator.  On that
   basis, the respondent rejected the appellant's account of  his  detention
   and torture, and of his brother's arrest and his  father's  death  during
   the demonstration and there is therefore no  consideration  of  paragraph
   339K of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended).

19. Paragraph 63 of the refusal letter deals with the Article  2  ECHR  risk
   as though the respondent intended to return the appellant to Eritrea, not
   Sudan.  The same is true of paragraph 64,  which  deals  with  Article  3
   ECHR, and paragraph 70, which deals with Article 8 ECHR.  The  effect  of
   that is that the appellant's claims under Articles 2, 3 and  8  have  not
   been considered as advanced, that is to say, on the basis  of  return  to
   Sudan.

20. The respondent refused leave to remain and  the  appellant  appealed  to
   the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the standard and burden  of  proof
   correctly at [55], but then proceeded  to  analyse  the  refusal  letter,
   paragraph by paragraph, reaching a credibility finding  before  [346]  in
   which he purported  to  consider  credibility.   The  Judge  treated  the
   Country Information Guidance as a country background source  document  in
   its own right, rather than a summary of the country  background  evidence
   relied upon by the respondent in 2011, which is the correct approach.

22. The Judge relied, in particular, on  the  respondent's  account  in  the
   refusal letter of what the 2011 Guidance said was  the  contents  of  the
   undated O'Fahey/Tubiana paper. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted
   that evidence and preferred it to  the  country  expert  evidence  of  Mr
   Verney.  The Judge did so without seeing either the O'Fahey/Tubiana paper
   or even the 2011 Guidance which mentions it.

23. At [381] the Judge  noted  that  the  appellant  knew  the  name  of  an
   historical Tunjur Sultan 'which is little known outside Darfur'.  Another
   witness, Mr Mohammed, gave fuller  evidence  about  the  history  of  the
   Tunjur.   The  Judge  considered  that  to  damage,  not   support,   the
   credibility of the appellant's account.

24. The Judge placed little or no weight on the expert evidence of Mr  Peter
   Verney, which he said should  not  be  treated  as  'Gospel  truth'.   He
   considered  Mr  Verney's  report  to  be  insufficiently   sourced,   and
   inconsistent with 'other country background information'.

25. Neither the First-tier Tribunal Judge nor the respondent  made  a  clear
   finding as to whether the appellant was a non-Arab Darfuri.

26. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

27. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman granted permission to  appeal.   She
   considered that the First-tier Tribunal had arguably applied too  high  a
   standard of proof in practice, failing to make any allowance for cultural
   differences, the use of an  interpreter,  the  fact  that  the  interview
   record was not entirely verbatim, and the appellant's level of education.
    She considered it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had placed
   too much weight on the Country Information Guidance report in  preference
   to other country evidence before him, particularly  since  the  documents
   relied upon were not disclosed at the hearing.  He had, it seemed, simply
   taken the respondent's word for the contents of the 2011 Guidance.

28. The respondent was asked to provide a copy of that document.

Rule 24 Reply

29. The respondent's Rule 24 Reply argued that the  2011  Guidance,  and  in
   particular paragraph 3.16.07 thereof, was in the public  domain  and  the
   First-tier Tribunal had not erred in giving  it  significant  weight  and
   preferring it to Mr Verney's evidence.   The  asylum  interview  predated
   the refusal letter and the  respondent  considered  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal had given cogent reasons for rejecting the  appellant's  account
   as to why he gave the answers he did at interview.

30. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal hearing

31. I had before me the documents before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  an
   additional bundle received by the Upper Tribunal on 18  August  2017,  as
   well as the 2011 Guidance.  There were no skeleton arguments but I  heard
   oral submissions from the parties.

32. I take judicial notice of the 2017 Country Information  Guidance,  which
   is in the public domain (unlike the 2011  one,  which  seems  not  to  be
   publicly available any longer).

33. For the appellant, Mr Holmes argued that  the  respondent  was  under  a
   duty to the First-tier Tribunal to serve relevant material, in this  case
   the 2011 Guidance, if she wished to rely upon it at the hearing.

34. Mr Bates recognised that the document in question was not  available  at
   the hearing.  I did not call upon him for detailed submissions.

Discussion

35. The documents referred  to  in  the  refusal  letter  all  pre-date  the
   division of Sudan and South Sudan in 2011.    I  remind  myself  that  Mr
   Verney was an accepted expert witness in all the country  guidance  cases
   mentioned above.  I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
   rejecting the evidence of Mr  Peter  Verney  in  favour  of  the  refusal
   letter's summary of the 2011  Guidance's  summary  of  several  very  old
   papers, the principal one of which was undated.  It is  not  possible  to
   assess a document's validity without seeing it and it  is  irrational  to
   prefer that putative document to the expert evidence as the Judge did.

36. The documents which featured so heavily in the refusal  letter  are  not
   referred to in the 2017 Guidance.  The guidance in the equivalent passage
   in the August 2017 Country Information Guidance does  not  refer  to  the
   papers relied on in 2011:

         "3. Policy summary

         3.1.1 The security, human  rights  and  humanitarian  situation  in
         Darfur continues to be poor. Non-Arab Darfuris in the Darfur region
         are likely to face human rights violations which amount to  serious
         harm or persecution.

         3.1.2 Existing caselaw has  found  that  non-Arab  Darfuris  as  an
         ethnic group are at  risk  of  persecution  in  Darfur  and  cannot
         reasonably be expected to relocate elsewhere in Sudan, including to
         Khartoum.

         3.1.3 The Home Office  view  is,  however,  that  there  is  cogent
         evidence indicating that non-Arab Darfuris  are  not  generally  at
         risk of persecution or serious harm solely on the grounds of  their
         ethnicity in Khartoum. This evidence  provides  strong  grounds  to
         depart from the existing caselaw of AA and MM.

         3.1.4 Rather, a person's non-Arab Darfuri ethnicity is likely to be
         a factor which may bring them to the attention of  the  state  and,
         depending on other aspects of their  profile  and  activities,  may
         lead to a risk of serious harm or persecution in Khartoum.

         3.1.5 Darfuris in Khartoum face discrimination in accessing  public
         services, education and  employment,  experience  forced  eviction,
         societal harassment from other Sudanese, and do not have access  to
         humanitarian assistance. However, in general such treatment is  not
         so severe that it is likely to amount to persecution but each  case
         will need to be considered on its individual facts.

         3.1.6 All returns are to Khartoum. It will generally be  reasonable
         for a person, including those not previously resident in  Khartoum,
         to return to that city but each case will need to be considered  on
         its individual facts. If the person is able to demonstrate  a  risk
         of persecution or serious harm from the state in Khartoum, internal
         relocation to another part of Sudan will not be reasonable.

         3.1.7 There is no sufficiency of protection available."

   Paragraph 3.1.3 is completely unsourced.

37. Nor did the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  properly  seek  to  apply  the
   country guidance.  There is no finding in the decision as to whether  the
   appellant is a non-Arab Darfuri, or an Arab, from Darfur or elsewhere  in
   Sudan.

38. I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  approach  to  the
   evidence of Mr Verney, and the Country Information  Guidance  summary  of
   country evidence which was not before him, was  perverse  and  Wednesbury
   unreasonable.  The decision cannot stand.

39. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   Absent
   any finding whether this appellant is a Darfuri, and whether, if  so,  he
   is Arab or non-Arab, I cannot remake the decision, and the refusal letter
   is so inadequate that I cannot rely on that to assist  me.   Accordingly,
   the decision in this appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on
   a date to be fixed.



DECISION

40. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be
   remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.



Date:         25 August 2017                 Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


