

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01000/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11 November 2019                         |On 22 November 2019            |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    K P V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Srihanan or counsel instructed by M Vasuki &
C0, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because the Appellant is an asylum seeker  and  publicity  could  cause  him
harm.

This is an appeal by a citizen of Sri Lanka against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal to dismiss his appeal against a  decision  of  the  Respondent
refusing him international  protection  and/or  leave  to  remain  on  human
rights grounds.

The  Appellant  claims  to  have  been  a  low  level  supporter  of   Tamil
separatism. He worked as a mechanic for the LTTE.

He says that he has  been  ill-treated,  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
continue to look for him and that he has been an active  supporter  of  pro-
Tamil independence in the United Kingdom.

The First-tier Tribunal disbelieved much of his evidence.

Permission was granted because it was arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal
had not made lawful findings concerning  the  scarring  on  the  Appellant's
back which tended to support his contention that  he  had  been  ill-treated
and that his evidence that the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  continued  to  be
interested in his whereabouts was disbelieved without  adequate  regard  for
the evidence that the Appellant is, or may be, a poor historian  because  he
suffers from PTSD.

At paragraph 30 of the Decision and Reasons the Judge said:

  "The scarring report (at p.6) refers to the fact that the  injuries  were
  not self-inflicted, but caused by being burnt with the  heated  iron  rod
  during his detention. It  is  said  the  scares  are  typical  of  events
  described by the claimant of being intentionally burnt. I reject that."

As far as I can see no reason, still less any  adequate  reason,  was  given
for rejecting that prima facia credible expert evidence.

This omission is clearly an error of law.

Ill-treatment in the past does not mean that the Appellant  is  presently  a
refugee. He is only a refugee if there is a present risk  but  his  evidence
that he is at risk needs  to  be  appraised  having  proper  regard  to  the
evidence that  he  has  been  tortured  and  the  evidence  that  he  cannot
necessarily remembers accurately because of PTSD.

Similarly his involvement in sur place activities has to  be  assessed  with
regard to how  they  might  be  perceived  in  Sri  Lanka  rather  than  how
sincerely they are practised.

I do not know if the Appellant will give evidence when the case  is  reheard
but he must be given that chance.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its decision and I  direct
that the appeal be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 November 2019               |







