
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA019772016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th June 2017                             |On 23rd June 2017             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     sm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, Counsel instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, in relation to a Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  22nd
    December 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge N M Paul following a hearing
    at Taylor House on 16th December.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in August 1947.  She is  a
    person who has visited the UK on numerous occasions to visit her  adult
    son who is now a British resident.  The last time she came she did  not
    return and claimed asylum.  She did so some four years after a previous
    human rights application had been refused and some four years after she
    last came to the UK.

 3. The grounds challenge  the  way  in  which  the  judge  has  approached
    credibility and they do so with great force and having read the grounds
    and the  Decision  and  Reasons  I  find  that  this  decision  is  not
    sustainable.

 4. The judge sets out at considerable length the  Appellant's  claim,  the
    Respondent's  submissions  and  the  submissions  and  it  is  only  at
    paragraph 40 that his reasoning starts.  The biggest problem is  to  be
    found at paragraph 42 where he says:

         "The starting point, in this case, has to be an assessment  of  the
         Appellant's credibility because of course if her account as to what
         treatment she received in Sri Lanka is not correct, it  calls  into
         question any of the evidence that has been based  on  the  accounts
         that she had  given.   In  particular,  if  the  Appellant  is  not
         accepted as being a credible witness then  of  course  very  little
         reliance can be placed on what she has  said  to  the  psychiatrist
         and/or psychologist, because of course that would be deemed  to  be
         self-serving  in  support  of  an  unreliable,  if  not  incredible
         account."

 5. Had that paragraph featured at the end of the findings  on  credibility
    rather than at the beginning it may just  have  survived.   However  it
    does not.  It is right at the beginning of the credibility findings and
    flies in the face of guidance, in particular the case of Mibanga [2005]
    EWCA Civ 367 which confirms that expert evidence  should  not  just  be
    looked  at  after  credibility  findings  have  been  made   but   that
    credibility  must  be  assessed  taking  into  account  that  evidence,
    including any expert evidence.  At no point in this  judge's  reasoning
    has he considered the medical  evidence  at  all.   The  Appellant  was
    deemed so mentally unfit that she could not  give  evidence.   She  had
    been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder as  well  as  severe
    depression.  The psychiatrist may have given an explanation as  to  why
    the Appellant had difficulty in giving evidence.  The psychiatrist  may
    have given an explanation as to why it was the claim was made  so  late
    in the day.  That may have been a good explanation and it may not.  The
    judge does not consider it at all.  That  report  should  have  been  a
    central part of the credibility findings.  Not only did the  judge  not
    consider the expert report, he did not make any findings in relation to
    what she claimed had happened to her in Sri Lanka either.  He  did  not
    make any findings in relation to her claimed diaspora activities.   The
    findings that he does make appear to be based solely on the delay.

 6. For that reason the Decision and Reasons cannot  stand  and  I  set  it
    aside in its entirety with no preserved findings.   It  is  appropriate
    and agreed by both representatives that this case should be remitted to
    be re-heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  is  what  I  do.
    Accordingly the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent
    that the case is remitted for  a  full  re-hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. No anonymity direction was made previously but as it is an asylum  case
    I will make an anonymity direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 23rd June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date 23rd June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


