
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/01164/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 March 2018                          | On 27 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                               Bashdar ibrahim
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Boyle, Legal Representative, Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge Head-Rapson of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent
    on 23 March 2017 dismissing  his  appeal  on  international  protection
    grounds.

2.   The judge accepted that  the  appellant's  home  area  was  Kirkuk  but
    rejected for lack of credibility his claim to fear reprisals  from  the
    family of a girl he had extramarital relations with.

3.   The grounds do not challenge the judge's adverse  credibility  findings
    but take issue with the judge's decision to depart from Upper  Tribunal
    country guidance as set out in AA (Article 15(c) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
    544 (IAC) according to which Kirkuk was unsafe.

4.   I have no hesitation in finding this ground of appeal  made  out.   The
    only reason given for departing from AA is that set out by the judge at
    paragraph 46 which states:-

         "46. Since the case of AA, and indeed since the decision  was  made
             in this case, in August 2016, the Objective Evidence states as
             follows:


              Country  Information  and  Guidance  -  Iraq:  Return/Internal
             Relocation (August 2016):


              3.  Policy Summary
              3.1.1  The 'contested' governorates of Iraq are Anbar, Diyala,
             Kirkuk (aka Tameen), Ninewah and Salah al-Din.
              3.1.2  In the CG case of AA, which considered evidence  up  to
             April  2015,  the  courts  found  that,  in  the   'contested'
             governorates, indiscriminate violence was at such a level that
             subsequent grounds existed for believing that a person, solely
             by being present there for any length of time,  faced  a  real
             risk of harm which threatened their life  or  person  (thereby
             engaging Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Direction  and
             entitling a person to a grant of Humanitarian Protection).
              3.1.3  However, the situation has changed since then,  Diyala,
             Kirkuk (with the exception of Hawija and the surrounding area)
             and Salah Al-Din no  longer  meet  the  threshold  of  Article
             15(c).
              3.1.4  However, decision makers should consider whether  there
             are particular factors  relevant  to  the  persons  individual
             circumstances which might nevertheless place them at  enhanced
             risk.
              3.1.5  In general, a person can relocate to the areas which do
             not meet the threshold of Article 15(c).
              3.1.6  Where a claim falls to be refused, it is unlikely to be
             certifiable as 'clearly unfounded' under  section  94  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."


         There  are  two  difficulties  with  this  treatment.   First,   to
         designate the CIG policy as "Objective Evidence" was not  something
         the judge could simply assume.  CIG policy is an emanation  of  the
         Home Office who is only one party in the appeal. The objectivity of
         what was  described  as  "Objective  Evidence  "was  a  matter  for
         judicial evaluation.  Second  there  was  a  considerable  body  of
         background country material before the judge, some relating to  the
         issue of safety in Kirkuk and not all of it concurred with the  CIG
         assessment.  The judge's treatment evinces a clear failure to  give
         cogent reasons for departing from country guidance or (as  part  of
         that) to identify diverse sources justifying such a course.


5.   Mr Diwnycz did not seek to resist  the  grounds  of  appeal  if  I  was
    persuaded the judge erred in his treatment of the guidance in AA, but I
    have given consideration in any event to whether the decision could  be
    defended on the basis that the judge made further  defensible  findings
    in the alternative to the effect that the appellant  could  safely  and
    reasonably relocate to the IKR.  I  have  concluded  that  the  judge's
    treatment of this issue is too problematic for me to  uphold  it.   The
    principal difficulty is that the judge's approach is at odds  with  the
    Home Office CIG on  internal  relocation,  as  well  as  with  Tribunal
    country guidance.  In particular the judge only dealt with the issue of
    entry for 10 days or registration for renewal and  sponsorship  without
    addressing all the factors set out in AA at paragraph 204  pages  17  -
    21.

6.   For the above reasons the judge materially erred in  law  necessitating
    that I set out the judge's decision.

7.   To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Head-Rapson).

8.   No anonymity direction is made because none was applied for.


Signed:                                      Date: 25 April 2018

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

