
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01681/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 March 2021                      |On 15 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE



                                   Between

                                    JACG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Johnrose
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Mexico which was born  in  1975.  He
    entered the United Kingdom in 2018 with his partner.  Both  parties  to
    the appeal accept that the appellant had fled to Europe  after  he  had
    been beaten and threatened by  members  of  a  drugs  cartel  after  he
    refused to assist them in supplying drugs in his  home  area  in  2018.
    However, the Secretary of State contends that the appellant is  not  at
    real risk on return on account of being a gay man  and  that  he  could
    reasonably relocate to Mexico City to obviate any risk from the cartel.
    The First-tier Tribunal (Judge T Jones) dismissed the appeal. It  found
    that the appellant was not at real risk on return  on  account  of  his
    sexuality (a finding not  challenged  on  appeal)  and  that  he  could
    relocate to Mexico City, the cartel not having the ability  and  having
    no further interest in committing resources to seeking  to  locate  and
    harm the appellant or his partner.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There is one ground of appeal. The appellant  asserts  that  the  judge
    placed excessive weight on his finding that  the  cartel  had  made  no
    attempt to locate  the  appellant's  mother  and  sister  (it  was  the
    appellant's claim that the cartel was likely to harass the appellant by
    threatening his family) even though they live  only  45  minutes  drive
    from  the  appellant's  former  home.  The  judge  had  overlooked  the
    appellant's evidence that, having been threatened by the cartel, he had
    cased visiting his mother and sister to minimise the risk of the cartel
    members following him to their home. By  taking  that  precaution,  the
    appellant had 'obviated  any  risk'  to  his  mother  and  sister;  the
    question which the judge had failed to answer was  whether  the  cartel
    would be able and willing to find the appellant  should  he  return  to
    Mexico.

 3. Notwithstanding the skilful submissions of Mrs Johnrose,  who  appeared
    for the appellant at the remote initial hearing in the Upper  Tribunal,
    I do not find that the judge has erred in law such  that  his  decision
    falls to be set aside. I find that the  judge's  reasoning  is  not  at
    fault for the reason advanced in the grounds. The submission made by Mr
    Bates, who appeared before the Upper  Tribunal  for  the  Secretary  of
    State, was essentially the same as  that  advanced  by  the  Presenting
    Officer before the First-tier  Tribunal,  namely  that  the  power  and
    influence of the cartel and its interest  in  the  appellant  had  been
    significantly overestimated by the appellant. Judge Jones accepted [69]
    the Presenting Officer's submission that the appellant's claim that the
    cartel had considerable power and influence with  the  authorities  and
    police was simply not  consistent  with  the  fact  that  the  cartel's
    members would have to rely solely upon following the appellant  to  the
    home of his family because they lacked the 'will or resource' to  trace
    the family's whereabouts by any other means. The judge had  taken  that
    fact as the basis for his clear  finding  that,  notwithstanding  their
    history of  harming  the  appellant,  the  cartel's  members  had  lost
    interest in finding and harming the appellant in an  area  as  vast  as
    Mexico City either directly (the judge's finding that the cartel  would
    not know that the appellant had returned to Mexico is, in  my  opinion,
    wholly valid) or through threats to  his  family.  The  judge  was  not
    required to decide whether the cartel had not sought to harm the mother
    and sister because they lacked to resources or influence to locate them
    or because they had lost interest in the appellant; from the  decision,
    it is clear that the  judge  considered  that  both  explanations  were
    likely to be relevant. As the judge pointed out  [75],  two  years  had
    elapsed since the appellant had 'disappeared from [his  home  area]  of
    Mexico intending not to  return.'  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's
    decision adequately explains the Tribunal's reasons for dismissing  the
    appeal and that those reasons are both cogent and were available to the
    judge on the evidence before him. I therefore dismiss the appeal.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 4 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


















