
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01005/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 May 2016                                |On 01 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                          MR MD BABLU AHMED TOPADAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan, Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   A A Wilson dismissing an appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born in 1986 and  is  a  national  of  Bangladesh.   He
   entered the UK in 2010 as a student.  He claimed asylum in December 2015.
    He claimed that he was a member of the  BNP  from  March  2004  and  was
   secretary of his local ward of the student wing before becoming the local
   union  secretary  in  February  2008.   From  2008  he   had   increasing
   difficulties with a particular  person  in  the  Awami  League.   He  was
   attacked by this person in June 2008.  At a rally shortly  afterwards  he
   was beaten up by the police.  After the election in 2008 the Awami League
   activist who had targeted him before started looking for him again and he
   had to go into hiding.  A false claim was lodged  against  him  with  the
   police.  Further allegations were made by a different individual  in  May
   or June 2009.  An arrest warrant was issued in October 2009  and  he  was
   then advised to leave the country.

3) At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal there was no appearance  by
   or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   Shortly  before  the  hearing   the
   appellant's then solicitors wrote to the Tribunal stating that they  were
   withdrawing from acting and the appellant wanted the appeal to be decided
   on the  basis  of  the  documentary  evidence.   The  judge  recorded  at
   paragraph 9 of the decision his reasons for proceeding with the hearing.

4) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal considered  the  documents  and  the
   appellant's immigration history.  The judge concluded that the  documents
   relied upon by the appellant carried no weight at all.   The  appellant's
   asylum claim was therefore dismissed.

5) The appellant claimed that he was facing a five year prison  sentence  in
   Bangladesh.  The judge concluded that even if this were so,  there  would
   be no violation of Article 3 on the basis either that the  appellant  had
   been sentenced in absence to a five year prison sentence or  that  prison
   conditions in Bangladesh would violate Article 3.  In relation to  prison
   conditions the judge relied upon  the  case  of  SH  (prison  conditions)
   Bangladesh CG [2008] UKAIT 0076.

6) The judge also considered the appellant's private  life.   The  appellant
   had no family life in the UK.  Although he  had  been  in  the  UK  since
   January 2010 he had not lost his ability  to  relocate  and  re-integrate
   within Bangladesh.  The Secretary of State's decision was  proportionate.



7) Permission to appeal was sought on several grounds.   It  was  said  that
   the judge had not given proper consideration to the issue of credibility.
    The appellant's credibility had not been questioned and  the  judge  did
   not make adverse findings on credibility.  The judge failed to take  into
   account the appellant's explanation for why no further letters  could  be
   produced in support of his claim.  The judge  had  also  failed  to  give
   adequate regard to the  appellant's  current  life  in  the  UK  and  the
   undesirable effect it would have if he could not continue it.

8) In the grant of permission to appeal it was considered arguable  that  no
   clear findings were made on credibility or on  the  documents  submitted.
   The decision lacked structure and there were no  clear  findings  on  the
   reliability of the documents.  It  was  arguable  that  instead  of  both
   parties engaging with the evidence,  reliance  had  been  placed  on  the
   appellant's submission of false documents with a previous application and
   his delay in claiming asylum.

9) A rule 21 notice dated  28  April  2016  was  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
   respondent.  This states that credibility was in issue.  The Judge of the
   First-tier Tribunal noted the correct standard of  proof  and  considered
   that the appellant had lodged a false document in a previous application.
    This and the issue of delay in  claiming  asylum  were  factors  in  the
   appeal.  The appellant compounded this by choosing not to  attending  his
   hearing and offering his assistance to the Tribunal.  The judge  directed
   himself appropriately.

Submissions

10) At the hearing before me Mr Khan,  for  the  appellant,  submitted  that
   there were no clear findings made by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
   on the reliability of the documents relied upon by  the  appellant.   The
   judge did not engage with this evidence.   Instead  he  relied  upon  the
   appellant's previous use of false documents and  his  delay  in  claiming
   asylum.  This was an error of law.

11) Mr Khan continued that nowhere did the judge  refer  to  other  material
   aspects of the  evidence,  chiefly  the  appellant's  witness  statement,
   relating to his political activities and the risk on return.   The  judge
   did not assess the witness statement in any detail and made no assessment
   of the documents relied upon.  Mr Khan submitted that the  judge  made  a
   damaging finding on credibility on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had
   submitted false documents in a previous application.  The  appellant  had
   had no opportunity to challenge this contention.

12) It was pointed out to Mr Khan that reference  was  made  to  a  judicial
   review brought to challenge the Secretary of State's decision in relation
   to the previous application where it was alleged that the  appellant  had
   sought to rely upon false documents.  Permission to  apply  for  judicial
   review had been refused.

13) Mr Khan responded that the refusal was on the basis that  the  appellant
   had an alternative remedy in the form of an out of  country  appeal.   He
   pointed out that the appellant had made an Article 3  claim  in  November
   2014 but submitted that this had not  been  decided  by  the  respondent.
   There was no evidence that the appellant had relied upon false documents.
    The judge should have given reasons for his findings.  The judge  should
   have considered whether it was fair to admit the evidence in relation  to
   false documentation.  The reasons given by the judge in paragraph 20 were
   not adequate.  Reliance was placed on the decision of the Upper  Tribunal
   in MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641.   The  appellant
   chose not to attend the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  but  this
   did not relieve the judge of the duty to give reasons.

14) Mr Khan further submitted that the judge  should  have  found  that  the
   respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law because  it  was
   taken in an unfair manner.  He referred to paragraph  6  of  the  judge's
   decision, in which it was recorded that the Secretary of State had set  a
   deadline of  22  February  2016  for  the  appellant  to  submit  further
   representations but the Home Office  notice  of  decision  was  dated  25
   January 2016.  The judge commented that on the face of it the decision by
   the Secretary of State was premature.

15) The question was raised as to what  representations  the  appellant  had
   been prevented from making to the Secretary of State.   Mr  Khan  pointed
   out that all the documents on which the appellant relied were in a bundle
   dated 9 March 2016.  It was noted that this bundle was  lodged  prior  to
   the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 15  March  2016.   Mr  Khan
   submitted that the judge had not  properly  considered  these  documents,
   which should have been accepted or rejected.  The decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal should be set aside and a further hearing held.

16) For the appellant Mr Wilding submitted that the  appeal  was  completely
   without merit.  The appellant did not attend the hearing before the First-
   tier Tribunal.  There was nothing unfair about this hearing and this  was
   not a point which was raised in the application for permission to appeal.
    The Secretary of State had provided evidence of  historical  fraud.   It
   was maintained on behalf of the appellant that this was unfair  but  this
   was not so in an asylum appeal.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did
   not say none of the documents were reliable because  of  the  appellant's
   historical use of fake documents.  The outcome of the appeal in the First-
   tier Tribunal did not depend upon the historical use of false  documents.
   Evidence  was  produced  of  an  ETS  statement  and  ETS  specification.
   Although there was subsequent case law on ETS, no evidence in relation to
   English language testing was produced by the appellant.

17) Mr Wilding submitted that from paragraph 16 of the decision onwards  the
   judge had properly considered the claim and rejected it.  At paragraph 16
   and 17 the judge had looked at the general situation in  Bangladesh.   At
   paragraph 18 he had considered the appellant's screening  interview.   At
   paragraph 19 he considered the delay by the appellant in claiming asylum.
    At paragraph 20  the  judge  referred  to  the  previous  use  of  false
   documents by the appellant but even putting this aside,  the  judge  gave
   reasons at paragraphs  21  and  22  for  not  accepting  the  appellant's
   evidence.  The  judge  pointed  out  that  at  the  time  he  raised  his
   application for judicial review the appellant had access to legal  advice
   but chose not to claim asylum at that point.   He  claimed  to  have  had
   legal advice at the time he left Bangladesh but  the  judge  pointed  out
   there was no verifiable information from his  lawyers  in  Bangladesh  at
   that time.  The appellant would need to show the  judge's  findings  were
   perverse but the judge could only assess the evidence  which  was  before
   him and the appellant had chosen not to attend the hearing.

18) Mr Khan explained at his point that  the  appellant  did  not  have  the
   means to finance legal representation and he was  scared  to  attend  the
   hearing without a lawyer.

19) Mr Wilding resumed by saying that the grounds  in  the  application  did
   not show any error of law.  The question  of  whether  the  Secretary  of
   State's decision was unfair was not in the grounds  of  the  application.
   The only question arising from  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  made  in
   December 2015 was whether his removal would  lead  to  a  breach  of  the
   Refugee Convention.  The question of whether  the  Secretary  of  State's
   decision was in accordance with the law was not within  the  jurisdiction
   of the First-tier Tribunal.  There was anyway  the  question  of  whether
   there was any prejudice arising from the restriction of  the  appellant's
   opportunity to lodge further documents.  There was an appeal to the First-
   tier Tribunal.  This was not certified.  The appellant could produce  any
   documents on which he sought to rely and had done so.

20) Mr Khan in response referred to  paragraph  18  of  the  decision.   The
   judge observed that at paragraph  6.2  of  the  screening  interview  the
   appellant had made it clear that there was a politically  motivated  case
   against him.  The appellant correctly stated at his  screening  interview
   that he had never committed any offence but the case raised  against  him
   was because of  his  involvement  in  politics.   All  the  charges  were
   politically motivated.  The judge said at paragraph 22 that he would give
   no weight to the documents but he did not  consider  the  evidence  as  a
   whole, including the documents  from  the  police.   The  judge  did  not
   explain why the documents were not reliable, in accordance  with  Tanveer
   Ahmed [2002] INLR 345.  The judge's decision was vitiated by an error  of
   law and should be set aside for a further hearing to  be  held  before  a
   differently constituted hearing.

21) On  the  issue  of  possible  unfairness,  Mr  Khan  accepted  that  the
   appellant did not have a case - he had had  the  opportunity  to  produce
   documents before the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

22) The essential issues in this appeal are whether the Judge of the  First-
   tier  Tribunal  properly  assessed  the  evidence  and  made  credibility
   findings based on the  evidence  and  supported  by  adequate  and  valid
   reasons.  To begin with it is worth noting that at paragraph  15  of  the
   decision the judge asked himself what  weight  he  should  give  to  "the
   copious documents" relied upon by the appellant  which  appeared  to  the
   judge to be in "a clear, logical and  legal  framework"  as  against  the
   appellant having previously lodged false documents  to  obtain  leave  to
   remain and on his own admission having arrived in the UK when  the  first
   set of proceedings against him in Bangladesh had already commenced.

23) The judge then  observed,  at  paragraph  16,  that  in  answering  this
   question he did not have the benefit of the  appellant  appearing  before
   him and tendering himself for cross-examination.  This was something  the
   appellant himself had deprived himself of the opportunity of doing.  This
   was not, however, evidence against the appellant.

24) The judge then observed  at  paragraph  17  that  he  had  already  made
   reference to the situation in Bangladesh  and  the  degree  of  political
   instability there from 2008 to 2010.  This political instability did  not
   of itself mean that someone who was involved in that would  necessary  be
   at risk on return now.  They could be at risk due to the  fact  they  had
   been convicted of criminal offences.  It was possible for  the  appellant
   show that his  particular  conviction  was  generated  through  political
   motivation and that he had been deprived of  a  fair  trial.   The  judge
   observed that  there  was  no  statement  either  from  the  advocate  in
   Bangladesh that the appellant had instructed prior to  his  departure  or
   from the advocate who had represented  him  in  court  at  his  trial  in
   absence.

25) The judge then referred at paragraph 18  to  the  appellant's  screening
   interview.  At this the appellant said in his own country  he  had  never
   been accused of or committed an offence for which he had  been  or  could
   have been convicted.  He also stated that he had never  been  accused  of
   being involved with any political organisation or religious  organisation
   or any armed or violent organisation.  This was despite the fact that the
   second set of proceedings brought against  the  appellant  in  Bangladesh
   supposedly included firearms offences.  The judge then noted that at  6.2
   of the screening interview the appellant stated that he was  involved  in
   politics and there was a case against him.

26) At paragraph 19 the judge noted that the appellant was ill at the  start
   of his subsequent asylum  interview  but  the  interview  proceeded  with
   appropriate breaks.  The judge observed that according to  the  appellant
   he left Bangladesh knowing the risk that he claimed to face but he failed
   to claim asylum.  Instead he made an application  for  further  leave  to
   remain and, when that was refused, he made a  human  rights  application,
   again without claiming asylum.  This led to a very considerable delay.

27) The judge observed briefly at paragraph 20 that the appellant  had  used
   false documentation, namely a false English language test certificate, to
   obtain limited leave to remain in August 2014.  The judge asked  himself,
   at paragraph 21, whether this was simply the act of  a  desperate  person
   not able to obtain appropriate legal advice.  The judge  noted,  however,
   that an application for judicial  review  was  lodged  to  challenge  the
   respondent's decision arising from this.  This meant  the  appellant  had
   access to appropriate legal advice but chose not to  claim  asylum.   The
   judge was satisfied that the appellant had used false documents.

28) The judge then concluded that  in  the  absence  of  further  verifiable
   information from Bangladesh, in particular from the appellant's lawyer at
   the time he left, when he claimed to have received advice,  or  from  the
   lawyer appointed to represent him at  the  hearing,  the  judge  was  not
   satisfied that any weight could be attached to the documents on which the
   appellant relied.

29) To the extent that it has been argued  that  the  judge  did  not  reach
   clear conclusions on the appellant's credibility and on the  evidence,  I
   do not agree.  By implication, if not  expressly,  the  judge  found  the
   evidence  on  which  the  asylum  claim  was  based  to  be  lacking   in
   credibility.  The judge found  the  documentary  evidence  on  which  the
   appellant relied in support of his claim to  be  wholly  unreliable.   Mr
   Khan submitted before me that the  judge  did  not  have  regard  to  the
   appellant's witness statement but the judge noted at paragraph 3 that the
   details of the appellant's claim were set out clearly  in  his  statement
   and at his interview.  The judge did not disregard the witness  statement
   - he did not believe it.  The judge did not go  through  the  documentary
   evidence item by item but he was not required to  do  so.   The  decision
   clearly shows that he  was  aware  of  the  content  of  the  documentary
   evidence.  At paragraph 14 the judge observes that the  documents  lodged
   showed two separate court proceedings.  In respect of the first  set  the
   appellant was convicted in absence to imprisonment for five years, having
   been represented by an advocate appointed by the state.

30) Among the reasons given by the judge for not accepting  the  appellant's
   evidence were the discrepancies identified in the  appellant's  screening
   interview, as set out above.  At paragraph  5.3  of  this  interview  the
   appellant not only denied ever having committed an offence,  which  would
   be consistent with his account, but denied ever having been accused of an
   offence, which was not consistent.   He  further  denied,  at  5.5,  ever
   having been involved with or accused of being  involved  with  any  of  a
   number of groups, including an armed or violent  organisation,  group  or
   party.  Again the question was not  just  one  of  whether  he  had  been
   involved but whether he had been accused of being involved.  Then at  6.2
   the appellant refers to having been involved in  politics  and  having  a
   case brought against him.  He relied on documentary evidence showing that
   he  was  accused  of  involvement  in  firearms  offences.   These   were
   discrepancies on which the judge was entitled to rely.

31) One of the main points on which the judge found  against  the  appellant
   was in relation to his delay in claiming asylum.  The judge observed that
   the appellant left Bangladesh in 2010 when he  already  considered  there
   was a risk to him, but failed to make any claim for asylum.  Even when he
   made a human rights claim in July 2014 he did not claim asylum.   As  the
   judge observed, in the same year the appellant made  an  application  for
   judicial review, showing that he had access to legal advice, but he still
   did not claim asylum.  The judge was entitled  to  take  the  delay  into
   account.

32) The judge was also entitled to rely on omissions  from  the  appellant's
   documentary evidence.  The judge noted that there was  no  evidence  from
   the appellant's lawyers in Bangladesh, either those he  claimed  to  have
   consulted before he left or the lawyer appointed to represent him in  the
   first set of proceedings when he was  supposedly  convicted  in  absence.
   Although Mr Khan submitted before me that the judge had  disregarded  the
   appellant's explanation of why he had not been able  to  produce  further
   letters, Mr Khan  did  not  refer  me  to  where  in  the  evidence  this
   explanation was to be found and I have not seen  it.   I  note,  however,
   that at paragraph 46 of the witness statement the appellant said after he
   left Bangladesh he had received from his lawyer most of the documents  on
   which he relied.

33) I turn next to the judge's treatment of the appellant's previous use  of
   a false English language certificate.  In this regard Mr Wilding referred
   me to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir (ETS -  evidence
   - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229  and  the  earlier  judicial  review
   decision in Gazi IJR [2015] UKUT 00327.

34) I note that the Tribunal's conclusions in SM and Qadir were that in  ETS
   cases, where it was alleged that there was reliance on a fraudulent  test
   certificate, the Secretary of State's generic evidence, combined with her
   evidence  particular  to  the  appellant,  sufficed  to   discharge   the
   evidential burden  of  proving  the  certificate  had  been  procured  by
   dishonesty.  However,  given  the  multiple  frailties  from  which  this
   generic evidence was considered to suffer and, in the light  of  evidence
   adduced by the appellants, the Secretary of State had failed to discharge
   the legal burden of proving dishonesty on their part.

35) In the present appeal the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  had  before
   him the evidence on which the Secretary of State had  relied  in  finding
   that the application made in 2014 was made  using  a  false  certificate.
   There is a letter dated 5 October 2014 addressing the appellant by  name,
   in which it is stated on behalf of the Secretary of State that an anomaly
   in the appellant's speaking test indicated the presence of a  proxy  test
   taker.  This was supported by a witness  statement  from  a  senior  case
   worker specific to the appellant, as well  as  the  generic  evidence  to
   which reference was made in SM and Qadir.  As Mr Wilding submitted before
   me, this was sufficient to discharge the burden of  proof.   No  evidence
   was adduced by the appellant to refute the Secretary of State's evidence.



36) For the appellant, I understood Mr Khan to say that  the  appellant  did
   not have an in-country right of appeal against  the  decision  curtailing
   his leave because of the use of false documents.  Nevertheless,  the  use
   of these false educational certificates was raised  in  the  reasons  for
   refusal letter against which the present appeal  has  been  brought.   It
   does not appear to have figured prominently in the respondent's reasoning
   for refusing the asylum claim but the judge was nevertheless entitled  to
   have regard to it.  The appellant had an opportunity in relation  to  the
   present appeal to question whether he had in fact  relied  upon  a  false
   educational certificate but he did not do so.  Although the judge rightly
   drew no adverse inference from the appellant's decision not to attend the
   hearing, the appellant had the benefit of legal advice in preparation for
   the hearing and had the opportunity to address this point.

37) Mr Khan submitted that the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
   have regard to the evidence in the round, as required by  Tanveer  Ahmed.
   It seems to me, however, from the exposition of the judge's reasoning set
   out above, that the judge fully considered the  documentary  evidence  in
   the round and was entitled to reach the conclusions which he reached  for
   the reasons which he stated.  Mr Khan sought to rely on the  decision  of
   the Upper Tribunal in MK regarding the duty to give reasons.  This states
   no more than that if a document is to be worth no weight  whatsoever,  it
   is necessary to say so in the decision and  for  such  a  finding  to  be
   supported by reasons.  In this appeal the  judge  found  the  documentary
   evidence to be of no weight and gave adequate reasons  for  his  finding.
   There was no breach of the duty to give reasons.

38) In conclusion, the grounds on which the application  for  permission  to
   appeal has been brought and argued before me did not show  any  error  of
   law in the judge's decision.   For  this  reason  the  decision  will  be
   upheld.

Conclusions

39) The making of a decision did not involve the making of  an  error  on  a
   point of law.

40) I do not set aside the decision.



Anonymity

41) The Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  order  for
   anonymity.  I have not been asked to make such an  order  and  I  see  no
   reason of substance for so doing.





Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
