
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    PA/01956/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 30 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between
                                    L B D
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                        DETERMINATION and REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam.  It is  accepted  that  she  was
    trafficked into prostitution  in  Vietnam,  China,  and  France  before
    claiming asylum in the UK.  The respondents' decision dated 18 February
    2019 finds that she  is  not  entitled  to  asylum  because  sufficient
    protection is provided by the authorities in Vietnam, and she would not
    be at risk as a lone woman, or as a single mother with  her  son,  [37-
    64]; and that she could reasonably relocate to Hi  Chi  Minh  City,  or
    elsewhere, [65-75].

 2.  (The respondent also held that the claim did not fall within a Refugee
    Convention category, [76-77], but that is not presently an issue.)

 3. The respondents' decision  at  [10]  lists  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant, ending with "unrecognisable copies of photographs".

 4. FtT Judge  Fowell  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 October 2019.  He  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    account about targeting of her family, the disappearance of her son, or
    her brother being beaten to  death.   He  did  not  find  her  credible
    "beyond the facts found by the  NRM",  [39].   He  disagreed  with  the
    respondent about a Refugee Convention category, [52].  He found no risk
    of re-trafficking, [53-57].  He  disagreed  with  the  respondent  also
    about sufficiency of protection and internal relocation,  [58-60],  but
    held that availability of family support was such  that  there  was  no
    real risk on return, [61].

 5. Judge Fowell recorded evidence in the appellant's bundle, including, at
    [10], photographs, a police  report,  and  death  certificates  of  her
    parents and her brother.  At [30-31]  he  noted  that  the  appellant's
    representatives had said at the interview that further documents  would
    be supplied within a week, but that had not been done by  the  time  of
    the refusal letter nearly two years  later.   He  therefore  found  "no
    procedural unfairness in the Home Office  challenging  this  subsequent
    evidence".  At [33-38] he found these items unreliable.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT.

 7. Ground 1 is "procedural unfairness and  illegality".  It  is  contended
    that the Home office "sought to depart from their reasons  for  refusal
    letter" and to challenge the authenticity of documents  not  previously
    challenged, and that "neither the  Home  Office  nor  the  judge"  were
    entitled to do so "on the date of the hearing".

 8. Ground 2 is "risk of re-trafficking".

 9. UTJ Blundell granted permission by a decision dated 19 and issued on 20
    December 2019.  He noted that ground 1 did not accord with [10] of  the
    respondent's decision and with  [30-31]  of  the  FtT's  decision,  and
    observed  that  the  point  should  be  resolved   by   evidence   from
    representatives  that  the  documents  had  been  placed   before   the
    respondent as claimed.  The rest of the  grounds  were  thought  to  be
    "less strong" but permission was not restricted.

10. On 25 February 2020, the appellant changed her representatives.

11. By a note and  directions  issued  on  1  May  2020  the  UT  took  the
    provisional view that it would be appropriate to  determine  without  a
    hearing whether the FtT erred in law and, if so, whether it  should  be
    set aside.  Parties were  also  given  the  opportunity  to  submit  on
    whether, notwithstanding those directions, a hearing was necessary.

12. The appellant  has  filed  a  submission  in  response  to  directions,
    received by  email  on  12  May  2020.   Under  the  heading  "skeleton
    argument", her representatives  say  on  ground  1  that  the  relevant
    documents were served on the respondent by previous representatives "in
    late 2017 ... shortly after the asylum interview" and that if  concerns
    were raised at the hearing,  the  appellant  should  have  been  "given
    adequate time to address those new issues".   Previous  representatives
    have not responded to a  request  for  a  record  of  delivery  of  the
    documents to the respondent.  They did receive  the  appellant's  file.
    They produce from it a letter  from  a  translation  company  dated  13
    November 2017 as "the only  evidence  we  have  to  prove"  that  those
    solicitors "submitted those translations to the Home Office".

13. The submission attaches two case reports, but makes no comment  on  any
    light they might shed on error of law in this case.

14. The appellant does not suggest that a hearing is required.

15. The SSHD has filed a submission dated 21 May  2020.   This  says,  very
    briefly,  that  the  grounds  are  only  disagreement;  the  respondent
    maintains that the documents in question were not before the  decision-
    maker; and the decision of the FtT should not be set aside.

16. The SSHD's submission says at (d) that the appeal "may be difficult  to
    determine on the  papers".   That  is  rather  cryptic,  if  not  self-
    contradictory.  It appears to be aimed at how remaking  might  proceed,
    if the decision were to be set aside,  rather  than  whether  there  is
    error of law.

17. I am satisfied, in all the above circumstances, that  this  is  a  case
    where the error of  law  issue  may  properly  be  resolved  without  a
    hearing, applying rules 2 and 34.




    Ground 1.

18. The appellant raised procedural unfairness at the  hearing,  [23],  but
    she did not ask for an adjournment.

19. Although much time has gone by, the appellant  has  not  yet  suggested
    that there is anything else she might have advanced in support  of  the
    authenticity of her documents.

20. There is no reason to think that the appellant's case would  have  been
    any better even if the judge had (of his own initiative)  seen  fit  to
    adjourn.

21. The judge at [33-38] gave various reasons, in which no error  has  been
    shown, for finding the documentary evidence  unreliable.   He  did  not
    there mention the late stage at which they were produced.

22. The appellant has  not  referred  to  anything  in  the  terms  of  the
    respondent's decision, or anywhere else in prior procedure, which might
    reasonably have led her to believe that the  police  report  and  death
    certificates were accepted as genuine, or  that  this  chapter  of  her
    account was undisputed.

23. There is only the faintest of reasons for thinking that  the  documents
    might have been submitted before the respondent's  decision  was  made.
    To the contrary, the listing of documents  in  the  decision,  and  the
    absence of reference to the matters  to  which  they  relate,  strongly
    suggest that those matters were not before the decision-maker.

24. Ground 1 discloses no procedural unfairness.




    Ground 2.

25. The appellant's submissions do not take this ground any further.  It is
    only insistence and disagreement.  It identifies no error on any  point
    of law.

26. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

27. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which remains in place.

28. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.


     [pic]
     UT Judge Macleman               Date: 20 July 2020




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.


