
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01730/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester CJC               |        Decision and Reasons        |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On: 9 April 2018                       |        On 11 April 2018            |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                  M A A A B
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     None
For the respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    appellant's  asylum  claim  and  medical  evidence  relevant   to   his
    vulnerability.


 2. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, has appealed against  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 15 August 2017 in which it  dismissed  an
    appeal  against  the  decision   of   the   respondent   refusing   his
    international protection claim.


 3. The First-tier Tribunal treated the appellant as a vulnerable appellant
    as did I when he appeared before me.  The appellant was assisted before
    me by Ms Hill, a social worker and her trainee  social  worker.   I  am
    grateful to them for their assistance.   Unfortunately,  there  was  no
    interpreter to explain the proceedings to the appellant,  but  Ms  Hill
    communicated on behalf of the appellant that he relied upon the grounds
    of appeal and wished to challenge the First-tier Tribunal decision.  Ms
    Hill also assured me that she would explain what happened at the  brief
    hearing to the appellant with the use of an interpreter by telephone.


 4. Although there was no interpreter, I did  not  consider  that  fairness
    required an adjournment of the  hearing.   This  is  because  Mr  Bates
    sensibly and realistically conceded there was an error of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision, such that it  should  be  set  aside  and
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


 5. Mr Bates accepted that in an otherwise carefully drafted decision,  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to consider for itself  whether  the  appeal
    should be adjourned in light of the  available  medical  evidence,  and
    that there had been procedural unfairness.


 6. In a letter dated 17 July 2017 (some three weeks before the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing) Dr Farrington,  a  GP  with  the  Greater  Manchester
    Mental Health Trust, described the appellant in these terms:


           "On examination, he was clearly having difficulty  concentrating
           today.  He was disassociative  at  times  and  agitated  by  the
           distracting intrusive thoughts in his head.  He is  clearly  not
           functioning well at present and I am concerned he is  not  in  a
           fit state to attend his court hearing."


 7. This letter was provided  alongside  an  adjournment  request  dated  3
    August 2018.  The First-tier  Tribunal  refused  this  request  on  the
    papers on 7 August 2018, observing that there had  already  been  delay
    and  the  appellant  had  been  given  considerable  time   to   obtain
    representation.  The decision did not address the GP's concern that the
    appellant was not in a fit state to attend his court hearing.


 8. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal on 8  August  2017,
    it is clear from [1] and [29]  of  its  decision  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was aware of Dr Farrington's letter.  At  [3]  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appears to have satisfied itself that the appellant  was  well
    enough to proceed but has provided no reasons for this.  In particular,
    the First-tier Tribunal did not address that relatively recently  a  GP
    with specialist experience in mental health matters was concerned  that
    the appellant was not fit to attend a court hearing.


 9. Mr  Corden  accepted  that  the  medical  evidence  together  with  the
    appointment with solicitors on 29 August 2017 was such that  procedural
    fairness  required  an  adjournment,  and  this   remained   the   case
    notwithstanding the appellant's indication that he wished  to  proceed.
    As First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  MJ  Gillepsie  observed  when  granting
    permission on the papers, it is questionable whether much weight  ought
    to have been given to the appellant's willingness to proceed  with  the
    hearing unassisted by legal representation, given the medical  evidence
    available.  After all, just a matter of days  before  the  hearing  the
    appellant had made a written handwritten request  for  an  adjournment,
    and there had been no obvious change in  circumstances.   The  decision
    does not indicate any probing into this issue or explain how the First-
    tier Tribunal satisfied itself that the appellant was "engaged  at  all
    times".


10. I am satisfied that Mr Bates was entirely correct to concede  an  error
    of law was made such that the decision  must  be  set  aside,  for  the
    reasons I have summarised above.

11. Both representatives agreed that the decision should be remade  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to para  7.2  of  the  relevant
    Senior President's Practice Statement and the nature and extent of  the
    factual findings required in remaking the decision, and I have  decided
    that this is an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.


12. I am very concerned  that  this  is  a  case  in  which  the  appellant
    continues to have no legal representation.  He is clearly a  vulnerable
    person and has made an international  protection  claim.   He  and  the
    Tribunal would be greatly assisted by experienced solicitors  with  the
    benefit of a legal aid contract,  representing  him.   Immediate  steps
    should be taken by such solicitors or  his  social  workers  to  obtain
    updated medical evidence addressing the appellant's capacity to provide
    evidence at a hearing and any other  relevant  matters  concerning  his
    mental health.

Decision


13. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.


14. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 9 April 2018
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
