
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/01129/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 1 November 2018                         |on 17th December 2018         |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     M G
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision  dated  11  January  2018,  refusing  the
         appellant's claim.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Farrelly, promulgated on 5 June 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal dated 20 June 2018.

      v) The grant of permission dated 2 July 2018.

 2. Ground 1 alleges error through the absence at [19] of the full terms of
    headnote 4 of MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG [2013] UKUT 00611  (IAC),
    because that headnote goes on to point out that Coptic Christian  women
    are sometimes "the  target  of  disappearances,  forced  abduction  and
    forced conversion", which was the nature of this case; and per headnote
    7, a case might be established in such circumstances.

 3. There is no fixed  rule  on  the  extent  of  quotation  or  paraphrase
    required of a judge.  The decision shows that the FtT was aware of  the
    nature both of the appellant's claim and of the country guidance.  Risk
    depended on the circumstances, as the FtT said at [19], and as is clear
    from the full headnote and from [150] of AS.  As  Mr  Matthews  pointed
    out, the appellant is not in the categories by age or by marital status
    of Coptic women who are the main victims of  persecution  of  the  type
    alleged.  Fuller citation from AS might have tended both ways.   Ground
    1 discloses no error of law.

 4. Ground 2, sub-headed (i) - (vii), alleges that the FtT failed to record
    the evidence accurately and fully, and focused on incidents  peripheral
    to the claim.

 5. Sub-heading (i)  cites  sections  of  the  appellant's  interviews  and
    statements.

 6. The claim is accurately summarised in the decision at [2].   The  judge
    notes at [8] that the appellant has provided "an  extensive  narrative"
    and  "considerable  detail".   There  is  no  requirement  for  copious
    quotation.

 7. Ground 2 (i) does not show that anything essential was overlooked.

 8. Ground 2 (ii) says that the appellant was  not  asked  at  the  hearing
    about her son being refused  medical  treatment.   There  has  been  no
    production of anyone's record of the hearing.  In any event, the matter
    has not been shown to have any importance.

 9. Grounds 2 (iii) and (iv) overlap.  As  developed  in  submissions,  the
    main point was that the judge should have understood the description by
    the appellant of a neighbour as a "Muslim Sheikh" to be a clear  not  a
    vague reference to a religious cleric.  However, the term  "sheikh"  is
    vague - or, at least, was not shown by the appellant to be precise.

10.  Consulting  a  standard  dictionary  after  the  hearing,  the   first
    definition given is "an Arab leader, in particular the chief or head of
    an Arab tribe, family or village"; and  the  second,  "a  leader  in  a
    Muslim community or organization".  This  is  a  term  of  wide-ranging
    usage.

11. A subsidiary point  about  whether  another  person  was  described  as
    definitely or only possibly a police officer has equally little bearing
    on the outcome.

12. Ground 2 (v) complains about the judge saying at [24] that  the  motive
    to kidnap the appellant and her children "at this junction is unclear".
     The references given confirm that she has always based  her  claim  on
    being targeted.  However, it has not been shown that  she  did  explain
    why an attempted kidnapping happened at that stage  of  her  narrative.
    Consistency is a different matter from clarity of explanation.

13. Ground 2 (vi) quotes the appellant's account  of  an  incident  at  her
    house, but fails to show that the judge was not  entitled  to  find  it
    "rather amazing" that under the circumstances described she would allow
    her neighbour entry to her apartment.

14. Ground 2 (vii) complains about  the  judge  saying  at  [27]  that  the
    appellant used deception to obtain her visa to enter the UK.  She  does
    not dispute that she did so.  There is nothing to show that  the  judge
    failed to consider her explanation.  His rejection of it must be put in
    context of the decision as a whole.  There is no error in  taking  this
    as suggesting fabrication in an attempt for the family to settle in the
    UK.  That was the obvious alternative explanation, and a view  open  to
    the judge on the whole evidence.

15. Ground 3 alleges error through failure to assess credibility  in  light
    of key passages of "objective evidence" about abuses against Copts  and
    lack of state protection.  Ms Loughran accepted  there  had  been  some
    reference by the judge, but said that he failed to  focus  on  specific
    evidence which comprised a level of corroboration.

16. The decision at [7], at [16] - [19], and as  a  whole,  is  reached  in
    terms which make it clear that the  judge  was  aware  of  the  general
    background evidence and country guidance against  which  a  case  of  a
    Coptic Christian woman was to be assessed.  It has not been shown  that
    ground  3  amounts  to  more  than  another  form  of  insistence   and
    disagreement on the facts.

17. Together and separately, the grounds are a determined repetition of the
    appellant's case, but they do not show that the  decision  of  the  FtT
    should be set aside for having involved the making of any  error  on  a
    point of law.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  No reason is stated, but  as  the
    matter was not addressed in the UT, anonymity is preserved herein.


            [pic]

            6 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




