
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01635/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                 |                                |
|On 10 July 2019                        |On 17 July 2019                 |
|                                       |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                   Ali [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq of Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Austin promulgated on 15 April 2019, which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against  a  refusal  of  a  protection  claim  on  all
   grounds.

The Judge's Decision
3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The  Appellants  claim
   was that he had fled from Iran  as  his  attendance  at  a  House  Church
   consequent upon  his  conversion  to  Christianity  was  discovered.  The
   Appellant evidence was that he had continued to practice his faith in the
   UK and in the 2 years since his arrival he and his wife and children were
   all involved in the Church and  he  both  attended  the  Church  and  was
   involved in outside activities. At the appeal the Appellant was supported
   by Reverend [K] and two members of his congregation Mr [J] an Iranian who
   was appointed a lay pastor in the Church of England in Shiraz for 4 years
   by the Bishop of Iran and Mr [B] a member of the Church for 39 years  and
   leader of the Alpha Course the Appellant attended.
4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Dearden  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
   against the Respondent's decision.
5. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that  the  reasons  given  for  the
   finding that the Appellant was not a genuine Christian were  inadequately
   reasoned and his approach to the evidence of  the  expert  witnesses  was
   flawed relying on TF (Iran) [2018] CSIH 58
6. On 14 May 2019 First tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bulpitt  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

   7. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms  Sadiq  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant that

   (a) The reasons given for rejecting their  evidence  was  inadequate.  He
      referred to the fact that certain types of witness could  be  regarded
      as experts.

   (b)  In relation to Mr [J] the very brief summary  of  his  evidence  was
      unfair as he had a lot to say about the reasons for why he  found  the
      Appellant to be genuine. In relation to Mr  [B]  the  Judge  suggested
      that the weight he gave his  opinions  was  limited  by  language  and
      communication difficulties but given that the Appellant speaks English
      and Mr [J] speaks Farsi and no questions were put about this issue  by
      the Judge or the HOPO to allow the  issue  to  be  addressed  to  find
      against him was unfair.

   (c)There is no assessment of the fact that these witnesses had known  the
      Appellant for 2 years having seen him attend Church on a regular basis
      each week and participate in activities outside the Church as well.

   (d) The Judge found against him only for failing to mention the fact that
      he was baptised 29 years ago in Japan.

   (e)There were no clear findings in respect of the attendance at the house
      church in Iran.

   (f) While he does not  hold  against  he  Appellant  any  shortcoming  in
      respect of his knowledge of the  Bible  equally  the  Judge  does  not
      recognise the depth of knowledge he displays.

8. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Tan submitted that:

   a) He agreed with much that Mr Sadiq had said  and  conceded  that  there
      were errors of law.

   b) He accepted that given TF was persuasive he had failed to  do  justice
      to the evidence of the witnesses.

   c) He accepted that the findings about the events in Iran were unclear.

   d) There was  no  consideration  of  the  depth  of  involvement  of  the
      Appellant, his wife and children in the life of the Church both inside
      and outside the Church itself.
Finding on Material Error

9. Having  heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

10. The Appellant was supported at court by three witnesses  who  gave  oral
   evidence and I am satisfied that in respect of two of those witnesses the
   Judges approach was flawed. Reverend [K] readily accepted that there were
   limits to what he could say about the Appellant personally as he had  had
   no direct conversations with him and about his faith.

11. The Judge however dismissed the evidence of Mr [J]  at  paragraph  56  a
   witness who had a background of responsibility with the  Church  both  in
   Iran and the UK, spoke Farsi and knew the Appellant well none of which is
   reflected in the decision. The Judge  unfairly  summarised  his  evidence
   that if someone tells him he is a Christian his role is to  believe  them
   when his written statement and oral evidence must be  read  together.   I
   agree that this is an inadequate assessment of his evidence.  Importantly
   the Judge has failed to engage with the different types of evidence  that
   such a witness could give as set out in TF at paragraphs  52-58  and  the
   fact that such evidence can  be  regarded  as  expert  evidence  that  is
   entitled to respect. The same  applies  to  the  treatment  of  Mr  [B]'s
   evidence: Mr [B] runs the Alpha course which of itself reflects a  degree
   of knowledge that at least merits consideration of whether he  should  be
   accepted as an expert. Additionally the Judge states 'It is apparent that
   Mr [B]'s conversations with AM would  be  limited  with  AM  by  language
   constraints': it is apparent from the way that this  is  worded  that  no
   direct questions was put to the witnesses  about  this  to  give  him  an
   opportunity to address the challenge.

12. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal  to  address  and  determine  the
   weight to be given to expert evidence constitutes a clear error  of  law.
   This error I consider to be material since  had  the  Tribunal  conducted
   this exercise the outcome could have been different. That in my  view  is
   the correct test to apply.

13. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be re-determined afresh.

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
   (a)      the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
   First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
   party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
   necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
   that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
   appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
   the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to the failure to  properly
   address witnesses evidence. In this case none of the findings of fact are
   to stand and the matter will be a complete re hearing.

16. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.


   Signed                                                              Date
   12.7.2019


   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

