
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01835/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th May 2016                               |On 13th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     dh
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Harding, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    find that it is appropriate to continue the order.  Consequently  under
    Rule 14, the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, unless and
    until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant  is  granted
    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    identify her.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and to  the
    Respondent and failure to comply  with  the  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Malins) who, in a  determination  promulgated  on  14th
    March 2016 allowed her appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State of 7th October 2015.  Whilst is the Secretary of State's  appeal,
    I intend to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for ease of reference.

 3. The background can be summarised briefly.  The Appellant arrived in the
    United Kingdom on an unknown date.  She stated that it was in or  about
    August 2013, having entered illegally having  travelled  through  Italy
    and France and then into the United Kingdom with the help of an  agent.
    On 27th March 2015, she made an appointment and  subsequently  made  an
    asylum claim on 8th April 2015.  It was at the screening interview that
    she provided information which supported an account of being a possible
    victim of trafficking.

 4. On 9th April 2015 the Appellant's case was referred  to  the  Competent
    Authority to consider there were reasonable grounds to believe that she
    was a  victim  of  trafficking.   On  15th  April  2015  the  Competent
    Authority informed her that there were reasonable grounds for believing
    that she was a potential victim of human trafficking.  As it  is  well-
    established, there is a two stage process for  identifying  victims  of
    trafficking; the reasonable grounds and the  conclusive  ground  stage.
    The first stage is an initial filter before the conclusive decision  is
    taken.  The reasonable grounds test considers the statement "I  suspect
    but cannot prove the person is a victim  of  trafficking"  whereas  the
    second stage is the conclusive grounds decision  and  the  standard  of
    proof is the balance of probabilities.

 5. In a decision of 25th September 2015  the  Competent  Authority  having
    considered the circumstances of the  Appellant's  case  concluded  that
    there were not sufficient grounds on the balance  of  probabilities  to
    believe that she was the victim of trafficking.  The  reasons  are  set
    out in that accompanying letter.  Before that decision  was  made,  the
    Appellant was interviewed in detail in connection with her asylum claim
    on 16th July 2015.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  set  out  the  factual  basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim at paragraph 7  of  her  decision.   In  the  judge's
    findings of credibility the judge found her "devoid of credibility" and
    rejected "every part of the Appellant's account of events prior to  her
    leaving Albania and ultimately claiming asylum in the UK."  However the
    judge found that it was credible that she had a trafficker who put  her
    into prostitution in London but could make no finding as  to  what  had
    happened in Albania and to how and why she had left Albania or in  what
    circumstances (paragraph [13.3]).  As to  the  trafficking  issue,  the
    judge found at [14.2] that the journey was arranged by a  man  named  T
    and that she had travelled with a couple with  whom  she  had  probably
    been told not to identify and that she had arrived clandestinely in the
    UK and that she had been exploited  in  prostitution  either  by  T  or
    another.  The judge  considered  the  issue  of  returnability  and  at
    paragraph [16.2] found her to be in danger of  re-trafficking.   As  to
    the asylum claim she found that she had not shown a fear of persecution
    for a Convention reason either emanating from her father nor any  other
    person that she was to marry but that she would be at risk of Article 3
    mistreatment.  Thus the judge allowed the appeal.

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  and  on  5th  April
    2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes granted permission.

 8. At the hearing on 5th May, I heard submissions from both parties, which
    have  noted  in  my  Record  of  Proceedings  and  where  relevant  are
    incorporated into my discussion on whether or not there is an error  of
    law disclosed in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The first issue relates to the findings of fact made by the  judge  and
    the submissions advanced by the Secretary of State that the  judge  had
    made inconsistent findings relating to the factual circumstances of the
    Appellant's claim, which ultimately affected her  consideration  as  to
    whether she was a victim of trafficking, the issue  of  sufficiency  of
    protection and risk of re-trafficking.

10. The judge's findings  are  set  out  at  paragraph  [13.1]-13.3)].   In
    respect of those findings the judge stated "The above findings, take in
    every part of the Appellant's account of events prior  to  her  leaving
    Albania and ultimately, claiming asylum in the UK.  Upon    the  entire
    account, I find her devoid of credibility."  The earlier findings  make
    reference to the asserted claim to be at risk of a forced marriage, the
    relationship with a man called T and how he helped her to travel to the
    United Kingdom, the account of her journey to France, how  she  managed
    to leave Albania without her parents' consent, and her escape from  the
    house where she had lived in the United Kingdom was also found  not  to
    be credible and also the claim being further undermined by the delay in
    claiming asylum of one year and seven months.  Thus the judge found her
    to be "devoid of credibility".  The judge went on to state at paragraph
    [13.2]  that  notwithstanding  that,  the  judge  found  her  to  be  a
    vulnerable young woman who spoke no English with no family or means  of
    support and a very small child (that was  born  on  24th  April).   The
    judge   found   that   it    was    credible    that    she    had    a
    protector/agent/trafficker who put her into prostitution.  At paragraph
    [13.3] the judge went on to state:

         "It is not for me to speculate as  to  what  actually  happened  in
         Albania and in any event, I have no evidence  upon  this  from  any
         source.  I have however, made findings  in  paragraph  13.1  above,
         which leave a large question mark over how and  why  the  Appellant
         left Albania.  In all the circumstances, it would seem likely  that
         the Appellant's  family  sold  off  their  eldest  child  and  that
         instructions were given to her to  speak  of  a  threatened  forced
         marriage and help from a boyfriend (T) with which she did her  best
         to comply, in trying circumstances.  But I repeat, I  can  make  no
         findings upon any of this."

11. At paragraph [16.1] the judge also makes reference to paragraph [79] of
    the country guidance decision of AM and the  issue  of  families  where
    abuse had occurred and stated ("as was probably the  case  here").   At
    [16.4] the judge found that she had no fear  of  persecution  emanating
    from her father nor of any person who she was to marry.

12. The Appellant's factual account concerning  a  forced  marriage,  being
    trafficked into  the  UK  by  a  man  called  T,  the  process  of  her
    trafficking, the details of her escape in the UK and the fact that  she
    had failed to claim asylum and the delay that was  involved,  were  all
    matters taken into account by the judge and were rejected by the  judge
    (see findings at [13.1][a]-[e]].  Thus I  have  already  set  out,  the
    judge considered that those findings took into account  every  part  of
    the Appellant's factual account of events prior to leaving Albania  but
    also "ultimately claiming asylum in the  UK",  because  those  findings
    also concerned her account of  being  effectively  imprisoned  and  her
    escape."

13. However at [13.2] the judge found that she had  a  protector/agent  and
    trafficker who had put her into prostitution and the judge set out  the
    alternative basis upon which she said the  Appellant  might  have  left
    Albania in  that  paragraph.   Whilst  Mr  Harding  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant referred to those findings as  alternative  findings,  it  is
    plain that the judge at that point made it clear  that  she  could  not
    speculate as she had no evidence and expressly said at paragraph [13.3]
    that she made no findings upon any of those issues.

14. The  finding made at paragraph  [14.2]  was  that   the  Appellant  was
    trafficked to the UK stating:

         "Regardless of my credibility finding, there is no basis  to  doubt
         that the Appellant's journey was arranged by T,  or  that  she  had
         travelled with a couple whom she had  probably  been  told  not  to
         identify or that she had manifestly arrived  clandestinely  in  the
         UK.  I find that the Appellant had been exploited in prostitution -
         either by T, or  by  another  Albanian  man  (this  sector  of  the
         European Community is particularly adept in this  field)  and  that
         she managed ultimately, to get away."

15. Mr Harding has submitted that there  is  nothing  inconsistent  in  the
    findings of fact set out by the judge as the judge  set  out  what  she
    found to have happened in the UK.  In essence he submits that there was
    a discrete finding made by the judge which  was  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.  However in my judgment the findings at paragraph [14.2]  are
    inconsistent with the overall findings of fact.  The findings at [14.2]
    set out that the judge found that there was no basis to doubt that  the
    Appellant's journey was arranged by T or  that  she  travelled  with  a
    couple (and identified those circumstances).   The  judge  went  on  to
    consider that she had been exploited in prostitution by  T  or  another
    Albanian man and that she had managed to "get away".  However  that  is
    inconsistent with her findings that the Appellant's account was "devoid
    of credibility" as to what had happened in Albania, in that she did not
    believe how she  had  got  to  the  UK  or  as  the  judge  had  stated
    "ultimately, claiming asylum in the UK"  which  included  the  lack  of
    credibility shown by her delay in claiming asylum but also the  account
    that she had given of her  escape.   The  findings  also  included  her
    relationship with the man T and the lack of credibility in that respect
    and the couple with whom she had travelled to the UK.

16. Furthermore, I am satisfied that  the  inconsistent  findings  of  fact
    infected her conclusions reached upon the risk on  return.   The  judge
    considered the issue of "returnability" at  paragraph  [16]  and  cited
    paragraph [79] of AM (relating to families) and paragraph [42] relating
    to the availability of the one shelter identified by the  Tribunal  and
    concluded at paragraph [16.2] "The proposition that the Appellant would
    be in danger of re-trafficking  is  also  supported  by  the  objective
    evidence in this appeal."  At paragraph [16.4] the  judge  stated  that
    she had not made out her asylum claim because she had not  demonstrated
    a fear of persecution emanation from her father nor of a person she was
    to marry.  However at [16.3] the judge found  her  to  be  at  risk  of
    Article 3 mistreatment.

17. At [16.2] the judge fails to give reasons as to why the Appellant would
    be in danger of re-trafficking.  Whilst Mr  Harding  submits  that  the
    judge's reference to the conclusion being "supported by  the  objective
    material" and when read together with paragraph [11]  where  the  judge
    set out that she had considered the written evidence, is sufficient,  I
    do not agree.  As Ms Pal submitted there was an abundance  of  material
    in the Appellant's bundle concerning this issue which was  relevant  to
    the analysis of the risk of re-trafficking and  required  consideration
    by  the  judge.   The  objective  material  consisted  of   a   Country
    Information Guidance Report upon  trafficking  in  Albania  (dated  9th
    September  2015  found  at  pages  45  to  67)  and  also  the  Country
    Information Guidance for Albania dated August 2015 (pages 68 to 100  of
    the Appellant's bundle).  That material made reference to the  specific
    evidence relevant to the issue of sufficiency of protection (see [1.19]-
    [1.114]) and at [1.1.15] a list  of  particular  circumstances  of  the
    individual that was relevant to the issue of sufficiency of  protection
    was set out.  The updated report dated 9th September  2015  provided  a
    further overview of the issue of protection,  the  legislation  and  at
    paragraph [2.6], importantly, the assistance to victims of  trafficking
    which made reference to the  US  Department  of  State  Report  and  at
    [2.6.11], the information provided  concerning  a  number  of  shelters
    available to those upon return.

18. None of that material was considered or given any analysis by the judge
    in reaching the conclusion that she was at risk of  re-trafficking.   I
    do not consider that it is sufficient  to  state  that  the  danger  is
    "supported by the objective evidence" when the objective  evidence  was
    not consistent and required to be analysed alongside and along with the
    particular  factual  circumstances  of  the  Appellant.   None  of  the
    material was considered or given any analysis by the judge in  reaching
    the conclusion on  the  issue  of  re-trafficking  and  she  failed  to
    identify the objective material that she found to  be  consistent  with
    that.  Mr Harding was not able to identify the objective material  that
    she purportedly relied upon.

19. The failure in my judgment is both relevant and material.  The decision
    of AM and DM (the country guidance relied on by the  judge)  identified
    at paragraphs [168]-[174] the issues  a  victim  of  trafficking  might
    face.  At paragraph [181], the Tribunal  considered  that  the  central
    issues focused on whether or not a victim of trafficking would  face  a
    real risk of persecution  from  her  former  traffickers  because  they
    escaped or was at risk of being re-trafficked and whether  there  is  a
    sufficiency  of  protection  for  them.   The  first  issue  is   "fact
    specific".  When considering the second issue, the Tribunal noted  that
    there were laws and initiatives to  combat  trafficking  and  concluded
    that the steps taken by the Albanian  authorities  were  sufficient  to
    meet the standard of sufficiency of protection for re-trafficking  from
    "new traffickers".  However when considering the issue  of  whether  or
    not the victim of trafficking has a sufficiency of protection from  her
    "former traffickers" should they wish to re-traffic her, or  harm  her,
    that was an issue which was "fact specific".

20. The judge's assessment on the re-trafficking issue makes no analysis of
    the  fact  specific  matters  relevant  when  considering  the   issues
    identified by the Tribunal in  the  country  guidance  decision  of  AM
    whether  being  re-trafficked  by  new   traffickers   or   by   former
    traffickers.  The reference made by the judge to paragraph [79]  of  AM
    relates to the issue of families where the judge records "the  families
    would be contacted in any event despite the case that trafficking often
    was from families where abuse had occurred (as  is  probably  the  case
    here)..."  Therefore when considering risk on return and the risk of re-
    trafficking the judge appeared to place weight on the fact that she has
    a family where abuse had occurred and relevant to risk whereas  earlier
    the judge had stated  at  paragraph  [13.3]  that  she  could  make  no
    findings concerning the family and at [16.4] expressly found  that  the
    Appellant had no fear emanating from her father.

21. Furthermore when considering the issue of sufficiency of protection the
    judge referred to  paragraph  [42]  of  AM  (as  cited)  but  that  was
    insufficient when there was the other material as identified earlier in
    the determination that was relevant to the issue and because the  judge
    had not provided any analysis as to why the Appellant would be at  risk
    of re-trafficking.  I therefore consider that even  if  Mr  Harding  is
    right that the finding of fact that  she  had  been  trafficked  was  a
    discrete issue and notwithstanding that the  Appellant  was  devoid  of
    credibility in relation to the earlier  findings,  those  other  issues
    still remain and demonstrate in my judgment material errors of law.

22. The last issue is not one that was either raised  in  the  Respondent's
    grounds or in the Rule 24 response filed on behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    It relates to the judge's failure to consider the new country  guidance
    decision of TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092.   Whilst
    neither party referred to this in their written  material,  Mr  Harding
    properly raised it and it is a "Robinson obvious" point.

23. The judge heard the  appeal  on  8th  February  2016  and  the  country
    guidance decision was promulgated the next day on  9th  February.   The
    judge's decision, however, was not promulgated until  14th  March  2016
    and therefore was available before promulgation.  Even if it  could  be
    said that the judge was "fixed" with notice  of  the  country  guidance
    decision and thus was in  error  of  not  applying  it  as  Mr  Harding
    submits, there are cases and I consider this is one,  which  fall  into
    the category where the proper course is to either recall the parties to
    provide further oral submissions/additional oral evidence or to  invite
    the parties  to  provide  further  submissions  in  writing.   Such  an
    approach would satisfy the  requirements  of  procedural  fairness  and
    would enable both parties to provide their submissions and evidence  on
    relevant issues.  There will be cases in which it would be  open  to  a
    judge to consider the country guidance without following that approach.
    However as I have stated this appeal was not such  a  case  because  it
    included consideration of further  issues  and  further  argument  that
    relates to the particular factual circumstances of this Appellant.

24. Mr Harding submitted that if the Tribunal had applied TD  and  AD  that
    the  outcome  would  have  been  the  same.   When  asked  to   provide
    submissions to support that argument,  he  submitted  that  the  bolded
    paragraphs given in that decision would support her claim.   I  do  not
    agree.  It seems to me that in view of the lack of  consistency  as  to
    the findings and even it  was  accepted  that  the  judge  had  made  a
    discrete finding that she had  been  trafficked,  as  contended  by  Mr
    Harding, the conclusions as to  risk  on  re-trafficking  required  the
    judge to make a full analysis in the terms that I have set out earlier,
    which in my judgment was  lacking  in  this  determination..   The  old
    country guidance decision and the new country  guidance  decision  both
    make it plain  that  the  victim's  particular  circumstances  must  be
    considered  and  that  in  relation  to  reception  and   reintegration
    programmes, whether it was unreasonable must be determined on a case-by-
    case basis and that a careful assessment of all the circumstances apply
    (see headnotes ([c] and [f]).   Furthermore  as  to  the  risk  of  re-
    trafficking the Tribunal identified  at  [e]  that  whether  that  risk
    existed for an individual claimant would turn in part  on  the  factors
    that led to the initial trafficking and on her personal  circumstances,
    including her background, age and her willingness and ability  to  seek
    help from the authorities.  For a proportion of victims of trafficking,
    their situations may mean that they are especially  vulnerable  to  re-
    trafficking, or being forced into other  exploitative  situations.   At
    [h] the particular circumstances add a  further  factor  including  the
    availability of support networks.  Arguably  the  judge's  findings  as
    they currently stand do not assist in reaching conclusions  on  all  of
    those issues  thus  I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  demonstrates
    material errors of law.

25. As for remaking the decision, I consider that the submissions  made  by
    Mr Harding are right when he submits that if an error of law  is  found
    that the correct course would be to remit the appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal with no preserved findings, who would be required to make full
    findings of fact upon the particular circumstances  of  this  Appellant
    and apply the new country guidance to those findings of fact as made.

26. Therefore I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit
    the appeal to be reheard before the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross
    by way of a fresh hearing as set out above.




Signed                              Date 11/5/2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Anonymity Direction:

Consequently under Rule 14, the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008, unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant
is granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent and failure to comply with the  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

