
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01841/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17th August 2017                      |On 6th October 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     NJ
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gobirof Counsel instructed by Albany Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                       Extempore DECISION AND REASONS


Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, the Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member  of  their  family.   This  order
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Secretary of State is the Appellant in these  proceedings  and  she
    appeals a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-Thompson
    promulgated  on  27th  March  2017  in  which  the  judge  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal  on  protection  grounds  relevant  to  the  Refugee
    Convention.

 3. The judge found that the Appellant was a member of a particular  social
    group who on return to her Home Area would be at  risk  of  persecution
    from her family, and insufficiently protected by the State.

 4. The judge found that the Appellant could not relocate to the safe  area
    of the Independent Kurdish Region.  In doing so the judge took  account
    that the Appellant was a single woman,  returning  either  pregnant  or
    with a baby.

 5. The Secretary of State, dissatisfied with  that  decision,  applied  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6.  On 23rd May 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission in  the
    following terms:

         "On balance, it is arguable that the judge erred in  not  factoring
         into potential risks facing the applicant, the fact that she has  a
         partner who, like her, has no legal status, and the fact that their
         long-term plan is to live together  as  a  family.   The  point  is
         arguably  relevant  with  regard  to   both   risk   and   internal
         relocation".

 7. Before me both representatives were in  agreement  that  the  grant  of
    permission identified a material error of law. The  factual  matrix  of
    the Appellant having a new partner and, in light of his status  in  the
    United  Kingdom,  the  likelihood  of  his   return   to   Iraq,   were
    considerations that the judge needed to address to see what impact,  if
    any, the presence of her partner might have, both in terms of  risk  in
    her home area and  elsewhere,  and  in  terms  of  the  possibility  of
    relocation, and additionally in terms of the availability of  documents
    that she might require in order to relocate, on return to Iraq.

 8. There was a substantial factual matrix which was left  unconsidered  by
    the judge and which requires judicial consideration  and  fact-finding.
    In those circumstances, it is agreed that the matter should be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal, the error being the  insufficiency  of  the
    consideration.  I note for the record that the findings of fact made by
    Judge  Suffield-Thompson  in  respect  of  the   credibility   of   the
    Appellant's historical account at [34] were not challenged and are  not
    infected by the error of law, and accordingly remain.







Decision

 9. The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals material error  of  law
    requiring it to be set aside and remade. In light  of  the  substantial
    fact finding exercise to be undertaken the appeal is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


Signed                              Date 04 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

