
[pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal number: PA/01263/2017         |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at Field House          |      | |Decision & Reasons  promulgated      |
|On 16 November 2017           |      |    On 21 November 2017             | |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|                                                                            |
|UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|           |A A A M                                           |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|Appellant                                                                   |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|          |SSECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT        |             |
|          |                                                   |Respondent   |


I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:

For the appellant:         Ms R Kotak,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Pickup
                 Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant, a national of Libya born on 2  January  1986,  has  been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Boylan-Kemp MBE who, in a decision  promulgated  on  20  April
    2017 following a hearing on 7 March 2017, dismissed his appeal  against
    a decision of the respondent of 25 January 2017 by  which  she  refused
    his asylum claim of 27 July 2016. The appeal was brought under s.82  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Summary of basis of asylum claim

 2. The appellant claimed to fear persecution at the hands  of  a  powerful
    pro-Gaddafi family in Libya. The following summary is taken from  paras
    9 and 10 of the judge's decision:

 3. The appellant lived  with  his  parents  and  four  brothers  and  four
    sisters.  Two of the appellant's brothers were imprisoned for two years
    in 2006 for  writing  anti-Gaddafi  slogans  in  a  public  place.  The
    appellant and his family took part in  anti-Gaddafi  demonstrations  in
    early 2011 and as a result he was detained by the authorities on 15 May
    2011 for one day before being released.  The appellant and  his  family
    went into hiding in Tripoli before  returning  home  in  November  2011
    after the fall of Gaddafi.

 4. A powerful pro-Gaddafi family found out  that  the  appellant  and  his
    family had taken part  in  anti-Gaddafi  demonstrations  and  began  to
    target him and his family; they fired shots at the appellant's house on
    1 April 2011 and again on 19 May 2011.  On 30 January 2013  they  tried
    to run the appellant's father off the  road.   On  3  April  2013  they
    attacked the appellant's family in their home.  On 16 October 2013 they
    again attacked the appellant's family and the appellant's  brother,  W,
    was shot and killed.  The incidents were reported to the police but  no
    action taken.  The appellant's father sold  their  land  and  moved  to
    Tripoli in December 2013.  When the appellant's father returned to  the
    family home in May 2015 he was again  threatened  by  the  family.  The
    appellant's family received threatening phone calls in January, May and
    June 2016 and have had to change their phone numbers as a result.   The
    appellant fears being killed by this family upon his return to Libya.

The judge's decision

 5. The judge rejected the entirety of the appellant's  account.  She  gave
    several reasons. However, it is plain that she placed emphasis  on  the
    fact that  the  appellant  had  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  to
    undertake studies with Libyan government sponsorship. She said, at para
    25, that she placed "particular emphasis" on this point.  At  paras  20
    and 21, she said:


         "20. The appellant's account must be viewed in  the  light  of  the
             fact that he was employed by a state-run university  and  that
             his studies in the UK have been funded by the government  from
             his initial application made on 14 April 2012 through  to  the
             expiration of his student visa on 1 August 2016....


         21.  I do not accept as plausible the fact that appellant was  able
             to obtain paid employment and then an ongoing scholarship  for
             overseas studies from the Libyan government, especially as his
             employment was obtained, if not commenced, during  the  period
             when Gaddafi was in power.  I can see the logic in Mr  Scott's
             submission that who he now fears is a family separate  to  the
             state and so this would  not  have  affected  his  ability  to
             obtain state support.  However, the appellant's claim is  that
             he was  a  known  Gaddafi  opponent  even  whilst  he  was  at
             university and was monitored by the authorities as  a  result.
             Therefore, I do not find his evidence as to the  interest  the
             authorities have historically held in  him  to  be  consistent
             with the with [sic] the  fact  that  he  was  able  to  obtain
             employment at a state-run institution and then continue to  be
             funded by the state to undertake overseas studies.  I do  find
             that the appellant has provided a reasonable  explanation  for
             this inconsistency in either his witness statement or  in  his
             oral evidence.   Therefore,  I  find  the  fact  that  he  has
             received ongoing state support to undermine the credibility of
             his account of being involved in anti-Gaddafi activities which
             resulted  in  his  family  being  targeted  by  a  pro-Gaddafi
             family."


         25.  Overall, upon taking all of the evidence  in  the  round,  and
             placing particular reliance upon the fact that he has been  in
             the UK with government  sponsorship,  then  I  find  that  the
             appellant has not satisfied me, even to  the  lower  standard,
             that he is at risk  of  persecution  as  claimed  due  to  his
             imputed political opinion, and therefore I find  that  he  has
             failed to demonstrate even to this lower standard  that  there
             would be a reasonable degree of likelihood of persecution upon
             his return to Libya.  Accordingly, I find that  he  cannot  be
             granted refugee status under the Convention on this basis."


         (My emphasis)

 6. Having rejected the appellant's account of  the  basis  of  his  asylum
    claim, the judge found that the appellant  was  not  at  real  risk  of
    persecution in Libya and dismissed his appeal on asylum grounds.

 7. In relation to humanitarian protection,  the  judge  applied  the  then
    applicable country guidance case of  FA  (Libya:  art  15(c)  Libya  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00413. Although she accepted that there was civil unrest in
    Libya, she noted that the appellant's family live in Tripoli which  she
    considered was not in an area of civil unrest.  She  found  that  there
    were no particular factors present relevant to the appellant that would
    put him at risk in Libya, as he could once again return to  his  family
    there as he has done on two previous occasions without incident.

 8. For the same reasons, the judge dismissed the  appeal  in  relation  to
    Articles 2 and 3. The appellant did not rely upon Article 8 before  the
    judge.

 9. I shall use the spelling "Gaddafi", as the judge did, to refer  to  the
    regime of the former dictator who fell from power in August  2011,  for
    consistency. I shall refer to the judge as "judge".

The grounds and the grant of permission

10. The grounds challenged the judge's assessment  of  credibility  on  the
    ground that the judge had  misapprehended  the  appellant's  case.  The
    appellant's studies were not funded by  the  Gaddafi  government.  They
    were funded by the Libyan transitional  government.  The  grounds  rely
    upon two letters which are said to confirm that the appellant  received
    a scholarship from the National Transitional Council ("NTC").

11. The grounds did not challenge the judge's assessment of the appellant's
    humanitarian protection claim.

12. In granting permission, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Norton-Taylor
    raised an issue not raised in the grounds,  i.e.  in  relation  to  the
    judge's decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds. He referred to the country  guidance  case  of  ZMM
    (Article  15(c))  Libya  CG  [2017]  UKUT  263   (IAC).   Although   he
    acknowledged that this decision was promulgated some two  months  after
    the judge's decision, he considered that its impact raised an obviously
    arguable point  and  he  therefore  said  that  he  granted  permission
    primarily on this basis. In addition, Judge Norton-Taylor said that  he
    did not limit the grant of permission,  although  he  was  plainly  not
    impressed by the challenge to the judge's assessment of credibility.





Assessment

13. I should make it clear that I reject the ground  in  respect  of  which
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Norton-Taylor granted  permission.  It
    is clear that the judge applied FA which  was  the  applicable  country
    guidance case. She was obliged to  apply  that  country  guidance.  The
    grounds did not challenge her application of that guidance. She  simply
    cannot be said to have  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  apply  country
    guidance that had not been promulgated. I appreciate that Judge Norton-
    Taylor considered  that  the  impact  of  ZMM  nevertheless  should  be
    considered. However, the reality is that the Upper  Tribunal  can  only
    set aside a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had materially erred in law.

14. Ms Kotak submitted that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's consideration of the humanitarian protection claim because  (in
    her submission) the risk falls to be assessed as  of  today.  I  reject
    this submission which ignores the fact that the judge must be shown  to
    have materially erred in law before the assessment of risk falls to  be
    considered on the basis of the current country guidance.

15. However, in view of my decision on the credibility ground (see  below),
    this ground falls away.

16. I turn to the credibility ground.

17. Ms Kotak submitted copies  of  the  two  letters  referred  to  in  the
    grounds. The first was a letter dated 19 December  2011  from  the  NTC
    stating that the appellant  had  been  awarded  a  scholarship  for  an
    English language course and post-graduate study in the  United  Kingdom
    majoring in "Political Science". The second was a letter dated 10 March
    2012 stating that  the  appellant  was  sponsored  by  the  Scholarship
    Department  at  "The  ministry  of  higher  education  and   scientific
    research" in Libya for the English  language  course  and  postgraduate
    study in the United Kingdom.

18. Ms Kotak submitted that the documents were admissible in order to  show
    that the judge had made a mistake.

19. In my judgment, these two documents  are  inadmissible  and  cannot  be
    relied upon to show that the judge erred in law. The two  documents  do
    not establish that the judge has made  a  mistake  as  to  an  existing
    incontrovertible fact. Whether or not the documents are reliable as  to
    their contents depends on the credibility of the appellant.  It  cannot
    be said to be an inconvertible fact that he was sponsored by the NRC.

20. Judge Norton-Taylor gave his reasons for not  being  impressed  by  the
    credibility ground. He said that they ignore the fact  that  the  judge
    made it clear at para 21 that she was relying  on  the  fact  that  the
    employment and funding was initiated by the Gaddafi  regime  which  the
    grounds appeared to overlook. Ms Kotak did not address me on this point
    notwithstanding that it was specifically raised by Judge Norton-Taylor.
    However, I could not find any evidence before the judge to  the  effect
    that the appellant's scholarship to the United Kingdom was initiated by
    the Gaddafi regime. This is an important  point  in  respect  of  which
    there was simply no evidence before the judge.

21. The evidence before the judge included the Bio-data form at  B36-38  of
    the respondent's bundle. At B37,  the  appellant  said  that  his  last
    employer in Libya was the University of Law and Political Science where
    he was employed from 2010-2011.  In view of this  evidence,  the  judge
    was fully entitled to find it lacking in credibility that the appellant
    had been able to obtain and continue  his  employment  at  a  state-run
    university if, as he claimed, his brother were imprisoned for two years
    in 2006 for writing anti-Gaddafi slogans in a public place, if he  (the
    appellant) and his family took part in anti-Gaddafi  demonstrations  in
    early 2011 and if he was detained by the authorities on 15 May 2011 for
    one day before being released.

22. However, there was a lacuna in the evidence  before  the  judge  as  to
    whether the appellant's studies in the United Kingdom were sponsored by
    the NTC. By the time he arrived in the United Kingdom on  13  September
    2012, the Gaddafi regime had fallen. It is therefore difficult  to  see
    that his studies could have been  actually  paid  for  by  the  Gaddafi
    regime if that regime had fallen by the time he arrived. There was also
    a lacuna in the evidence before the judge as to whether the appellant's
    scholarship was initiated by the Gaddafi regime when it  was  still  in
    power.

23. Whilst the judge would have been fully entitled to find  it  incredible
    that the appellant  had  been  able  to  obtain  and  to  continue  his
    employment at a state-run university, she specifically  said  that  she
    placed particular reliance upon the fact that he has been in the United
    Kingdom with government sponsorship. I have explained that there was  a
    lacuna in the evidence before the judge in this  respect.  Accordingly,
    whilst I do not accept that the two letters described  above  establish
    that the judge made a mistake of an existing fact, I am satisfied  that
    the judge may have erred in law by speculating, in  that,  she  assumed
    that his scholarship was initiated and funded by  the  Gaddafi  regime.
    Given that she placed particular reliance on this point, I am satisfied
    that her error was  material  to  her  adverse  credibility  assessment
    notwithstanding my observations at para 21 above.

24. I therefore set aside the judge's credibility  assessment.  Credibility
    will need to be re-assessed since this is relevant to  the  appellant's
    asylum claim. In relation to the  humanitarian  protection  claim,  the
    judge hearing the appeal  will  need  to  apply  ZMM,  unless  this  is
    replaced by another country guidance case by then. On the basis of ZMM,
    the appellant's appeal falls to be allowed on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

25. At the next hearing, the appellant and the respondent must ensure  that
    the documentation submitted in support of the  appellant's  application
    for entry clearance as a student prior to his  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 13 September 2012  is  made  available  to  the  judge.  The
    appellant would also be  well  advised  to  deal  with  sufficiency  of
    protection and why, even if he does have a genuine fear of  a  powerful
    pro-Gaddafi family, he would not be able to obtain protection from  the
    authorities in Libya.

26. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

27. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.2 (b).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set aside. This case is remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all issues  on  the  merits  by  a
judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Boylan-Kemp MBE.






[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 20 November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
