
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01668/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined Without a Hearing at Field House   |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 23 July 2020                               |On 18 August 2020            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     TS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this  order  because  the  appellant  is  an  asylum  seeker   and   is
    consequentially entitled to anonymity.

 2. The appellant says that she is Eritrean. This is an  appeal  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  her  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State on  19  January  2018  refusing  her
    refugee status and/or leave to remain on human rights ground.

 3. The appeal has previously been determined unsatisfactorily.

 4. At its core there is a dispute about the appellant's nationality.   She
    says that she is Eritrean but the Secretary of State  finds  that  that
    has not been established.  The First-tier Tribunal took the same view.

 5. There are careful and important and detailed  grounds  challenging  the
    First-tier Tribunal's  approach  to  the  expert  evidence  but  it  is
    important to remember that that is not the only point in this appeal.

 6. This is a case  where  an  oral  hearing  was  anticipated  but,  as  a
    consequence of  the  national  lockdown  in  the  light  of  the  well-
    publicised COVID-19 crisis, on 4 May 2020 the Principal Resident  Judge
    sent out directions and a note suggesting  that  the  appeal  might  be
    appropriate for disposal without a hearing.

 7. As is well-known but is made entirely clear by Rule 2 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, the overriding objective of  the
    Procedure Rules is to ensure that  cases  are  dealt  with  fairly  and
    justly and this involves  avoiding  delay.   It  also  involves  having
    regard to Tribunal users who  are  not  parties  to  these  proceedings
    because the hearing of their cases can be delayed by reason  of  making
    room for other cases to be heard and in the present crisis the pressure
    on Tribunal resources is extremely great.  Although, as  the  appellant
    properly points out, it is invariably the practice of the  Tribunal  in
    happier times to determine such appeals after an oral hearing, there is
    no entitlement under the Rules for an oral hearing but I am obliged  by
    Rule 34(2) to "have regard to  any  view  expressed  by  a  party  when
    deciding whether to hold  a  hearing  to  consider  any  matter".   The
    appellant's  position  is  less  than  enthusiastic  support  but   she
    recognises the special difficulties facing the Tribunal caused  by  the
    pandemic but does remind  me,  appropriately,  that  oral  argument  is
    usually the best and preferred way.  However, it is  precisely  because
    of the kind of concern raised  here  that  the  Tribunal  notified  the
    parties of the possibility of disposal without a  hearing  and  invited
    further submissions so they had an  opportunity  of  considering  their
    position carefully and having reflected on these things I am  persuaded
    that the overall interest of justice, which is  not  the  same  as  the
    wishes of the appellant, requires a  determination  without  a  hearing
    which is what I now set out to do.

 8. As well as  full  grounds  of  appeal  drawn  by  Counsel  I  have  the
    "Appellant's Submissions in Response to the Directions of Form A 2020",
    a Rule 24 notice, a letter from the Secretary of  State  dated  21  May
    2020, and the "Appellant's Reply to Respondent's Submissions".

 9. I am not implying that the appellant's submissions  in  their  entirety
    are in any way excessive or verbose but there  is  a  lot  of  material
    there and although I may not find it necessary to comment on all of  it
    I have read it.  The  Secretary  of  State's  letter  is  appropriately
    shorter but everything has been taken into account.

10. Credibility is key to this case.  If the appellant is telling the truth
    that she is a Pentecostal Christian from Eritrea who has  left  Eritrea
    irregularly in circumstances that could be seen as avoiding the  draft.
    If she is telling the truth she may  well  have  a  strong  case.   The
    Secretary of State's position is that she is unreliable  and  justifies
    that assertion with reference to very different accounts with which the
    appellant has been associated.

11. It is, I find, undeniable that there are difficulties in believing  the
    appellant's account but that is not the same as saying  she  cannot  be
    believed.  The appellant's representatives are clearly  aware  of  this
    because they have  instructed  an  expert  who  has  commented  on  the
    appellant's case.  However, as indicated above, before looking at  that
    there are other possible errors that are important and I must  consider
    them.

12. The first ground of appeal is concerned with the expert  report.   This
    is important and I return to it below.

13. Ground 2 complains that the First-tier Tribunal was unfair "to rely  on
    Wikipedia material in closing submissions/failure  to  have  regard  to
    material considerations".

14. This appears to be a reference to the judge's finding in  paragraph  27
    that the appellant had not registered at a school  when,  according  to
    the grounds, there had been last minute evidence from  Wikipedia  about
    the school age in Eritrea.

15. With respect to the First-tier Tribunal Judge, permitting reference  to
    Wikipedia for the first time at the hearing is not a  satisfactory  way
    to conduct a hearing.  Evidence has to be disclosed broadly before  the
    hearing.  This gives parties an opportunity to consider the reliability
    of background material  and  make  suitable  submissions  in  response.
    Wikipedia is a useful resource and I accept that  is  does  try  to  be
    right and encourages errors to be identified and corrected. However  it
    should not be regarded as  an  authoritative  source  of  controversial
    information because it is not subject to peer review. Relying on it  in
    these circumstances risks corrupting "good" points  with  unsustainable
    ones.

16. The appellant complains that the  material  was  allowed  in  but  also
    points out that the article on its  own  terms  it  did  not  help  the
    respondent  as  suggested  because  it  tended  to  suggest  that  many
    Eritreans do not go to school and so her not being  registered  with  a
    school, whether or not  it  was  a  legal  requirement,  may  not  have
    mattered very much.  The Secretary of State points out  that  there  is
    nothing to indicate there was any formal objection to the evidence  but
    the appellant says this was implied by the complaint that a link to the
    web could not be followed.  In any event that does not  deal  with  the
    second limb  of  the  ground,  namely  that  the  evidence  supports  a
    different conclusion and this was not considered.

17. Ground 3 complains that the judge's credibility finding was not  "child
    sensitive".

18. This is  addressed  particularly  at  the  judge's  evaluation  of  the
    appellant's evidence that she had previously made a claim for asylum in
    Switzerland in which she pretended to be considerably  older  than  has
    now been accepted.  This earlier claim  was  not  mentioned  until  her
    fingerprints had been taken and checks became possible.

19. The point  is  also  made  that  credibility  does  not  establish  her
    nationality.

20. The Secretary of State's reply to ground 3 points out  that  the  judge
    reminded herself that the appellant was a minor  when  interviewed  but
    also made clear that the appellant has  undeniably  used  deception  by
    telling in different countries quite  different  stories  about  things
    that happened to her and claiming to be very different ages.

21. In the reply the appellant accepts that deception had been  established
    but returned again to paragraph 31 of the grounds  which  asserts  that
    the appellant was only a young person when she  was  (on  her  account)
    living in Eritrea and the judge was not seen to assess the  appellant's
    knowledge of the country against the fairly  clear  evidence  that  the
    appellant was remembering things from her  childhood.   There  is  some
    merit in this part of the point although the  general  suggestion  that
    the judge forgot the appellant's youth is unsustainable.

22. Ground 4 complains that the judge wrongly relied on something  recorded
    in a previous decision.  As indicated the appeal  has  previously  been
    determined unsatisfactorily.  In fact, its  unsatisfactory  disposition
    led to a reported decision (TS (interpreters) [2019]  UKUT  352)  which
    was a decision of  a  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  chaired  by  its
    President, Lane J.  That decision was set aside and  according  to  the
    grounds it should have been ignored.  The Secretary of State said  that
    the judge was simply referencing an undisputed fact but  the  appellant
    in her reply says that is wrong.   The  reply  reads  in  its  material
    parts:

         "The issue is that the FtTJ relied upon evidence before the FtTJ in
         cross-examination, in circumstances where there  were  errors  with
         interpretation.  The  FtTJ  should  not  have  had  regard  to  the
         previous set-aside decision.  The grant of permission by First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Chohan supports this".

23. However, when this ground  is  considered  carefully  it  becomes  less
    persuasive.  It is quite clear from simple inspection  that,  according
    to the First-tier Tribunal Judge on the last  occasion  when  this  was
    determined unsatisfactorily, the appellant did say in cross-examination
    that she had used the name Sarrap Gebremedhin.  The First-tier Tribunal
    Judge goes on at paragraph 44:

         "When asked at  court,  the  appellant  said  that  was  a  typical
         Tigrinya ethnic name, but that has not been established  before  me
         ...".

24. It is not clear to me if that is the judge saying what happened  before
    her or referring to the earlier hearing.  I cannot find anything in the
    earlier hearing that suggests that the appellant said to the  judge  on
    the first occasion that her name was typical Tigrinya.  It may be  that
    there is no point at all lurking here because the point was accepted in
    cross-examination before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   However,  the
    contention is that the judge looked at the decision and it is  hard  to
    see  why  the  judge  would  look  at  that  decision.    It   was   an
    unsatisfactory decision and reliability of interpreting was  very  much
    part of the reasons giving to concern.  The judge's only point is  that
    the appellant  has  not  established  that  she  ever  told  the  Swiss
    authorities that she was Eritrean.  However, as it does not seem to  be
    suggested she ever told them anything else  this  is  something  of  an
    elaborate explanation for a point that really gets nowhere anyway.

25. Ground 5 claims that the First-tier  Tribunal  departed  from  accepted
    findings about the appellant's  age  and  religious  convictions.   The
    appellant claims to have always identified  herself  as  a  Pentecostal
    Christian.

26. At paragraph 60 the First-tier Tribunal Judge  indicates  that  she  is
    bound by the Secretary of State's concession  although  she  does  muse
    that it may not in fact be correct.   At  paragraph  61  the  judge  is
    unequivocal that the appellant  has  not  established  that  she  is  a
    Pentecostal Christian from Eritrea.  The judge does not  say  that  she
    has not established that she is a Pentecostal Christian.  These  points
    are obvious but they are also taken by the Secretary of  State  in  the
    Response to directions.

27. Additionally, the Secretary of State points out  that  the  judge  said
    unequivocally that the appellant's allegiance to Pentecostalism was not
    in dispute (see paragraph 11).  Ground 6  is  misconceived.  The  judge
    fully accepted the appellant's assumed age and declared  religion.   It
    was her national origin that she did not prove.

28. Ground 6 lists five errors based on a misreading of the evidence.  They
    are not enormously consequential.  They turn on whether  the  appellant
    was 11 or 12 at  a  particular  time.   There  is  also  a  mistake  in
    reference to the "appellant's uncle's wife" when it  should  have  been
    the "uncle's wife's sister".  I am not  persuaded  that  these  are  as
    inconsequential as the Secretary of State implies.  It  is  a  puzzling
    feature of the case that the Swiss authorities  do  not  seem  to  have
    noticed that the appellant was very young and that mystery  is  greater
    if the appellant was 11 rather than 12 but these do not go to the heart
    of the matter.  There is a concern which I suspect is what is meant  by
    the reference to "anxious scrutiny" that in a case where  the  possible
    consequences for the appellant are very severe the judge  was  careless
    when that was not acceptable.  Notwithstanding  mistake,  the  Decision
    and Reasons are a whole is not careless.  The mistakes do not undermine
    it to the point that I can have no confidence in it  but  it  would  be
    better if they were not there.

29. Ground 7  criticises  the  judge  for  finding  something  implausible.
    Essentially the appellant said there was a chance meeting  between  her
    and a friend from Eritrea.  They met at a church in King's  Cross.  The
    judge  said  at  paragraph  52  that  she  had  "concerns   about   the
    plausibility" of this part of the claim.

30. It was said that there  were  seven  people  at  a  prayer  meeting  in
    Eritrea.  They met in secret and by chance met again  at  a  church  in
    London favoured by Christians from Ethiopia.  The judge also  found  it
    significant that this friendship was not mentioned at an earlier  stage
    as the case unfolded.  I have to say I find that a bigger concern.   As
    the appellant's Reply points out, this is not a chance meeting  between
    two people from Eritrea but from two people who claim to be  Christians
    from Eritrea living in London.  I do not suggest the odds of  a  chance
    meeting are particularly high but it is not as wildly improbable as the
    Secretary of State implies by looking at the population of Eritrea.

31. The judge also recorded that the appellant was asked  what  appeared  a
    perfectly straightforward question which was whether the friend "F" was
    one of the seven people who the appellant claimed to  have  attended  a
    prayer meeting with herself and her father.  The judge found the answer
    evasive.  It is very difficult to see why that question could not  have
    been answered in an entirely straightforward way  even  if  the  answer
    happened to be "I do not know".

32. Ground 8 complains that there  was  an  inadequate  assessment  of  the
    appellant and her daughter's circumstances.   The  Secretary  of  State
    accepts the theoretical nature of their criticism but points  out  that
    the appellant had been completely  disbelieved  and  there  was  really
    little to go on to support a proper finding about the  difficulties  on
    return to the appellant and her child from the point of view  of  their
    rights under Article 8.  I do not accept that any error  identified  at
    ground 8 material.

33. I now turn to the weightier matter of the criticism of the handling  of
    the expert evidence.

34. However, before engaging with the detail of the criticism I propose  to
    consider carefully exactly what the expert had to say.

35. The expert is Dr Samuel A Bekalo and the report is dated  11  September
    2018.  The report begins  by  a  summary  of  his  instructions  and  a
    recognition that his overriding duty is to  provide  an  impartial  and
    independent expert opinion.  He explained that he  had  read  the  case
    bundle provided by the solicitors which included the witness  statement
    and supplementary witness statement and the  Home  Office  reasons  for
    refusal and he had interviewed the appellant although the interview had
    to be organised by "Skype" which, it is hard to  remember  now,  was  a
    little novel in June 2018.

36. Dr Bekalo has first-hand experience living and working with people from
    the East or Horn of Africa and he had visited the region over ten times
    since 2000, most recently  in  August  2017.   He  is  a  Research  and
    Development Education Fellow at Leeds University.  He explained that he
    interviewed the appellant.  Skype was the only practical method because
    of the costs in time and money in travelling to meet each other.

37. He began by making observations on the appellant's appearance.  He said
    that she had the relatively high cheek bone,  small  to  medium  build,
    lighter skin colour and straight  hair  that  was  typical  of  Habesha
    people that comprised much of the population of Ethiopia  and  Eritrea.
    Clearly it would be wrong to put much emphasis on a person's appearance
    in determining her nationality but he was entitled  to  say  there  was
    nothing about her appearance that spoke against her claim  to  be  from
    the Habesha people.

38. He then turned his attention  to  the  linguistic  proficiency  of  the
    appellant.  He recognised that it was a matter of considerable  concern
    to the Secretary of State that  the  appellant  spoke  little  Tigrinya
    because the Secretary of State would expect a person who  was  Eritrean
    to be at least competent in Tigrinya and probably Arabic.

39. Dr Bekalo indicated that he too expected somebody affiliated to Eritrea
    to understand and speak Tigrinya at least to a basic level and also  he
    expected appellants to speak the language of the country in which  they
    reside or had resided for a significant period which in this  case  was
    Arabic [the appellant claims to have lived in Sudan].  He then made the
    observation that the appellant could not speak much Tigrinya or  indeed
    Arabic.  He then put it to her in the following terms:

         "Although you and the Eritrean Community in  their  support  letter
         stated that you speak Tigrinya, your proficiency  of  Tigrinya  you
         demonstrated today seems to me very limited.  In this  regard,  one
         may suppose that the HO's view is  right  in  the  sense  that  you
         should be able to speak your claimed country national language?"

40. The appellant appeared to understand the point but said she  had  lived
    most of her life with Amharic speaking people.  She had lived in  parts
    of Eritrea where Amharic was the dominant language and  said  that  she
    and people like her were described as Amitche which she describes as  a
    local  term  for  Eritreans  deported  from  Eritrea.   She  said  they
    associated with each other graduated and that was the reason  that  she
    did not speak other languages.  She said  that  was  why  she  had  not
    learnt more Arabic when she was in Sudan.  Essentially she  claimed  to
    have spent her time with Amharic speaking people.

41. Dr Bekalo then said that the appellant  appeared  to  be  competent  in
    Amharic which was the language to which she had  been  exposed  and  he
    then said:

         "In the light of this, coupled with the other indicators and issues
         discussed in the preceding and remaining sections, I would say that
         the appellant could  be  one  of  those  young  Eritreans  who  was
         dispersed and  lived  in  various  places  outside  Eritrea,  hence
         happened to master Amharic instead of the Tigrinya language".

42. He made it plain that he regarded this as probable rather than a matter
    of certainty.  Her accent suggested to him a person who had learned the
    language in Ethiopia rather than  in  the  diaspora  and  he  made  the
    comment that in his experience some people struggle to learn a language
    whereas others can learn a language very quickly.

43. He looked at the appellant's family names.  Her name and  the  name  of
    her father, foster mother and "presumed brother", were typical Tigrinya
    names and tended to suggest an  affiliation  with  Eritrea.   Ethiopian
    ethnic groups, he said, have their own distinct different names.

44. He then asked her questions about life in Eritrea.  He  explained  that
    he deliberately asked questions that were not connected with each other
    as he thought he had made it  harder  for  someone  who  was  repeating
    things they had "mugged up" for the interview rather than saying things
    that they knew from experience.

45. She began by saying that she thought that national service  lasted  for
    two years.  Dr Bekalo put it to her that he thought  national  military
    service never ended  in  Eritrea  and  she  did  not  respond  to  that
    suggestion.

46. He then suggested that  she  would  be  exempt  from  military  service
    because she was a mother of a dependent child and  she  said  "I  don't
    know.  I'm not sure about that.  I can't trust the government".

47. She described Assab as hot and near the sea.  She was unsure about  any
    rivers or mountains but she did know there was a mountain  called  Emba
    Soira.  She was able to name the neighbourhood where she said  she  was
    born which was part of the capital Asmara.  She named two other  cities
    but did not use or know a local name for Massawa.

48. He then asked her to explain why her family  had  returned  to  Eritrea
    given that they, according to her, were Pentecostal Christians and  the
    religion is banned in the country.  She described that as her  father's
    decision.

49. He then put to her on the two matters  that  concerned  him  about  her
    story and the answers were recorded.  He found it difficult to  comment
    on the plausibility of individual events including the escape from  the
    prayer meeting and the illegal exit from the country.  He said that the
    appellant "does not have a profound knowledge about the country  socio-
    culture as well as the politics and the situation she found herself  in
    which led her to leave the country" but commented as well that this was
    perhaps not surprising as she was a child when she left Eritrea.

50. At paragraph 3.2 he said:

         "Nonetheless, the appellant came across to me as one of those young
         Eritreans who lived in and moved around from place  to  place  with
         family members outside the country,  with  little  information  and
         exposure to her claimed country socio-politics and geography as she
         says.  I say this because, from time to time, I come across  people
         like the appellant in  refugee/IDP  (Internally  Displaced  People)
         camps and towns in the Kenya/Ethiopia/Sudan, who speak little or no
         Tigrinya and know little about the Eritrea country situation.  They
         speak the respective local community languages they are exposed  to
         (e.g. Amharic, Arabic, Swahili, English).  As such and  as  pointed
         out in the language section above, the appellant ended up  speaking
         Amharic, although she is a bit familiar with Tigrinya and her names
         are typical Tigrinya Christian names".

51. He also commented that although he would "exercise caution"  about  the
    reliability  of  the  methods  and  procedures  used  by  the  Eritrean
    Community in Lambeth he did give some weight  to  their  support.   You
    would not expect that support to be forthcoming if it were not sincere.

52. He found it probable but  not  certain  that  the  appellant  was  from
    Eritrea in the Tigrinya ethnic  group  and  he  found  no  evidence  to
    suppose that she is Ethiopian except being fluent in Amharic.

53. He then made comments generally on the situation in Eritrea  which  are
    depressing reading  but  not  I  think  controversial  or  particularly
    relevant in the context of this appeal.

54. I consider now how the First-tier Tribunal Judge analysed the report.

55. Her analysis began at paragraph 31  where  the  judge  expressed  "some
    concerns about the reliability of the conclusions given in that report,
    and its impartiality".  The judge then  immediately  gave  reasons  for
    coming  to  a  different  conclusion.   She  said  that  the   Tribunal
    determined credibility, not the expert, and  a  finding  based  on  the
    appellant being believed did  not  bind  the  Tribunal  unless  it  too
    believed the evidence.  She noted that Dr Bekalo had not explained  why
    he claimed expertise in assessing nationality  and  she  was  concerned
    that he only claimed to be able to speak basic Tigrinya  and  a  little
    Arabic which she thought regrettable  given  so  much  depended  on  an
    ability to speak those languages.  She found the report lacked  balance
    and  the  report  did  not  show  any  recognition  of   the   inherent
    difficulties in assessing nationality  or  ethnicity.   She  found  the
    reference to being "affiliated to  Eritrea"  unclear.   It  could  mean
    someone who was not Eritrean but had ancestors who were.  However,  she
    accepted his evidence that the appellant  could  not  use  Tigrinya  to
    communicate to describe colours or close relatives or  basic  foods  or
    count past eight.  The judge also found the expert's use of the  phrase
    "balance of probabilities" surprising as in her  judgment  the  reasons
    given did not make the conclusion probable.  (Paragraph 36).

56. The judge also found Dr Bekalo's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had
    learned to speak Amharic in Ethiopia a little puzzling when it was  the
    appellant's claim that she had never been to Ethiopia.  The judge noted
    Dr Bekalo's comments that there were others like the  appellant  living
    in the dispersed communities who do not speak  Tigrinya  or  know  much
    about Eritrea but that does not help when it was the  appellant's  case
    that she had lived in Eritrea with her father.

57. The judge was also surprised at Dr Bekalo's  readiness  to  excuse  the
    appellant's ignorance of Arabic given her claimed history.

58. Unlike Dr Bekalo the judge found it significant that the appellant  did
    not know that the military service she by implication at least  claimed
    to fear was lifelong and not limited to  two  years.   The  judge  also
    found it revealing that she did not seem to have considered whether she
    would be exempt by reason of being a mother.

59. The judge found nothing was said in  the  general  knowledge  questions
    that was not readily available by  a  little  research  in  the  public
    domain and Dr Bekalo did not explain why he said the  appellant  "comes
    across" as a displaced Eritrean.

60. The judge was also surprised at the failure of Dr  Bekalo  to  consider
    the possibility that the reason the appellant could not  do  better  in
    her geography test and general knowledge test  about  the  country  was
    that she was just not telling the truth.  The judge did not  understand
    why  Dr  Bekalo  was  apparently  so  willing  to  attribute  the  poor
    performance to nervousness.

61. The judge explained at paragraph 42 how she found the report lacked the
    objectivity and balance that she expected to find in an expert report.

62. At paragraph 43 the judge noted how Dr Bekalo had found  a  problem  in
    the Eritrean Community letter which asserted  that  the  appellant  did
    have an ability to speak  Tigrinya  that  she  had  not  been  able  to
    demonstrate to him but he then went on  to  suggest  that  the  opinion
    would not have been given lightly.

63. At paragraph 44 the judge noted how a main reason given  by  Dr  Bekalo
    for believing the appellant at all was that she and  close  members  of
    her family had Eritrean Christian names.  The difficulty with  this  is
    the previous judge's decision showed that  the  appellant  had  claimed
    asylum in Switzerland in an entirely different name.

64. The judge noted there was  no  reference  or  independent  evidence  to
    support the contention that the names which she now relied were  indeed
    Tigrinyan and the judge found the appellant's general credibility to be
    so low that she was disinclined to give any weight to her claimed names
    being her given names in any event.

65. At paragraph 45 the judge went on to look at what she described as  "at
    least one false premise" in the report.  I set out the judge's comment:

         "On the first page Dr Bekalo says he was asked to  comment  on  the
         plausibility of the appellant's claim to be  Eritrean  but  Amharic
         speaking, 'due to the claimed fact that she lost  her  mother  when
         young and was largely brought up outside the country by an  Amharic
         speaking family friend'.  It  is  not  clear  to  me  whether  that
         statement originates from the solicitors' instructions, or  is  the
         (sic) Dr Bekalo's own assessment of the history, but it is not what
         the appellant says (WS 3-4).   The  appellant  says  she  was  only
         raised by an Amharic speaking friend or family  member,  until  the
         age of 5, after which she was raised outside  the  country  by  her
         Tigrinya speaking father ...".

66. The judge also felt that it  was  not  within  the  expert's  remit  to
    comment on the plausibility of the escape.

67. There are also comments on the general  personality  of  the  appellant
    which the judge found ought not to have been in the report and devalued
    it to some extent.

68. The judge then went on to deal  with  the  support  from  the  Eritrean
    Community and found it  unsatisfactory  that  nobody  had  attended  to
    support the evidence and the evidence  referred  to  her  understanding
    Tigrinya "very well" which did not seem to be supported by anyone else.

69. The judge then considered other matters.

70. The adverse findings relating to the expert report  were  substantially
    challenged in the grounds as indicated  above.   They  point  out  that
    there should be no confusion about what was sent to Dr Bekalo.   It  is
    clear from the body of the report that he was given the refusal  letter
    and witness statements and other matters.  It is not  a  false  premise
    that the appellant "was largely brought up outside the  country  by  an
    Amharic  speaking  family  friend",  that  is  what   the   appellant's
    solicitors had said but the witness statement made  matters  clear  and
    the appellant was plainly interviewed by the expert on the basis of her
    spending time in Assab and Khartoum as she claimed to have done in  her
    statements.

71. The criticisms placed on Dr Bekalo's limited language ability  have  to
    be assessed against his being a member and examiner of the Institute of
    Linguistics and his self-deprecatory comments should  be  seen  against
    that background.  He was clearly competent comment  on  her  linguistic
    skills and on her claimed nationality.  He had given reasons to explain
    his conclusion.  Certain things were clearly right and the  report  was
    balanced.  Whilst the appellant's personality may be irrelevant it  was
    not a feature of the expert's reasoning and  need  not  have  attracted
    adverse comment by the judge.  The  grounds  then  summarised  the  key
    findings of the report.  The appellant has the features of  a  Habesha.
    She could be Eritrean Tigrinya.  Her names are Tigrinya  and  she  left
    Eritrea when she was young.

72. I have read the appellant's submissions in response to directions of  4
    May 2020.  This makes the  point  that  permission  was  given  on  all
    grounds but that has never been doubted, at least not by me.

73. There  is  an  important  development  around  paragraph  11  where  Ms
    Fitzsimons for the appellant points out that  the  judge  had  made  an
    adverse credibility finding based on things the appellant said when she
    was a child, or rather experienced when she was a child.   This  should
    not have been a strong point and  she  suggested  tainted  the  judge's
    approach to the expert evidence.

74. Eventually there was a response from the  Secretary  of  State,  it  is
    dated 21 May 2020.  As is so often the case  the  person  drafting  the
    Rule 24 notice did not have access to the Presenting  Officer's  Record
    of Proceedings. They do point out correctly that there is no  challenge
    to the finding that the appellant used different names  in  Switzerland
    and that does rather undermine the criticism of looking to the  earlier
    decision.  It was open to the judge to disbelieve the claim that  there
    was a chance meeting at a church and that  the  grounds  generally  are
    just disagreement.

75. This attracted a further reply from Ms Fitzsimons. It is very  critical
    of allowing in  late  expert  evidence  from  an  untraceable  link  on
    Wikipedia (untraceable in  the  sense  the  appellant's  representative
    could not find it) and  puts  a  different  emphasis  on  the  inherent
    likelihood of meeting in a church.

76. I have not summarised everything in both of the further papers.

77. This is a case that is not without difficulty from my point of view.  I
    am grateful, and the appellant should be very grateful, to the work  of
    the appellant's solicitors in doing the best they can for her.  Some of
    the observations made in the submissions are well-founded  and  I  have
    indicated my views about this.  The judge should not  have  allowed  in
    the late evidence from Wikipedia.   As  far  as  an  error  of  law  is
    concerned I find the  judge  was  entitled  to  disbelieve  the  chance
    meeting at a church but that has given me food for thought and if  that
    were the only point in the appeal I might have to think  even  further.
    The expert was a qualified expert and  his  opinion  should  have  been
    given weight.

78. Nevertheless, certain things are clear.  This appellant has produced no
    strong evidence at any stage that she is Eritrean.  At its very highest
    she has produced reasons why her claim should not be disbelieved.   The
    fundamental problem she has is that she does  not  speak  the  language
    that she would be expected to speak.  A supplementary  problem  is  she
    does not know very much about the country.  A further problem  is  that
    she has undermined her  own  credibility  by  telling  lies  which  she
    clearly has in other proceedings.

79. I agree with the judge that whatever weight is given to  the  expertise
    of Dr Bekalo he does not explain why he has reached the conclusion that
    the appellant is one of the displaced Eritreans.  That  is  fundamental
    to his report and although may very well be his honestly  held  opinion
    the judge was at the very least entitled to say it  was  not  explained
    properly.  I have read the report too and I can find no explanation.

80. This is a decision to be looked at in the round and I am satisfied as a
    whole the decision stands up  to  scrutiny.   The  mistakes  have  been
    properly and professionally exposed by  skilled  representation  and  I
    have given that all the weight that I think due but in my judgment  the
    decision as a whole stands and I dismiss the appeal.

81. Notice of Decision

82. This appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 August 2020                 |



