
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01569/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th September 2018                        |On 10th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 Nuhamin [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sills of Counsel, Z D Spicer Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born on 29th December 1993.  The
    Appellant left Ethiopia on 25th August 2017 travelling direct to the UK
    arriving at Heathrow and claimed asylum on 21st  September  2017.   Her
    application for asylum was based upon a purported well-founded fear  of
    persecution in Ethiopia on the basis of her political opinion  in  that
    her claim was to be considered  under  political  opinion  because  she
    claimed to be a supporter of Ginbot 7, which is considered a  terrorist
    organisation by the Ethiopian authorities. The Appellant's  application
    was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 20th January 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Tobin sitting at Manchester on  2nd  March  2018.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  3rd  April  2018  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 17th April 2018.
     On 16th May 2018 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  granted  the
    Appellant permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Hodgkinson  noted  that  the
    grounds argued that the judge had erred by failing to take into account
    material matters, by failing to consider country evidence, properly  or
    at all;  by  providing  inadequate  reasons;  by  making  contradictory
    findings; by misinterpreting the available evidence and in reaching  an
    irrational decision (as particularised in the grounds).

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Sills.  Mr Sills is familiar with this matter.  He  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal and he is the author of the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer Mr Whitwell.

Submission/Discussion

 5. Mr Sills starts by commenting that much  of  the  Appellant's  case  is
    accepted by the Secretary of State in the Notice of Refusal.  He points
    out that her nationality is accepted, that she is acknowledged as a low-
    level supporter of Ginbot 7, that she was arrested and detained by  the
    authorities for attending a demonstration in October 2016 and that  all
    this is set out in a summary of  findings  of  fact  at  paragraph  36.
    However, he points out that at paragraphs 44 and 45 it is not  accepted
    by the Secretary of State that the Appellant is at risk  on  return  to
    Ethiopia.

 6. He takes me to the Policy and Information Note on  Ethiopia  issued  by
    the Home Office (version 2.0e October 2017) and refers  me  therein  to
    the relevant paragraphs which are to be found in the  consideration  of
    issues section and the policy  summary  at  paragraphs  2  and  3.   In
    particular he takes me to the policy summary which he submits sets  out
    the issues that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had to deal with.  It  is
    his contention that the finding that  the  Appellant  is  a  supporter,
    which is accepted by the Secretary of State means that the Secretary of
    State cannot avail himself of the findings  at  paragraph  3.1.6  which
    states:

          "However, persons who have a low profile who  are  not  active  in
         opposition groups may face harassment  or  discrimination  but,  in
         general, this will not reach the level to constitute persecution."

    He submits that such a finding, both by the Secretary of State  and  as
    endorsed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, is effectively an  error  of
    law bearing in mind that the Respondent had accepted that the Appellant
    was politically active and was detained in political  protests  over  a
    year before she came to the UK and that it is accepted that she  was  a
    supporter of G7.  He submits that the judge was required  to  take  her
    accepted history of political activism into account when assessing  her
    support for G7 and that he has failed to do so at paragraph 20 where he
    has merely indicated that the Appellant  has  "voiced  mere  platitudes
    that she could not explain."  He submits that  the  judge  was  engaged
    with the evidence and it is necessary for the judge to  do  so  and  to
    make clear findings.

 7. He further goes on to examine paragraphs 21 to 32 in some  detail.   He
    contends that at paragraph 21 the judge has  given  inadequate  reasons
    for finding the Appellant's reasons for becoming a member of G7  to  be
    inconsistent.  Further at paragraph 27, having  made  adverse  findings
    against the Appellant on an assumption that PG7 activities in the UK in
    Ethiopia would place her family at equal risk, the  judge  goes  on  to
    record the Appellant's admission that there  is  a  difference  between
    being a member of PG7 in the UK and in Ethiopia.  He contends that  the
    judge  is  in  effect  criticising  the  Appellant's  case   based   on
    contradictory findings and this is unfair and amounts to  an  error  of
    reasoning.

 8. He contends that the judge misrepresents the Appellant at paragraph  23
    in that the Appellant does not state that the authorities know she is a
    PG7 supporter because the authorities raided her house and  confiscated
    her phone and laptop.  The Appellant has he says gone on to explain the
    reasoning for that and refers me to  paragraph  5  of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  Further, he contends that at paragraph 26 the judge has failed
    to take into account the key facts of the Appellant's  claim  which  is
    that it  was  only  after  she  came  to  the  UK  that  the  Ethiopian
    authorities found out she was a PG7  supporter.   Further,  he  submits
    that the judge has made a finding at paragraph 28  that  the  Ethiopian
    authorities would not attempt to track down the Appellant with  a  view
    to murder on the basis of materials  posted  on  the  internet  of  her
    attending demonstrations and that this is inconsistent  with  paragraph
    10.2.1 of the Country  Information  Note.   Finally,  he  takes  me  to
    paragraphs 31 and 32 where he contends that the judge has departed from
    the Respondent's policy document without  giving  reasons  and  submits
    that the judge entirely misses the  point  about  PG7  in  the  country
    information  in  that  it  is  the  Ethiopian  authorities  that   have
    designated  PG7  as  a  terrorist   organisation,   not   the   country
    information.  He indicates that  in  such  circumstances  there  are  a
    substantial number of material errors of law and that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 9. Mr Whitwell indicates that it is necessary to read the conclusion as  a
    whole and it is clear what the judge had found out and why and that  it
    is necessary to give due consideration to the  ultimate  conclusion  of
    the policy document, in particular that at paragraph 3.1.4 it states:

         "However a person who, although having sympathy with the OLF,  ONLF
         or AGUDM, has had limited involvement with the organisation and has
         not come to the attention of the authorities is less likely  to  be
         at risk.  The onus is on the person to demonstrate that they  would
         be at risk."

    He submits that it is necessary to be very wary  about  conflating  the
    risk set out in the Notice of Refusal and he refers me to paragraphs 32
    to 35 of the Notice of  Refusal  and  to  question  94  of  the  asylum
    interview submitting that it has not been found that there  is  a  link
    between the Appellant's arrest  at  demonstrations  and  her  low-level
    activities.  He too looks at the findings of  the  judge  pointing  out
    that the judge's findings at paragraph 21 are very clear and  that  the
    judge was not persuaded about the Appellant's political sincerity.   He
    submits that the judge's findings are  adequate.   Further  he  submits
    that the judge's findings on the Appellant's sur  place  activities  at
    paragraph 28 are reasonable and that the Appellant does not  come  near
    the required threshold of the policy document.  He submits that overall
    the judge has done enough and that there is  consequently  no  material
    error of law in the decision.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. The issues before me are a "reasons challenge".  What is  contended  is
    that the judge's adverse findings at paragraph 20 is inconsistent  with
    the Respondent's acceptance of her PG7 support when she was in Ethiopia
    and that it is contended that the judge erred at paragraph  23  in  his
    indication  as  to  how  the  Ethiopian  authorities  learnt   of   the
    Appellant's PG7 activities in Ethiopia.  Further, there are contentions
    that in the grounds that the judge has  allegedly  failed  to  identify
    country material relied upon.

13. I consider that this is the key to the issue.   This  is  an  Appellant
    who, according to the Secretary of State is accepted  at  paragraph  36
    the Notice of Refusal of being  an  Ethiopian  national,  who  supports
    Ginbot 7 and who  has  been  arrested  at  a  demonstration.   In  such
    circumstances  it  is  a  requirement  that  the   judge   gives   full
    consideration to the factual issues herein and I am satisfied that  the
    judge has failed to specifically apply the guidance given in the policy
    summary at 2.3 (in particular 2.3.12) where it is accepted that  anyone
    who is a member or perceived to  be  a  member  of  one  of  the  three
    opposition groups, including Ginbot 7 may be  subject  to  abuses.   In
    assessing how the Ethiopian authorities would view a member of PG7 i.e.
    as a terrorist organisation, I accept the submissions made by Mr  Sills
    that the judge's reasoning is confused and that the  judge  potentially
    has failed to follow the Respondent's own policy guidance.

14. I accept that Mr Whitwell contends that the judge has done  enough  but
    it is incumbent upon the judge to make  clear  findings  and  if  those
    findings are to be based on country information to relate them to them.
     The judge has failed to  make  such  specific  connection  and  cross-
    reference to the policy document and as such has fallen into error.  In
    such circumstances the decision is unsafe and I find  that  that  there
    are material errors of law and set aside the  decision  and  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing with none  of  the
    findings of fact to stand.  I emphasise however that this is not to say
    that on a rehearing of this matter that another judge will not come  to
    exactly the same conclusions of  those  reached  by  Immigration  Judge
    Tobin.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and is set aside.  Directions are given hereafter for the rehearing  of
    this matter:

      1) That on finding that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision is set aside
         and is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  at  Manchester  on
         the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three  hours.



      2) That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

      3) That the appeal is to be heard before any Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Tobin.

      4) That there be leave to both parties to file and serve a  bundle  of
         further subjective and/or objective evidence upon which  they  seek
         to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

      5) That the Appellant do personally attend the appeal for the  purpose
         of cross-examination.

      6) That an Amharic interpreter do attend the restored hearing.  In the
         event that the Appellant  requires  an  interpreter  of  any  other
         language to be present then the Appellant's  instructed  solicitors
         must notify the Tribunal within seven  days  of  receipt  of  these
         directions.

16. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 4th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 4th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
