
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01861/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 February 2017              |On 6 February 2017              |
|Prepared on 3 February 2017     |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    R. D.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
                    Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  22  April  2015  as  a
        domestic servant,  and  shortly  afterwards  claimed  asylum.  That
        application was refused on 8 October 2015. The  Appellant's  appeal
        to the Tribunal against the refusal of  her  protection  claim  was
        dismissed on all grounds by decision of Judge  Fisher,  promulgated
        on 21 September 2016.
     2. The Appellant  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal by decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Storey of 14  November
        2016. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice dated 8  December  2016
        in relation to the grant of permission to the  Appellant,  but  the
        content of that notice did not engage with either  the  Appellant's
        complaint, or the reasons given by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey  for
        granting permission.
     3. Thus the matter comes before me.


The Appellant's case
     4. It is common ground before me that the Appellant's case before  the
        Tribunal was accepted as true on the  applicable  low  standard  of
        proof by Judge Fisher [20]. Thus he accepted that as a woman of 52,
        although the mother of three children, she had been trafficked from
        Cameroon to Dubai. Once in Dubai she had found herself  being  used
        as a sex slave or prostituted, and  held  against  her  will.  When
        brought to the UK she had escaped from those who had held her,  and
        had claimed asylum.
     5. It is also common ground that it followed that the  Judge  accepted
        the details of the Appellant's  account  of  how  she  came  to  be
        trafficked from Cameroon, and thus of which individual  within  her
        local community was responsible for doing so. It was accepted  that
        it followed, although the decision is silent upon this, that in the
        light of the Court of Appeal's approach to the evidence  concerning
        the way society with Cameroon operated in CM (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA
        Civ 125 that the individual responsible for doing so would know  if
        she returned to Cameroon, to her home area, to seek to be  reunited
        with her children.
     6. It is also common ground before me that there was no dispute before
        Judge Fisher over the mental state of the Appellant, and  the  very
        significant symptoms that had been exhibited and reported by her to
        the medical professionals who had  from  time  to  time  sought  to
        assist her [20]. The undisputed evidence showed that she  was  very
        far from well.
     7. The Judge also  accepted  on  the  evidence  before  him  that  the
        authorities in Cameroon were unable, or  unwilling,  to  offer  any
        adequate level of state protection to those at risk of trafficking,
        or to those returnees who were at risk of being re-trafficked [24].
     8. In the circumstances, it is common ground before me, that  although
        the decision does not specifically address the point, Judge  Fisher
        must either be taken to have accepted that  the  Appellant  was  at
        risk of harm (which would include the risk of being  re-trafficked)
        in the event that she returned to her home area, or, that he  erred
        if he failed to do so. Moreover that  such  a  risk  would  not  be
        alleviated by the availability to her  of  any  adequate  level  of
        state protection, because he had already concluded to the contrary.
     9. Thus Judge Fisher turned to consider whether it was  reasonable  to
        expect the Appellant to relocate within  Cameroon.  The  undisputed
        evidence before him described the serious problems that country has
        with the trafficking of  its  nationals,  and  indicated  that  the
        Appellant in her highly vulnerable condition  would  be  unable  to
        protect herself from such a threat if she sought to  return  to  an
        area that was not her home area, and in which she  necessarily  had
        no family or friendship network that could provide her with support
        and protection. It is accepted that this was not engaged with.
    10. In the circumstances the Respondent confirmed  through  Mr  Diwnycz
        that she no longer sought  to  argue  that  the  Appellant  as  one
        returning to her country of origin as a victim of sex  trafficking,
        and at  risk  of  being  re-trafficked,  was  not  a  member  of  a
        particular social group and  at  risk  of  serious  harm  as  such.
        Moreover, and more importantly, he confirmed  that  the  Respondent
        did not resist the conclusion that the Judge's decision  should  be
        set aside and remade so as to allow the asylum appeal.




   DECISION

        The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 21
        September 2016 did involve the making  of  an  error  of  law  that
        requires that decision to be set aside and remade.


        The asylum appeal is allowed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 3 February 2017


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
        Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 3 February 2017
