
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01698/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2016                    |On 6 September 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE rimington


                                   Between

                            LIBAAN MOHAMED AHMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Clarke, instructed by Broudie Jackson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant applied with permission to appeal against a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers who dismissed the appellant's appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse his protection  and
    human rights claim dated 1 October  2015  following  the  making  of  a
    deportation order.

 2. The background to this appeal is that  the  appellant  was  born  on  1
    January 1989 and is a citizen of Somalia. He was convicted on 2nd  July
    2010 to a term of imprisonment of five years and two months for  intent
    to supply  drugs,  and  again  on  6th  December  2013  to  a  term  of
    imprisonment for 5 years for offences  of  possession  with  intent  to
    supply  controlled  drugs  of  Class  A,  namely  crack  cocaine,   and
    possession with intent to supply heroin.  It  was  the  latter  offence
    which prompted the deportation order. The  respondent  decided  it  was
    conducive to the public good to deport the appellant to  Somalia.   The
    respondent took into account the appellant's  immigration  history  and
    criminal record leading to his  liability  for  automatic  deportation.
    After consulting the objective evidence and case guidance he  concluded
    that it would not be easy for the appellant to  resettle  in  Mogadishu
    but the security situation in Mogadishu had improved  considerably  and
    there was a sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  appellant.   It  was
    concluded that there was no real risk  of  harm  to  the  appellant  on
    return and it was not appropriate to grant him humanitarian  protection
    or protection with reference to Article 3 of the ECHR.

 3. The respondent certified that the presumption under  Section  72(2)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  applied  and  under
    Section 72(9)(b) of the  2002  Act  certified  the  asylum  claim.  The
    respondent continued to  consider  and  reject  any  entitlement  under
    humanitarian protection and protection on human  rights  grounds.   The
    appellant challenged the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers
    on six grounds. She concluded that the judge had misdirected himself in
    law with respect to the Section 72(2) certification.

 4. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge E V Grant  only  on
    one ground with respect to the Section 72 challenge. She stated:

         "Section 72 creates a presumption that a person has been  convicted
         of a particularly serious crime and is a danger  to  the  community
         applies where a person has been convicted and a sentence that leads
         to two years.  The consequence of a  Section  72  certification  is
         that the person is excluded from the application of Article  33  of
         the Refugee Convention.  The Section 72 certification is rebuttable
         by the appellant."

 5. Judge Grant added at paragraph 4 of her grant of permission:

         "In the findings of the FTTJ at paragraph 35 he upholds the Section
         72 certificate but does not give any reasons for doing so. It is  a
         rebuttable presumption and it may be the case that the  appellant's
         case is hopeless, nevertheless the appellant  was  entitled  to  be
         given adequate reasons for the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision
         to uphold the certificate."

 6. It should be emphasised that the remaining grounds  of  challenge  were
    refused permission.   Permission was granted in relation to the Section
    72 ground only.

 7. The challenge  by  the  appellant  states  that  the  judge  materially
    misdirected himself at paragraphs 34 and 35 in respect of Section 72 of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 8. Section 72(1), (2), (9) and (10) read as follows:

         "(1) This Section applies for the purpose of the  construction  and
             application  of  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee   Convention
             (exclusion from protection)

         (2)  A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by  a  final
             judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute  as
             danger to the community of the United Kingdom if he is -

             (a)  convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

             (b)  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  two
                  years.

         ...

         (9)  Subsection (10) applies where -

             (b)   the  Secretary  of  State  issues  a  certificate   that
                  presumptions under subsection (2), (3) or (4) apply to the
                  person (subject to rebuttal)

         (10) The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal -

             (a)  must begin substantive  deliberation  on  the  appeal  by
                  considering the certificate, and

             (b)   if  in  agreement  that  presumptions  under  subsection
                  (2),(3) or  (4)  apply  (having  given  the  appellant  an
                  opportunity for rebuttal) must dismiss the  appeal  in  so
                  far as it relies on the  ground  specified  in  subsection
                  (9)(a)"

 9. The appellant identifies  that  Section  72(2)  of  the  2002  Act  was
    considered in EN (Serbia) and KC (South Africa)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  630
    which stated at paragraph 45

         "The words 'particularly serious crime' are clear,  and  themselves
         restrict drastically the offences to which the Article applies.  So
         far as 'danger to the community is concerned, the  danger  must  be
         real, but if a person is convicted of a particularly serious crime,
         and there is a  real  risk  of  its  repetition  he  is  likely  to
         constitute a danger to the community."

    And at paragraph 80:

         "I conclude that Section  72  can  be  and  is  to  be  interpreted
         conformably with Article 14(4) of the Directive, and  therefore  is
         creating a rebuttable  presumption  in  relation  to  both  of  the
         relevant requirements of Article 33(2), i.e.  in  relation  to  the
         seriousness of the crime and in  relation  to  the  danger  of  the
         community, and I would reject the Secretary of  State's  submission
         to the contrary.

         Parenthetically it is interesting  to  note  that  this  result  is
         consistent with the explanatory notes to the Bill  which  state  at
         paragraph 198 in relation to Section 72 'A  person  may  rebut  the
         presumption that they have committed a particularly  serious  crime
         and are a danger to the community'".

10. The appellant also cited IH [2009] UKIAT 00012 at paragraph 25

         "The  presumption  from  Section  72  apply  in  all  cases,  where
         applicable, heard by the Tribunal SSHD v TB (Jamaica)  [2008]  EWCA
         Civ 977 at [29] per Stanley Burnton LJ".  However Section 72(9) and
         (10) create a mechanism that may be invoked  by  the  Secretary  of
         State which affects  the  Tribunal  process  when  deciding  asylum
         appeals.  Section 72(9) permits the Secretary of State to issue the
         certificate that the presumptions under the relevant subsection  of
         Section 72 apply.  When this is  done  as  it  was  in  this  case,
         Section 72(10) requires  the  Tribunal  to  determine  whether  the
         presumptions do in fact apply to the asylum appeal and if  they  do
         dismiss the appeal.  The effect is to alter the normal (and perhaps
         more natural) way of dealing with a case:  first  deciding  whether
         the individual is a refugee and, secondly, only if he  is  deciding
         whether notwithstanding that  he  may  still  be  refouled  because
         Article 33(2) applies.  In cases  where  a  certificate  is  issued
         under Section 72(9) a refoulement issue is decided first  and  only
         if it  does  not  apply  can  the  Tribunal  consider  whether  the
         individual is in fact a refugee because he has a well-founded  fear
         of persecution for a Convention reason.  Of  course,  in  practice,
         the evidence and any risk on return would need to be considered  in
         order to  decide  whether  the  individual's  return  would  breach
         Article 3 of the ECHR.  The decision of the panel in this appeal is
         one such example.  Section 72(10) does not prevent  this  but  does
         prevent the Tribunal from making a finding that  he  is  a  refugee
         albeit one who can be refouled".

11. The permission to appeal continued that under Section 72  of  the  2002
    Act the Tribunal is required to determine whether an  appellant'  crime
    is "particularly serious" having regard to the "facts and circumstances
    relating to the conviction and to the offender" and  also  whether  the
    appellant is a  danger  to  the  community.   Even  if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was correct in finding that  the  first  presumption  in
    Section 72(2) of the 2002 Act was not rebutted, it was  submitted  that
    the judge materially erred in law in  failing  to  address  the  second
    presumption and/or in failing to give reasons given the evidence before
    him why the second presumption had  not  been  rebutted.  The  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge in this issue included

    .    that the appellant had been a model prisoner

    .    he had completed the PEARL programme and the Building  Skills  for
         Recovery programme

    .    he had completed alcohol awareness work

    .    he had completed victim  awareness  work  via  the  Sycamore  Tree
         Programme

    .     the  appellant's  prison  "resume  is  exemplary  and   shows   a
         constructive and proactive approach to his term of imprisonment"

    .    the appellant has been assessed as posing a low risk of harm and a
         low risk of reconviction.  The appellant was  rehabilitated.   [EH]
         paragraph 3 of her statement.

The Hearing and Submissions

12. Miss Clark noted that the entirety of the reasoning was  at  paragraphs
    34 and 35 in relation to the Section 72 presumption and rebuttal. There
    was considerable evidence submitted to the Tribunal  which  made  clear
    that the concept of the appellant being a danger to the  community  was
    rebutted. Statute mandated that the judge had to deal with  the  matter
    and this was a reasons challenge. The judge had  not  met  the  minimum
    requirements and it was not possible to establish how he  came  to  the
    decision.  There was  a  materiality  to  the  error.   First,  he  was
    obligated by  statute  and  secondly,  the  reference  to  the  country
    guidance showed that the judge had used the wrong test.  There would be
    further repercussions for the appellant's future if there was a finding
    that Section 72 had been applied and this was a serious matter.  Should
    he be excluded from the Refugee Convention and he wished to revoke  the
    deportation order this may be a reason not to revoke  that  deportation
    order. The Section 72 finding had a material effect  both  legally  and
    practically. The appellant was permanently excluded  from  the  Refugee
    Convention and it may have a significant bearing on the  future  effect
    of the deportation order.

13. Mr Harrison relied on the Rule 24 response  and  both  parties  in  the
    event that I should find an error of law agreed that the matter  should
    be returned to the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

14. In accordance with the case law as set out above, it is incumbent  upon
    the judge to consider the matter of certification prior to  considering
    the asylum claim. That is what the judge did and I  will  set  out  his
    findings at paragraph 34 and 35 in full below.

         "34. In  accordance  with  Section  72(9)(b)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 the  Secretary  of  State  has
             certified that the presumption under subsection (2) applies to
             the appellant;  the effect being that  in  an  appeal  brought
             under Section 82 of the 2002 Act   against  the  decision  the
             automatic deportation provision of the UK Borders Act apply to
             the appellant and I must consider the certificate  first  and,
             if the certificate  is  upheld,  the  asylum  appeal  must  be
             dismissed.

         35.  Having carefully considered the contention of  the  respondent
             in the letter within  the  context  of  the  totality  of  the
             evidence and submissions made on behalf  of  the  appellant  I
             uphold the certificate. Although I deal with that aspect first
             for the avoidance of doubt the finding is made in light of the
             totality of the evidence including the objective evidence  and
             the country guidance. Had the asylum appeal not been certified
             by  the  Secretary  of  State  I  would,  nevertheless,   have
             dismissed the asylum appeal.

15. The judge at paragraph 35 specifically  states  that  having  carefully
    considered the contentions of the  respondent  in  the  Refusal  letter
    within the context of the totality of the evidence and submissions made
    on behalf of the appellant that he upheld the certificate.

16. The totality of the evidence was indeed set out by the judge and it  is
    helpful to set out the specific recordings and findings by the judge by
    way of indicating the 'totality' of the evidence and  the  submissions.
    The context is that the appellant was convicted of supplying  drugs  in
    2010 and imprisoned for 5 years 2 months.  He was  again  convicted  in
    2013 to a further term of five years imprisonment.

17.  The judge at [6] and  [17]  and  [21]  of  his  decision  records  the
    appellant's previous incarceration in 2010 for drugs  dealing.  At  [6]
    the judge notes 'his mother passed away in 2011 when the appellant  was
    serving his sentence of imprisonment.  The grounds submit the appellant
    was young na�ve and out of  control  ...  His  problems,  the  grounds,
    contend, were fuelled by his isolation and poor choice of  associates'.
    That was in 2011.

18.  At [7] the judge also notes in relation to the conviction of 2015

         'the grounds further contend the appellant  has  changed  his  life
         completely and become a different person.   He  regrets  committing
         his crimes.  His crimes  were  committed  when  he  was  young  and
         impressionable.  He has completed numerous educational  behavioural
         courses.  The appellant has a British long-term partner  Miss  [KH]
         with whom he has been in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationships
         since 2008 even through his terms of imprisonment'

19. The judge is cognisant of the submissions on behalf  of  the  appellant
    and  records  them  not  least  that  the  appellant's   representative
    advanced, on his behalf, that none of the criminal  offences  were  for
    violence or sexual offences [9].  In that paragraph it is also recorded
    that the appellant is deemed a low risk prisoner and had been  labelled
    category D as confirmed by the OASys Report.

20. At [20] the judge notes that

         'The appellant said that during his  last  sentence  in  prison  he
         changed his attitude and outlook.  He regrets his re-offending.  He
         is remorseful. He submits he was young and stupid. He  contends  he
         is rehabilitated. He makes the point that he is assessed as being a
         low risk'.

21. Further at [22] the judge notes

         'Miss [KH] did know the appellant was selling drugs again ... In  a
         later visit to the  appellant  he  explained  his  difficulties  in
         keeping away from the activities.  A reference to the  pressure  he
         was under from the criminal gang'

22. As recorded, the grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    specifically concentrated on the submissions in respect of his claim to
    refugee  status,  humanitarian  protection  or  protection  under   the
    European Convention, specifically Article 3 or Article 8.  The  grounds
    were not geared to supporting a rebuttal of Section 72 and that he  was
    no longer a danger to the community.

23.  Specifically  at  paragraph  58  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chambers
    recorded that the judge sentencing the appellant

         "noted the appellant had continued to supply drugs on a significant
         scale. Contrary to what is asserted in the grounds  the  respondent
         had taken due account of everything  urged  about  the  appellant's
         circumstances."

24. The judge also continues to state that "It was  agreed  by  both  sides
    that the appellant had played  a  significant  role  as  a  category  3
    offender and the judge had no doubt that the appellant was very much on
    the cusp of a leading role".  The judge recorded further that  although
    the appellant disputed the figure deriving from the  seizure  of  drugs
    nonetheless the appellant contested the indictment  but  was  convicted
    after a trial.  He did not appeal his conviction and sentence  but  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that he must act solely on the  reasons
    findings of the sentencing judge who took account of all issues on  the
    facts at the hearing.

25. At [59] the judge highlighted the sentencing judge's remarks from 2013

         'the sentencing Judge concluded that the drug dealing the Appellant
         was involved with was substantial, significant  and  measurable  by
         the amount of drugs and case seized all going to show the appellant
         as a regular and frequent dealer in "class A" drugs.

26. It is clear from reading  the  decision  as  a  whole  that  the  judge
    recorded specifically at paragraph 59 that the Secretary of  State  had
    made a deportation order against the appellant on the basis that he had
    received a sentence of five years for the serious offence  of  Class  A
    drug dealing.

27. There is no doubt that on a reading of the decision  as  a  whole,  the
    judge was fully cognisant that the appellant had been  convicted  of  a
    serious crime and had continued to supply drugs on a significant scale.
    The judge was aware of the remarks of the sentencing judge and also the
    factors in relation to his asserted rehabilitation and indeed these are
    referred to above.  The judge specifically  and  separately  considered
    the certification and stated, and it is  apparent,  that  he  carefully
    considered the contentions of both respondent  and  the  appellant  and
    submissions made on his behalf and yet upheld the  certificate.   I  am
    not persuaded that there is any error of  law.   The  judge  was  fully
    aware of the background of the appellant and the evidence submitted and
    tendered on his behalf and this  was  scrupulously  recorded.  He  made
    reference to the OASys Report and that none of the appellant's offences
    were for serious violence or sexual offences.   Nonetheless  he  upheld
    the certification, clearly concluding that the evidence did not  result
    in a rebuttal. I conclude that although his  reasoning  is  short  this
    nonetheless demonstrates that the  rebuttal  has  not  been  successful
    either in respect of the serious crime or indeed whether the  appellant
    is a danger to the community.   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set
    aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC) confirms that 'Although there is a legal
    duty to give a brief explanation of  the  conclusions  on  the  central
    issue on which an appeal is  determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be
    extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to  the
    material accepted by the judge'.  That is what the judge did. The judge
    has made careful  findings  with  reference  to  the  totality  of  the
    evidence and it is inconceivable that having recorded and analysed  the
    evidence that he did and in the way  that  he  did  that  it  could  be
    concluded that the judge had not effectively decided on both  limbs  of
    the  presumption  or  that  the  appellant  had  indeed  rebutted   the
    presumption.

28. Even if that were not the case, the judge  found  that  if  the  asylum
    appeal had not been certified he would have dismissed the asylum appeal
    in any event. It is clear that the judge has gone through the  evidence
    carefully and applied the country guidance of MOJ and Others (Return to
    Mogadishu) CG [2014]  UKIAT  44(IAC).   The  judge  made  a  series  of
    findings between paragraphs 40 to 53.   Although  those  findings  were
    challenged, that challenge was not upheld and no permission  to  appeal
    was granted in that respect.

29. Miss Warren urged  me  to  consider  the  future  legal  and  practical
    ramifications for this  appellant  and  although  I  am  aware  of  the
    seriousness of the matter it is an error of law in the judge's decision
    as at 18 March 2016 that  I  must  concentrate  and  I  find  there  no
    material error of law and the decision shall stand.


Signed   Date 2nd September 2016

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


