
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01695/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 13 April 2021                   |On : 27 April 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     EM
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
refusing her asylum and human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 25 October 1996.  She  arrived
in the UK on 29 January 2016 and claimed asylum the following day.  She  was
referred into the National Referral Mechanism (NRM) on 31 March  2016  as  a
suspected victim of trafficking, but a negative conclusive grounds  decision
was made by the Competent Authority.

The basis of the appellant's claim was  that  she  was  a  victim  of  human
trafficking and would be at risk on return to Albania as a result. She  also
claimed to fear her father. She claimed that her father was  a  violent  man
who had killed his cousin's wife in  an  honour  killing  and  had  been  in
prison as a result from 2003 to 2011. Her father told her that  she  had  to
get married to a man, D, who lived in France and when she refused,  he  beat
her and locked her in a room. At the beginning of October  2015  her  father
took her to Kukas to arrange a passport and Albanian ID card for her  and  a
few days later she left Albania with her brother and D's brother,  in  order
to marry D. They travelled by plane to Italy and then  by  train  to  France
and she was handed over to D who then took her  by  car  to  a  house  where
there were three Albanian men who were drinking alcohol and who  forced  her
to drink. She woke up the following day and found herself in  bed  with  one
of the men, A, who told her that D had sold  her  to  him.  A  kept  her  in
France for two days and then drove her to another  house  during  the  night
where she was forced to work as a prostitute. She  believed  that  that  was
when she was taken to the UK. She had to see six or seven clients a day  and
was forced to do that for three months, from October 2015 until the  end  of
January 2016 when she managed to escape through  the  bathroom  window.  She
reached a park and met an Albanian man there, H, with whom she  subsequently
had a relationship and had a baby, born on 15 October 2016.

The appellant's asylum and human rights claim  was  refused  on  5  February
2020. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account of being  forced
into marriage by her father. Further,  in  light  of  information  from  the
British Embassy in Tirana  confirming  that  she  had  left  Albania  on  28
December 2015 on a flight to Italy using her Albanian passport and  had  not
returned to Albania since then,  the  respondent  rejected  the  appellant's
claim to have been trafficked from October 2015 until January 2016  and  did
not accept that she had been forced into prostitution.  The  respondent  did
not accept that the appellant had a genuine subjective  fear  of  return  to
Albania and concluded that she was at no risk on return to that country.

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and her appeal  was
heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 7 October 2020 by Judge  Hembrough.  The
judge noted that the appellant had been interviewed by the police about  her
claimed ordeal and had been put  in  contact  with  an  organisation  called
Hestia which provided support for victims of trafficking. She had also  been
referred to a number of other support organisations including  the  Women  &
Girls Network and Ella, all of which had provided  letters  of  support.  In
addition, the judge had before him a psychiatric report  from  Dr  C  Obuaya
and a country expert report  from  Dr  E  Tahiraj,  as  well  as  copies  of
Albanian court documents related to the appellant's father's conviction  for
murder in 2003. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant.

The  judge  accepted  the  appellant's  account  of  having  witnessed   the
immediate aftermath of the murder committed by her father, when she was  six
years of age, and accepted that her father forced her into marriage with  an
older man whom she had never met. The judge  also  noted,  and  accepted,  a
record of the  appellant  having  attempted  suicide  in  Albania  by  tying
bedsheets together  but  having  been  stopped  by  her  mother.  The  judge
accepted that the appellant was taken from Albania by her  brother  and  D's
brother to marry D in France. However, the judge was not satisfied that  the
appellant had given an accurate account of what transpired from  that  point
on. He did not accept the appellant's claim to have been mistaken about  the
timing of her departure from Albania, given  the  significant  disparity  in
dates and the period of time in which she claimed  to  have  been  held  and
forced into prostitution. The judge noted  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
account in relation to the trafficking was  unsubstantiated  and  considered
it significant that there was no evidence from H to confirm  the  timing  of
when they met. Given that the appellant was recorded  by  Hestia  as  having
carried the Albanian court documents with her in her bag from  Albania,  the
judge concluded that it had  always  been  her  intention  to  claim  asylum
abroad. The judge considered  that  the  appellant's  mental  health  issues
arose from events in  Albania  and  concluded  that  her  account  of  being
trafficked to  the  UK  for  the  purposes  of  sexual  exploitation  was  a
fabrication. The judge accepted that the appellant would  be  at  risk  from
her father if she returned to her home area, having disobeyed his wishes  as
regards the marriage to D  and  having  had  a  child  out  of  wedlock.  He
concluded that the appellant could safely and reasonably relocate to  Tirana
or elsewhere in the south of Albania where her father  would  not  find  her
and that she would have access to the available reception and  reintegration
programmes for victims of trafficking. The judge considered that  she  would
have access to support for her mental health issues and that  there  was  no
risk of re-trafficking. He accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the following grounds: firstly, that the judge  failed  to  have
adequate regard to the medical and psychological evidence in respect of  the
appellant's memory and recall of the timing of her  escape;  secondly,  that
the judge erred by making his own findings on the cause of  the  appellant's
mental health issues despite the medical evidence;  third,  that  the  judge
erred by  expecting  corroboration  of  the  appellant's  account  of  being
trafficked; fourth, that the judge had regard to  irrelevant  considerations
in  making  his  adverse  credibility  findings;  fifth,  that   the   judge
inappropriately descended into the arena in his questions to the  appellant;
sixth, that the judge erred in finding that the  accepted  elements  of  the
appellant's account did not place her at risk of  re-trafficking  or  render
internal relocation unduly harsh in accordance with the country guidance  in
TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92; and seventh, that the  judge
rejected the country expert's evidence without adequate reasons.

Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on  all  grounds
except five and six and the responded provided a Rule 24  response  opposing
the appeal.

Hearing and submissions

The matter came before me and both parties made submissions.

Ms Fitzsimons focussed  on  the  grounds  upon  which  permission  had  been
granted. With regard to the  first  ground,  she  referred  to  the  medical
evidence before the judge which confirmed that  the  appellant  had  complex
PTSD and  that  her  presentation  was  consistent  with  other  victims  of
trafficking. She also referred to the statutory guidance  under  the  Modern
Slavery Act 2015 which confirmed  that  victims  of  trafficking  often  had
difficulty recalling details and submitted that the medical  evidence  could
have provided a  plausible  explanation  for  the  varying  dates  and  time
period. The judge therefore erred by finding that it did  not.  As  for  the
second  ground  the  judge,  when  rejecting  the  claimed  cause   of   the
appellant's PTSD, failed to engage with the medical expert's  opinion  which
was not only based upon his own observations but  also  the  community  care
assessments and which followed the Istanbul Protocol.  With  regard  to  the
third ground, the judge erred by expecting H to be a witness or  to  provide
a statement, because there was no duty to corroborate and  also  because  he
had only met the appellant after the trafficking incident and  she  had  not
told him about it. The appellant provided a plausible explanation as to  why
she had not told him, because she was ashamed. As for the fourth ground,  Ms
Fitzsimons submitted that the judge's reasoning at [69], that the  appellant
would have accessed support earlier and that  she  would  not  have  entered
into a sexual relationship with H so soon after meeting him if  her  account
of the trafficking was true, was a subjective judgment.  The  appellant  had
sought support from Hestia and other organisations and the  judge's  reasons
for rejecting her credibility on such a basis  were  not  made  out  on  the
evidence. With regard to the seventh ground, Ms  Fitzsimons  submitted  that
the judge gave no reason why she preferred the CPIN report  to  the  country
expert report, particularly when  the  country  expert  addressed  the  CPIN
report and gave reasons why she  believed  the  appellant  was  at  risk  on
return.

Ms Everett, in her submissions, relied on the rule 24 response although  she
accepted the challenge in ground four and did not consider that the  judge's
findings at [69] could be upheld. She considered that that  could  be  ring-
fenced, however, and that the determination could still stand, as the  judge
had properly dealt with the medical evidence, he had treated  the  appellant
as a vulnerable witness and he had made his credibility  assessment  against
the medical evidence. The judge had  adequately  expressed  his  reason  for
drawing the adverse conclusions from the absence of evidence from H.

Ms Fitzsimons, in response, submitted that the  error  in  ground  four  was
material  to  the  judge's  overall  credibility  assessment.  Further,  the
appellant had provided  a  good  reason  why  the  evidence  of  H  was  not
relevant, as she had not disclosed the events to him.

Discussion and conclusions

It seems to me that the first two grounds  are  essentially  a  disagreement
with  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  in   relation   to   the
appellant's account of being trafficked to  the  UK  and  with  the  adverse
conclusions he drew from the  discrepancy  in  the  timing  of  the  claimed
events. It cannot be said that the judge failed to consider the  appellant's
circumstances and her vulnerability and mental  health  issues  when  making
his  assessment.  Therefore,  to  assert  that  he  should  have  reached  a
different conclusion on the basis of  the  medical  evidence,  is  simply  a
disagreement with his decision.  It  is  clear  from  [38]  of  the  judge's
decision that he was well aware of  the  appellant's  vulnerable  state  and
that he took care to treat her accordingly. It is also  apparent  from  [51]
and [52] that the judge tried to give the  appellant  every  opportunity  to
provide a proper explanation for the difference between her account  of  the
date  she  left  Albania  and  the  period  she  spent  being  forced   into
prostitution and the information from the British Embassy in Tirana.  It  is
clear that the judge tried, as demonstrated at [51] and [65],  to  reconcile
the discrepancies in her evidence with her mental health  problems  and  the
trauma of her claimed experiences, and,  at  [66],  with  the  circumstances
under which she was relating her account at the Home Office interview.

There can be no doubt from the judge's findings that he had full  regard  to
the medical assessment  in  the  psychiatric  report  from  Dr  Obuaya  when
considering the possibility  of  the  appellant  being  mistaken  about  the
timing of her trafficking experiences and he observed  that  Dr  Obuaya  was
unable to offer any psychiatric explanation for the disparity  in  dates.  I
note that that reflects the psychiatric report at [86]. At  [73]  the  judge
gave  consideration  to  the  supporting  letters  from  the   organisations
assisting the appellant and clearly it cannot be  said  that  he  failed  to
take that evidence into account. Again, the  judge  observed  that  none  of
those letters explored the issue as regards the appellant's date of  travel.
It seems to me that that is a relevant matter which the judge was  perfectly
entitled to consider, in particular given  its  significance  and  the  fact
that, as reflected by the evidence at Annex L, M and N of  the  respondent's
appeal bundle, the appellant was advised by the  Competent  Authority  about
the discrepancy in her travel dates as far back as July 2019  and  had  thus
had ample time to provide a response. Indeed, it is  of  some  relevance  to
note that, aside from the letter from Ella's at page 76 of  the  appellant's
appeal bundle, the letters from the other supporting organisations were  not
recent and all pre-dated the discovery of the travel dates and the  negative
conclusive grounds decision and were made at a time when the discrepancy  in
her account had not been an issue.

For all of these reasons I do not find merit in the  first  two  grounds  of
appeal  and  I  reject  the  assertion  that  the  judge  made  his  adverse
credibility assessment without having adequate regard  to  the  medical  and
psychological evidence and that he erred in  his  approach  to  the  medical
evidence. As for the third ground, and the assertion that  the  judge  erred
in  requiring  corroboration  from  the   appellant   of   her   trafficking
experience, I do not agree that that is was what he did. At [67]  the  judge
merely observed that, as opposed to  her  claim  relating  to  her  father's
violence and the forced marriage, her account of the trafficking  experience
was unsubstantiated. Contrary to the assertion in the grounds, it  seems  to
me that the judge was perfectly entitled  to  consider  that  H  could  have
provided some valuable supporting evidence, not to confirm  the  appellant's
account of the trafficking - which it is said that she did  not  share  with
him - but to confirm  the  circumstances  in  which  they  met  and  how  he
assisted her. The judge noted, at [68], that the  appellant  was  dismissive
when questioned about the nature of her continued contact with H and he  was
entitled to conclude that she was not being forthcoming in that regard.

With regard to the fourth ground,  Ms  Everett  accepted  that  the  judge's
adverse comments at [69] were wrongly  made  and  not  sustainable  but  she
considered that that did  not  undermine  the  judge's  overall  credibility
findings. I do not agree with Ms Fitzsimons'  submission  that  the  judge's
overall credibility assessment was infected by those comments to the  extent
that it had to be set aside. It is clear that the judge gave  ample  reasons
for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account   of   having   been   trafficked,
irrespective of such comments, and I do not accept that such  considerations
infected his overall findings. It is clear that the  judge  considered  that
the discrepancy in the  appellant's  account  of  the  period  of  her  ill-
treatment was a matter that he considered could not  be  reconciled  in  any
way and he referred to other  material  matters  which  had  also  not  been
explained  by  the  appellant,  at  [70]  and  [71],  the  latter  of  which
significantly supported  his  view  that  the  trafficking  claim  had  been
fabricated as an addition  to  the  actual  events  which  had  led  to  her
departure from Albania.

With regard to the final ground, that appears to be  an  argument  with  the
weight that the judge accorded to the expert report, which was a matter  for
him and which he considered in full and  explained  with  cogent  reasoning.
The judge had full regard to the  country  background  information  and  the
relevant  country  guidance  when  assessing  the  risk  on  return  to  the
appellant and he gave cogent reasons as to why he considered that she  could
safely and reasonably relocate to another part  of  Albania  away  from  her
father. He was perfectly entitled to conclude as he did.

For all of these reasons I find no merit in the grounds.  Judge  Hembrough's
decision was a detailed and comprehensive one which took account of all  the
evidence and provided clear and cogent reasoning. I do not find  any  errors
of law in his decision requiring it  to  be  set  aside  and  I  accordingly
uphold his decision.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:     S Kebede   Dated: 16 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
