
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01299/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle Building, Glasgow              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th January 2018                           |On 24th January 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                    [R S]
                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter instructed by Katani & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The applicant made a  human  rights  and  international  protection
         claim. Both claims were refused by the respondent for  reasons  set
         out in a letter dated 25 January 2017. She appealed. Her appeal was
         dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clapham SSC  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 20th June 2017. Her husband had  made  a  claim  for
         international protection as her dependant and been refused as such.
         He does not have an outstanding an appeal.


      2. The basis of her claim is that she and her husband are cousins  and
         had a romantic relationship from February 2000. She was told by her
         family to cease the  relationship  but  they  kept  in  touch.  She
         claimed that at the end of 2003 she was informed by her family that
         she had to marry a Mr [T]. She refused and fled with  her  husband;
         they married. In 2005, she states that her older brother found  out
         where they were and her husband was threatened and assaulted and he
         was told to divorce her. Her husband was a  journalist  and  could,
         she said, be traced through that employment and she would therefore
         be traced by her family, even if they  moved  to  another  part  of
         Bangladesh. She and her husband came to the  UK  in  2006  and  she
         applied for asylum in July 2016.


      3. Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, discrepancies over  the  date
         of the marriage were identified. The appellant  said  she  and  her
         husband had married in 2004 whereas the  record  of  her  husband's
         interview for their visa in 2006 records that  he  said  they  were
         married on 14th July 2002.  In  oral  evidence  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge he said he could not recall what  he  said  at  that
         interview but that they had married on 5th January 2004.  She  said
         they had taken the marriage certificate, which shows a marriage  in
         2004, to the British Embassy. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  refers
         in his decision to both the appellant and her husband not answering
         questions that are put to them;  for  example,  that  she  did  not
         provide an explanation why her husband had given a year of marriage
         as 2002 when interviewed in 2006.


      4. Further matters relied upon by the appellant were that  her  family
         would be able to trace her through her husband's  employment,  that
         they had a young child (born 26 August 2014 in the UK) who would be
         abducted and that the police would not protect her or her family.


      5.  The  judge  found  that  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum  carried
         considerable weight and had she "genuinely believed herself  to  be
         at  risk  then  an  asylum  application  would   have   been   made
         immediately" and that "the reason for the delay in claiming  asylum
         was that the Appellant did not have a genuine or well-founded  fear
         of persecution." The judge then  made  further  findings  that  the
         account given by the appellant and  her  husband  was  "simply  not
         credible", "no explanation was provided as to why the husband  said
         at interview that the date of marriage had been 14 July 2002", as a
         journalist her husband could "no doubt adopt a pseudonym".


      6. Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds that the  First-tier
         Tribunal  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the
         credibility findings; commencing the credibility assessment with  a
         weighty adverse finding under s8 Asylum & Immigration (Treatment of
         Claimants etc) Act 2004 rather than considering the evidence  as  a
         whole; failing to take into account that the respondent had  failed
         to undertake checks on a verifiable document  namely  the  marriage
         certificate, erred in finding the appellant's husband could use  an
         assumed name and thus the  couple  could  avoid  being  traced  and
         failed to undertake any assessment of  the  best  interest  of  the
         child.


      7. Permission was granted in general terms on all grounds.


      8. There is no error of law in the assertion that the judge failed  to
         consider that there had been no  independent  verification  of  the
         marriage certificate.  There  is  no  duty  on  the  respondent  to
         undertake such verification for documents such as those  which  are
         relied upon by the appellant. The judge did fail to take  make  any
         findings on the best interest of  the  child  although,  given  his
         findings that the family were not at risk of  being  persecuted  if
         returned to Bangladesh it is hard to see how  the  outcome  of  the
         Article 8 claim could have been any different. That the police  are
         alleged to be complicit in rape and abduction, as  claimed  by  the
         appellant, is not on the evidence sustainable and  the  finding  to
         that effect does not amount to an error of law.


      9. The judge has however erred significantly in the weight placed upon
         the delay in claiming asylum with the dismissal of  the  protection
         claim being essentially predicated upon that delay rather than  any
         proper assessment of the claim. Furthermore, although the appellant
         is now nearly 38, married and has a child and thus it may  well  be
         reasonable to conclude that the man she was supposed to  marry  may
         no longer be interested, there was no consideration by the judge of
         the consequences to  her  of  having  failed  to  comply  with  her
         family's wishes (if they are proved to  the  relevant  standard  of
         proof), a matter which is separate to  whether  she  would  now  be
         forced to marry Mr [T]. In so far as her husband could be  expected
         to utilise a pseudonym, no sustainable reason is given why that  is
         acceptable to avoid being traced.


     10. I am therefore satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  erred
         in law in his findings that the appellant is not at risk  of  being
         persecuted for a Convention reason if removed to Bangladesh. I  set
         aside the decision to be remade.


     11. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
         assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper  Tribunal.
         Primary findings of fact are required on the protection  claim  and
         such findings may have an impact on  any  assessment  of  the  best
         interest of the child and thus the human rights claim.  I  conclude
         that the decision should be remitted to a First-tier Tribunal judge
         to determine the appeal, no findings preserved.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision and remit the hearing of the appeal to a First-
    tier Tribunal judge, no findings preserved.


[pic]
                                    Date 22nd January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
