
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01599/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 November 2016                   |On 14 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                           BAYOUSH KEBEDE WOLDEYES
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sesay, solicitor of Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a national of Ethiopia born on 4  July  1958.   On  13
    June 2015 she arrived  with  leave  to  enter  as  a  visitor.   On  23
    September 2015 she claimed asylum  because  she  feared  to  return  to
    Ethiopia on account of her involvement with the Oromo Liberation Front.





The Respondent's Decision

 2. On 5 February 2016 the Respondent  refused  her  application  and  gave
    directions for her removal to Ethiopia.  The Respondent considered  the
    Appellant's account of her activities with the OLF not to  be  credible
    and that on return there was no  real  risk  that  she  would  be  ill-
    treated.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 3. On 17 February 2016 the Appellant lodged notice of  appeal  relying  on
    her involvement with the OLF and asserting that her return would  place
    the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under Articles 2 and  3
    of the European Convention and  also  but  without  giving  reasons  or
    details under Articles 6 and 8.

 4. By a decision promulgated on 8 September 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Emerton found the Appellant not to be credible  and  dismissed
    her claim on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Judge's findings on her claimed initial arrest in 2005 were flawed  and
    lacked  adequate  reasoning.    Additionally,   having   accepted   the
    Appellant's ethnicity he had failed to  give  adequate  weight  to  the
    background evidence and  the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities.   An
    additional ground asserted the Judge had erred in  law  by  imposing  a
    requirement for corroboration of elements of the Appellant's account.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 6. The Appellant attended the hearing although she took no active part  in
    the proceedings.

Submissions for the Appellant

 7. Mr Sesay submitted the Judge had erred in making corroboration  of  the
    Appellant's account a  necessary  requirement  and  in  making  a  pre-
    supposition  about  how  a  genuine   asylum   seeker   would   behave.
    Additionally, the Judge having  accepted  the  background  evidence  of
    being Oromo in Ethiopia had erred in not finding that this showed there
    were very significant obstacles to the Appellant's return.

 8. Mr Sesay referred to paragraphs24 and 30 of the  Judge's  decision  and
    submitted  that  he  had  made  findings  based  on   an   absence   of
    documentation and that in the circumstances it was unreasonable to have
    expected  the  Appellant  as  an   asylum-seeker   to   have   produced
    documentation. This amounted to requiring corroboration.

 9. Mr Sesay asserted the Judge had erred by attaching little weight to the
    letter sent to the Appellant by  her  cousin  in  Ethiopia.   No  other
    reason was given.  He went on to submit that at paragraph 28 the  Judge
    had failed to explain why the  Appellant's  involvement  in  charitable
    activities in Ethiopia did not advance her case or  why  production  of
    evidence about this work was  necessary  to  establish  her  case.   He
    concluded by urging me to find a material error of law in the decision.

Submissions for the Respondent

10. Mr Duffy referred to the issue of corroboration and submitted that  the
    law relating to the need or lack of need for corroboration arose out of
    the context that a person leaving his or her country of origin to  seek
    asylum  will  often  not  have  the  opportunity  to  gather  and  take
    documentation to support the asylum claim.  In this case the  Appellant
    had entered the United Kingdom as a visitor and the Judge had commented
    on the Appellant's failure to produce evidence in part  in  respect  of
    matters in the United  Kingdom.   No  reason  had  been  given  by  the
    Appellant for the lack of  evidence  from  her  cousin  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He referred me to TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ. 40.

11. The Appellant had stated she was still in  contact  with  relatives  in
    Ethiopia and had not given any explanation why she had not been able to
    produce documents from Ethiopia, if necessary with their assistance, to
    evidence her previous work and status in Ethiopia.

12. The Judge had found inconsistencies in the Appellant's account and  was
    entitled to comment on the failure of the Appellant when asked  at  her
    screening interview to mention that she had been arrested and tortured.
     I noted that the screening interview had been on appointment  and  not
    immediately on the Appellant's first arrival in the United Kingdom,  so
    she had ample notice.

13. There was no error of law in paragraph 32 of the Judge's decision.   He
    had been entitled to and given sufficient reasons for his conclusion on
    the paucity  of  the  oral  testimony  given  by  the  Appellant.   The
    principal reason why the Judge had  found  against  the  Appellant  was
    because of the weakness or inadequacy of her oral testimony.

14. Mr Duffy turned to the grounds challenging the Judge's treatment of the
    Appellant's claim under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The
    Appellant had claimed she had had a good job and a  good  lifestyle  in
    Ethiopia as noted at paragraph 30 of the decision.  The Judge  had  not
    accepted her claim to fear persecution on return and found there  would
    be no reason why she should not return to Ethiopia.  Consequently,  his
    finding that there were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  her  re-
    integration on return  was  justified.   Mr  Sesay  for  the  Appellant
    interjected that paragraph 276ADE did not preclude a  consideration  of
    the Appellant's private life outside the United Kingdom.

15. I pointed out  that  paragraph  276ADE(1)  states  that  the  paragraph
    addresses "the requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK" (emphasis added).

16.  Mr  Duffy  addressed  the  interjection.   Paragraph  276ADE  of   the
    Immigration Rules did not provide a basis for a "weaker" asylum  claim.
    If it were to be pleaded, the  claim  would  have  to  rely  on  return
    amounting to a nullification of an  applicant's  private  life  in  the
    place to which he or she was to return.  He reiterated that  the  Judge
    had found that on return to Ethiopia the Appellant would not be at risk
    of ill-treatment and on her own admission she had enjoyed  a  good  job
    and private life circumstances in Ethiopia  before  she  had  come  the
    United Kingdom.  A claim engaging the nullification of private life  in
    the removal destination would have to be sufficiently strong to succeed
    on protection grounds otherwise it could not succeed at all.

17. In response Mr Sesay merely reiterated his claim that it was  an  error
    of law for the Judge to have pre-supposed how an  asylum  seeker  would
    behave in terms of whether corroborative evidence could be provided.  I
    reserved my Decision.

Consideration and Conclusion

18. I have considered the  oral  submissions  together  with  the  skeleton
    argument submitted by  Mr  Sesay.   The  Respondent's  response  of  20
    October 2016 under Procedure Rule 24 merely asserts in effect that  the
    Judge did not make any error of law.

19. The skeleton argument makes reference to  a  number  of  decisions  and
    judgments but otherwise adds nothing to the grounds for appeal.

20. The Judge expressly stated at the start of paragraph 24 of his decision
    that there was no duty upon an Appellant to obtain  corroboration.   He
    went on to comment about an expectation that a  genuine  asylum  seeker
    would seek to obtain supporting evidence.  His criticism at  paragraphs
    24 and 27 relates to the Appellant's relatives in  the  United  Kingdom
    and notes the absence of evidence from any of them.  At  paragraphs  24
    and 32 he remarks on the vague and evasive nature of the oral testimony
    of the Appellant.

21. Other than in cross-examination the discrepancy between the Appellant's
    claim at screening that she had never been arrested or detained and her
    claim to have been arrested and tortured in 2005 was not  explored,  no
    submissions were made on the point which the Appellant had  dealt  with
    in her statement of 29 July 2016, signed subsequent to the despatch  of
    the Respondent's bundle on 20 July 2016, that  she  had  not  seen  her
    screening interview and that the question asked  was  whether  she  was
    arrested due to criminal convictions or terrorism.

22. The Appellant's  skeleton  argument  challenges  paragraph  26  of  the
    Judge's decision dealing with the expert evidence from Dr  Berri.   The
    Judge made the point that Dr Berri's opinion will have been based on an
    acceptance of the Appellant's account.  This recognises that it is  not
    the function of an expert to assess credibility.  The Judge  notes  the
    absence of an adequate professional history to demonstrate  Dr  Berri's
    expertise and concludes that  there  is  little  of  substance  in  his
    evidence.

23. At paragraph 30, the Judge noted that the  Appellant  had  provided  no
    documentary evidence to support her claim that all her assets had  been
    confiscated and her bank account frozen.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to
    give little weight to this oral  testimony.   The  freezing  of  assets
    including bank accounts is a matter which it would not be  unreasonable
    to expect some documentary evidence to  be  readily  available  or  the
    absence of it to be given a proper explanation.  There would appear  to
    have been none before the Judge.

24. The Judge was entitled to find  that  the  documents  relating  to  the
    Appellant's charity did not advance her case to face persecution or ill-
    treatment on return to Ethiopia.  Of particular  note  is  the  Judge's
    finding at paragraph 32 that:-

         Overall, there  were  significant  weaknesses  in  the  Appellant's
         account.  Her oral evidence was the  opportunity  to  retrieve  the
         situation, even if she chose  not  to  call  any  UK  relatives  in
         support of her case, or provide  better  and  timelier  documentary
         evidence in support.

    The Judge found the Appellant accepted that she had left a good job and
    a comfortable lifestyle in  Ethiopia  as  well  as  children.   In  the
    circumstances the Judge was entitled to consider  that  her  claim  was
    based simply on the general situation for Oromo in Ethiopia and to  his
    findings that there were not very  significant  obstacles  to  her  re-
    integration on return.

25. In any event, I find that paragraph 276ADE relates to private  life  in
    and not outside the United Kingdom and I accept the submission made for
    the Respondent that her claim based on private life outside the  United
    Kingdom would have to be that the  damage  to  the  claimant  would  be
    sufficient to support  a  claim  for  protection.   The  Appellant  has
    evidently failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof  on  her  in  this
    respect.

26. I conclude that it might be  arguable  certain  parts  of  the  Judge's
    decision might have been more  felicitously  worded,  for  instance  by
    making reference to the amount of weight  to  be  attached  to  various
    parts of the Appellant's evidence. However, this does not amount to  an
    error of law such that the Judge's decision  should  be  set  aside  in
    whole or in part.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    and it shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
11. xi. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

