
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01224/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 14 July 2021                      |On 28 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   G Y Y M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by DMO Olabamiji,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of FtT Judge David C Clapham
    SSC, promulgated on 26 January 2021.  He states two grounds.

 2. Ground 1 is that the judge failed to assess evidence  from  appellant's
    parents, which had not been before a previous tribunal which  dismissed
    the  appeal  of  the  appellant's  brother   (the   two   cases   being
    inextricable).

 3. Ground 2, headed "expert report", is that the judge erred when applying
    the report to the resolution of  discrepancies  arising  from  evidence
    from a witness, Major Zelaya, (i) by discounting evidence based on  the
    expert's interaction with Major Zelaya, there being no bar  on  hearsay
    evidence; (ii) by giving no reasons for finding the expert to have gone
    outside her remit, when the expert was entitled to interview  witnesses
    to assess their plausibility; (iii) by questioning how the expert  knew
    she was speaking to Major Zelaya, when the expert had evidence of where
    he was based, and the bona fides of the expert had not  been  impugned;
    and (iv), by questioning how the Major  could  recall  the  appellant's
    brother, when it was clear from the expert report that  the  Major  had
    been referred to relevant documentary details.

 4. Mr Winter submitted further to ground 1, referring  to  authorities  on
    failure to assess the evidence of witnesses.  Mr  Bates  replied  along
    the lines of respondent's rule 24 response, emphasising that this was a
    "Devaseelan" type of case, and that the evidence from the witnesses did
    not go to the deficiencies in the evidence identified by  the  previous
    tribunal.

 5. I indicated that ground  1  disclosed  error  of  law,  such  that  the
    decision could not stand.

 6. The judge recorded the evidence from the appellant's mother and father,
    but expressed no view on its credibility or reliability.  That evidence
    should not have been ignored because the appellant's case was otherwise
    found not to be credible.

 7. A case might be conjectured where other reasons for a negative  outcome
    were so powerful that an oversight of this nature  could  not  possibly
    have made any difference; but this is not such a case.

 8. It is unnecessary to resolve ground 2, other than  to  record  that  an
    entirely fresh hearing is required, when parties will be able to submit
    on the weight which should be given to the expert report, unconstrained
    by anything in the FtT's decision.

 9. (I note in passing that the appellant's  parents  have  sought  asylum,
    based on the same claim, and that their applications are pending before
    the respondent.)

10. The decision of the FtT is set aside, other than as a  record  of  what
    was said at the hearing.  The case is remitted for fresh  hearing,  not
    before Judge Clapham.

11. An anonymity direction is in place.

        Hugh Macleman

      14 July 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




