

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number PA/01319/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Birmingham
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 4th September 2019                        On 4th November 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                             ABDULNASER IBRAHIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr F Mahmood (Solicitor, Morden Solicitors
LLP(Birmingham))
For the Respondent: Ms H Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of his
   asylum application was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Cox for
   the reasons given a decision promulgated on the 1st of May 2019. The
   Judge did not accept that the Appellant was a member of the Zaghwa, a non-
   Arab Darfuri tribe, and found he was not in need of international
   protection.

2. The grounds argue that the Judge erred in the assessment of the
   Appellant's language referring to the CPIN and the evidence that members
   of the African tribes speak Arabic and their own language whereas Arabs
   speak only Arabic. It was also argued that the Judge had not properly
   considered the relevant country guidance in failing to consider that the
   Appellant was a member of the Zaghwa tribe and therefore at risk by that
   fact alone. Finally it was asserted that had not followed the guidance in
   Chiver in assessing the Appellant's credibility. Permission was granted
   on all grounds.

3. There was no rule 24 response from the Home Office but in submissions
   both parties maintained their respective positions. The submissions are
   set out in the Record of Proceedings.

4. The real complaint is that the Judge did not find that the evidence
   showed the Appellant was from the Zaghwa tribe and therefore rejected the
   claim that he is a non-Arab Darfuri. There were several strands of
   evidence including evidence from supporting witnesses and the Appellant's
   ability to speak the tribal language.

5. In the decision the Appellant's evidence was set out in some detail.
   There were differences discussed particularly with regard to what he had
   told the Home Office in interview and his evidence about his brother's
   disappearance and being located in 2014. The Appellant did not explain
   how the same date of birth had been recorded in Italy.

6. There were issues with the evidence from the Zaghwa community and how
   contact had been made and how his claim had been verified and
   inconsistencies between the Appellant and his father. There were also
   issues around the number of attacks and when those had taken place.

7. Having set out the evidence the Judge discussed from paragraph 63
   onwards having reminded herself about the caution required when
   approaching evidence having regard to age and the fact that some aspects
   could be rejected while others were accepted. The Judge found a series of
   inconsistencies that were set out and analysed the Appellant's
   explanation for what was said at the Screening Interview.

8. So far as the Appellant's ability to speak Zaghwa was concerned the
   Judge observed at paragraph 85 the weight to be to that. However, the
   observation that it was weighty evidence did mean that the Appellant's
   ability was determinative of the issue and the evidence relied on does
   not assert that or anything similar either. It cannot be said that the
   Judge overlooked the importance of this aspect of the Appellant's case
   but it fell to be considered alongside the other evidence relied on
   including the inconsistencies and other issues discussed in the decision.

9. The Judge weighed the evidence overall and having regard to the
   inconsistencies in the evidence identified was entitled to reject the
   Appellant's credibility. This is not a decision that can be characterised
   as superficial or lacking in analysis. The Judge considered all the
   relevant aspects, the decision was open to the Judge for the reasons
   given and accordingly I find that there is no error in the decision.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

Dated: 25th September 2019




Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

Dated: 25th September 2019




