
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01627/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                             |On 07 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    MSUA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R. Popal, Counsel instructed by Hunter Stone
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By way of a decision promulgated on 15 January 2019  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim.  The appeal came before me to be remade.  The  issue  for
    consideration was the risk on return to the Appellant on account of his
    profile due to his BNP activity and his involvement with a human rights
    organisation in Bangladesh, and due to his sur place activity with  the
    BNP in the United Kingdom.


 2. I make an anonymity direction continuing that made at the error of  law
    hearing.

 3. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives, following
    which I reserved my decision.

 4. I have taken into account the documents contained  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle (148 pages), the Appellant's supplementary  bundle  (137  pages)
    and the Respondent's bundle (to T14).  I have also taken  into  account
    the original photographs and original newspaper articles which  are  on
    the file.

Submissions

 5. Miss Popal submitted that, on all the evidence provided, it  was  clear
    that the Appellant was a member of the BNP, and  that  he  had  held  a
    prominent position in Bangladesh for quite some  time.   Since  he  had
    come to the United Kingdom, he had continued his  BNP  involvement  and
    now held a  prominent  position  in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  was
    extensive evidence of his sur place activities in the United Kingdom.


 6. She referred me to the highlighted passages in the background  evidence
    contained  in  the  supplementary  bundle.   She  submitted  that  this
    evidence showed that the government paid attention to  those  who  were
    members of the opposition, even those whose activities were  low-level.
    She referred me to the  newspaper  articles  which  showed  the  active
    interest of the authorities in clamping down on political opposition in
    Bangladesh.  She submitted that article at  page  110  referred  to  an
    individual with a  similar  profile  to  the  Appellant  who  had  been
    arrested and detained.  He was a joint general  secretary  from  Sylhet
    who had also been involved with the BNP in the United Kingdom.  He  was
    a British citizen.  He had gone back to visit his father, and had  been
    arrested and detained.


 7. Miss Popal submitted that the Appellant had become of interest  to  the
    authorities as he was an active member of a human  rights  organisation
    in Bangladesh.  He had been the general secretary of that organisation.
     He had put pressure on the government  to  be  accountable  for  their
    human rights abuses.  She submitted that it was clear that human rights
    abuses occurred in  Bangladesh,  especially  within  the  judicial  and
    prison system.  Human rights organisations in Bangladesh played  a  key
    role.  There was hostility towards these organisations.  In his role as
    general secretary of the human rights organisation, the  Appellant  had
    assisted the family of a child who had been killed,  allegedly  at  the
    hands of the police.  He had tried to hold the government  to  account,
    and to ensure that the police  officers  responsible  came  before  the
    courts.  She submitted that clearly that  this  would  have  drawn  the
    authorities' attention to the Appellant.   Together  with  his  general
    criticism of the government, it was unsurprising that he  had  come  to
    the interest of the authorities.

 8. The Appellant's activities in the United Kingdom  had  been  confirmed.
    Taking into account his activities for the BNP  and  the  human  rights
    organisation in Bangladesh, together with his sur place activities,  it
    was clear that the Appellant had a profile  which  would  make  him  of
    interest to the authorities.

 9. In relation to the human rights organisation, Miss Popal submitted that
    the Appellant had disclosed his involvement at his screening and asylum
    interviews.  He had provided a  thorough  witness  statement.   It  was
    clear that the human rights organisation existed, and the  reasons  for
    refusal letter was wrong when it stated that it did not.

10. Mr. Walker made brief submissions.  He accepted that it was clear  from
    the evidence that the human rights organisation did exist, and that the
    reasons for refusal letter was wrong  in  that  respect.   He  accepted
    that, on all the evidence before me, it was clear  that  the  Appellant
    had a high political profile given his  sur  place  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom, plus his  documented  involvement  in  a  human  rights
    organisation in Bangladesh.  He referred  to  the  updated  information
    provided in the Appellant's supplementary bundle.  He accepted that the
    highlighted passages showed  the  difficulties  for  those  who  had  a
    political profile in Bangladesh.  He accepted that this evidence showed
    that those with a high political profile in Bangladesh, and  those  who
    had carried out sur place activities, were targeted in Bangladesh.

11. Miss Popal drew my attention to  the  Human  Rights  Watch  Report,  in
    particular pages 3, 24, 35 and 36, and also to the Odhikar Human Rights
    Monitoring Report on Bangladesh (pages 83 onwards of the  supplementary
    bundle), which had been relied on in the Respondent's CPIN.

Decision and Reasons

12. I find, as was accepted by Mr. Walker, that  it  is  reasonably  likely
    that the Appellant has a high political profile in Bangladesh given his
    involvement in the BNP and a human rights organisation  in  Bangladesh,
    and his sur place activities in the United Kingdom.


13. I find, as was accepted by Mr. Walker, that  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter is wrong when it states that the human rights organisation  with
    which the Appellant claimed to have been involved  in  Bangladesh  does
    not  exist.   The  Appellant's  involvement  in  this  organisation  is
    documented.  It was accepted in the decision of Judge Cameron  at  [94]
    where he found that the Appellant was involved with  the  human  rights
    organisation.  I find that the Appellant was the General  Secretary  of
    the human rights organisation.  I find that  it  is  reasonably  likely
    that the activities of the Appellant with this organisation  will  have
    brought him to the attention of the  authorities,  given  that  he  was
    involved in challenging the government,  bringing  it  to  account  for
    human rights abuses.



14. It was found by Judge Cameron at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  "the
    appellant throughout has always indicated that he held the position  of
    initially secretary and then general secretary within Ward  18,  and  I
    have no reason to doubt this given the documentation he has  submitted"
    [91].  I adopt that finding.  I find that the Appellant was  a  general
    secretary in the BNP in Bangladesh.

15.  I  find  that  the  Appellant  has  provided  evidence  to  show  that
    individuals who hold a similar rank, i.e. general  secretary  of  their
    BNP district, are  of  interest  to  the  authorities.   The  Appellant
    provided   evidence   in   the   form   of   a   news   article    from
    prothomalo.com/bangladesh/news (page 110 of the supplementary  bundle).
    This states:-

         "Police arrested BNP's UK unit  joint  general  secretary  Shohidul
         Islam Mamun from his residence  in  Sylhet  city's  Badambagich  on
         Monday afternoon, reports UNB".

16. This is confirmed by an article from the Dhaka Tribune (page 112) which
    refers to the arrest of the BNP's  UK  unit  joint  general  secretary.
    There was no challenge to this evidence.  These articles are both dated
    4 September 2018, and postdate the Appellant's appeal before the First-
    tier  Tribunal.   Their  relevance  is  clear  as  they  show  that  an
    individual with the same status within the BNP as the Appellant  is  of
    interest to the authorities.


17. I have considered the original newspaper articles provided.  There  was
    no challenge to the authenticity  of  these  documents.   They  include
    photographs of the Appellant involved in human rights and BNP  protests
    in Bangladesh.

18.  I  have  considered  the  photographs  provided  of  the   Appellant's
    involvement with the BNP  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  most  recent
    photographs are found at pages 1 to 11  of  the  supplementary  bundle.
    There is a photograph of the Appellant  with  other  BNP  leaders,  and
    photographs of the Appellant demonstrating in  central  London.   There
    was no challenge to this evidence,  and  Mr.  Walker  acknowledged  the
    Appellant's sur place activities with the BNP.

19. I have considered whether the Appellant's  sur  place  activities  will
    have brought him to the attention of  the  authorities  in  Bangladesh,
    with reference to the background evidence in the supplementary  bundle.
    There is evidence that those involved in  the  United  Kingdom  are  of
    interest to the authorities given the  arrest  of  Mr.  Mamun  when  he
    returned to Bangladesh in September 2018 (see [15] and [16] above).

20. I have considered the evidence from the Daily Star  (page  114  of  the
    supplementary bundle).  This is dated 18 November 2018.  It is entitled
    "Arrest of party men continues: BNP tells EC  [Electoral  Commission]".
    It refers to BNP clams that law enforcers had arrested "773 BNP men".

21. I have considered the report from Human Rights Watch entitled "Creating
    Panic:  Bangladesh  Election  Crackdown  on  Political  Opponents   and
    Critics" dated December 2018.  Under the heading  "Targeting  Political
    Opposition" it states:

         "Thousands of cases had been filed in recent months against leaders
         and   supporters   of   opposition   parties.   "The   police   are
         indiscriminately arresting  people,"  a  newspaper  columnist  told
         Human Rights Watch. According to a  law  professor,  "They  do  not
         bother with legal formalities, these  police.  They  are  arresting
         people just to harass and put pressure on the politicians."

    According to the BNP, over 300,000 of its leaders  and  activists  have
    been implicated in "false and fabricated" cases.  The  allegations  are
    often broad and vague. Human Rights Watch found that one partial set of
    14 cases, filed by just six of Dhaka's 49 police stations in the  first
    week of September, names 519 individuals and an unspecified  number  of
    unidentified  people,  accusing  them  of  a  variety  of  crimes.  The
    allegations specify that all of the accused  belong  to  the  BNP.  BNP
    Secretary General Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir is facing charges  in  46
    cases. A standing committee member, Mirza Abbas, faces  42  cases.  BNP
    candidate Saiful Alam Nirob, who is running against the home  minister,
    is facing 267 cases." (page 44 of the supplementary bundle).

22. Later there is reference to those arrested being subjected to abuse  in
    custody (page 45):

         "Several of those arrested said they had been subjected to abuse in
         custody. In four of the six recent  cases  of  alleged  torture  of
         political detainees investigated by Human Rights Watch, the victims
         said they were beaten up after they had been produced in court  and
         then remanded back to police custody instead of being sent to jail.
         In the other two, the  abuse  occurred  before  being  produced  in
         court. Abuses described to Human Rights Watch include beating  with
         fists, plastic pipes, or sugar canes, crushing body  parts  against
         the floor, and partial drowning."

23. More detail is set out in chapter II entitled "Crackdown  on  Political
    Opposition" (pages 54 to 63).

24. I have also considered the Odhikar Human Rights  Monitoring  Report  on
    Bangladesh (pages  83  onwards  of  the  supplementary  bundle).   This
    evidence is consistent with the evidence from Human Rights Watch.   The
    report is dated 9 December 2018, and covers the period  from  1  to  30
    November 2018.  At page 99 under the heading  "Political  Violence"  it
    states "In November 2018, according to information gathered by Odhikar,
    11 persons were killed  and  461  persons  were  injured  in  political
    violence".  At [27] it states:

         "Leaders  and  activists  of  the  ruling  Awami  league  and   its
         affiliated  organisations  are  enjoying  impunity  for  committing
         criminal offence, due to absence of democracy,  accountability  and
         rule of law."

25. At [29] it refers to violence on 23 November 2018, and states:

         "On 23  November  2018  leaders-activist  of  local  Awami  League,
         Chhatra League and Jubo League allegedly  attacked  and  vandalized
         the houses of local BNP leaders-activists in Chorbaria  Village  of
         Ajgoria Union under Laksham Upazila in Comilla District. They  also
         beat former Chhatra Dal42 leader Amanullah Aman and handed him over
         to the police."

26. At [30] the report refers to extra-judicial killings:

         "Extrajudicial killings continue due to the  absence  of  democracy
         and rule of law in the country. Such killings took a dangerous turn
         from  15  May  2018,  during  the  nationwide  'anti-drug'   drives
         conducted by law enforcement agencies, which continue in  November.
         From May 15 to 30 November 2018, 283 persons were reported to  have
         been  killed  extra-judicially  in  the  name  of   'gunfight'   or
         'shootout'  during  the  ongoing  'anti-drug  drives'  across   the
         country. 34 persons  were  reported  to  have  been  killed  extra-
         judicially in November."

27. The report goes on to consider enforced disappearances:

         "In November 2018, 12  persons  were  allegedly  disappeared  after
         being picked up by members of law enforcement agencies. Among them,
         three were showed arrested after a few days  of  disappearance  and
         the whereabouts of nine persons remain unknown. [32]


         A highly visible and worrying  number  of  enforced  disappearances
         have been committed during the current government reign. Opposition
         parties have expressed  their  concern  and  fear  that  there  are
         possibilities that leaders and activists of the opposition will  be
         disappeared in the lead up to the upcoming national elections. Many
         leaders and activists of the opposition parties,  particularly  the
         BNP, became victims of enforced disappearance before and after  the
         controversial 10th Parliamentary elections in 2014. Of  them,  many
         have still not returned." [33]

28. At [36] the report refers to the impunity enjoyed by members of the law
    enforcement agencies:

         "Members of the law enforcement agencies are enjoying  impunity  as
         the government is using them to suppress its  political  opponents.
         As a result of such impunity, allegations of harassment,  torturing
         people, taking bribes, shooting in the legs, attacks  and  unlawful
         detention of the opposition  and  dissenters  and  extortion,  were
         found against members of law enforcement agencies. The Torture  and
         Custodial Death (Prevention) Act, 2013 was passed after  relentless
         demands from human rights defenders. However, a  vast  majority  of
         the torture victims and family members are not  able  to  file  any
         cases under this Act due to fear of reprisals; and those cases that
         have been filed are yet to see light in the court."

29. I  find  that  the  background  evidence  shows  that  members  of  the
    opposition are being targeted in Bangladesh, and that the government is
    using law enforcement agencies to suppress opposition.  These  evidence
    in these two reports post-date the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    There was no challenge to this evidence and  I  find  that  it  can  be
    relied on to show that members of the opposition are being targeted  by
    the authorities in Bangladesh.  It shows that members of the BNP are at
    risk of arrest and detention.  I find it is reasonably likely that  the
    Appellant, who had a high profile in the BNP  in  Bangladesh,  and  who
    continues to have a high profile in the  BNP  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    would be targeted on account of  his  political  activity.   This  high
    profile was accepted by Mr. Walker.


30. Further I find it is reasonably likely that the Appellant  has  already
    come to the attention of the authorities when in Bangladesh on  account
    of his involvement with the human rights organisation as well  as  with
    the BNP.

31. Considering all the above, I find the Appellant's claim to be a genuine
    refugee in need of international protection to be well founded.  I find
    that there is a real risk that he will suffer persecution on return  to
    Bangladesh, and so his claim succeeds on asylum  grounds.   As  I  have
    allowed his appeal on asylum grounds, I do not  need  to  consider  his
    claim to  humanitarian  protection.   I  find  that  returning  him  to
    Bangladesh would cause the United  Kingdom  to  be  in  breach  of  its
    obligations under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

32. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

33. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

34. I have made an anonymity direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 2 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the event that a fee has been paid  or  is  payable,  I  have  considered
making a fee award.  I have decided to make no fee award as certain  aspects
of the Appellant's account were  not  accepted,  and  further  evidence  was
provided for the appeal.


Signed                                  Date 2 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


