
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01837/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Sent to all parties             |
|On October 28, 2016             |On November 16, 2016            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                MR RONG CHEN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms Hashmi (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    2. The appellant is a  national  of  China.  On  August  20,  2009  the
       appellant entered the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  (General)  Student
       with a visa valid until August 1, 2010. He then made an  application
       for leave to remain as Tier 4 (General) Student and this was granted
       until September 8, 2011. He then lodged two similar applications  on
       August 9, 2011 and August 26, 2011. On each occasion he withdrew the
       application the same day.

    3. On January 20, 2015 he lodged an application for leave to remain  on
       the grounds of family and private life. This was refused  without  a
       right of appeal on February 27, 2015.

    4. He was arrested working illegally on December 14,  2015  and  served
       with enforcement notification as an overstayer. On December 29, 2015
       he applied for leave to remain on the grounds of family and  private
       life. This was refused without a right  of  appeal  on  January  14,
       2016. He was the served with  removal  directions  for  January  23,
       2016.

    5. On January 21, 2016 he applied for asylum.  The  respondent  refused
       his application on February 15, 2016 under paragraph 336 HC 395.

    6. The appellant appealed that decision  on  February  23,  2016  under
       Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
       and his appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Geraint
       Jones QC (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge" on March 24,  2016.
       In a decision promulgated on March 30, 2016 he dismissed his claims.



    7. The appellant appealed the Judge's decision on April  12,  2016  and
       permission to appeal was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Martin on April 22, 2016. The grounds were renewed and permission to
       appeal was granted  on  a  narrow  basis  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Southern on June 8, 2016  on  the  ground  there  may  have  been  a
       procedural unfairness. He  gave  directions  for  the  filing  of  a
       statement  of  truth  by   the   two   representatives   and   their
       contemporaneous notes of the hearing with  a  view  to  establishing
       whether the Judge had been mistaken in his recollection.

    8. The matter came before me on the above date and on that  occasion  I
       heard submissions from both representatives. I reserved my decision.



PRELIMINARY ISSUES

    9. I raised as a preliminary issue that Ms Hashmi appeared to be taking
       on two roles namely that of witness and  advocate.  I  informed  her
       that depending on her answers to  certain  matters  I  may  have  to
       adjourn the case.

   10. I enquired from representatives  whether  any  statements  had  been
       filed and where their notes of hearing were.

   11. Mr McVeety indicated to me that no statement had been filed  by  his
       colleague because there were no contemporaneous notes of the hearing
       apart from a memo typed up after the hearing.

   12. Ms Hashmi  referred  me  to  her  statement  dated  March  29,  2016
       (supposed to be June 29, 2016). I raised with her  where  her  notes
       were and she indicated she had none. She later  confirmed  that  she
       had notes but they were silent on this issue.

   13. I pointed out to her that her statement did not  address  the  issue
       raised  by  the  Judge  but  she  submitted  it  did  and  in  those
       circumstances I invited her submissions.

SUBMISSIONS

   14. Ms Hashmi argued that the Judge would not allow an  adjournment  and
       his decision was in accurate at paragraph [16] because  he  made  no
       reference  to  refusing  an  adjournment.  She  had  asked  for   an
       adjournment because the appellant was unhappy  the  interpreter  was
       the same as at his interview and there had been issues raised  about
       the interpreter. She also identified  in  paragraph  [19]  that  the
       Judge had not checked the names written down by the interpreter. She
       emphasised that she could not go against what the Judge did and  she
       had proceeded with the hearing. Her client raised issues  about  the
       interpreter after the hearing.

   15. I the asked Ms Hashmi if she could assist me  with  what  the  Judge
       stated in paragraph [18] and she stated she could not as she had  no
       contemporaneous note.

   16. Ms McVeety submitted  that  the  court  record  confirmed  what  was
       recorded in the decision and in the absence of any other  record  or
       evidence to the contrary  then  the  record  must  be  taken  to  be
       accurate.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   17. In granting permission  to  appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern
       identified a narrow issue for me to consider.

   18. I had the benefit of the Judge's hearing notes  and  these  recorded
       that an issue was raised about using the same interpreter  that  had
       been used in the interview as it was alleged the interpreter was not
       good enough. He recorded that Ms Hashmi argued that using  the  same
       interpreter was  wrong  because  of  the  allegations  made  by  the
       appellant and in any event he wanted an  interpreter  familiar  with
       the Roman Catholic religion. Importantly the notes refer then  to  a
       conversation in Mandarin between the appellant and  the  interpreter
       which culminated with the interpreter saying  in  open  court,  "The
       appellant agrees we can go  ahead  with  the  appeal  and  with  the
       present interpreter". The Judge  then  noted  down  he  advised  the
       appellant  and  interpreter  to  alert  him  if   there   were   any
       interpretation problems.

   19. This is the only contemporaneous note of the  hearing.  Ms  Hashmi's
       statement did not address the issue and when  I  specifically  asked
       her about this she was unable to say whether it happened or did  not
       happen.

   20. Based on the evidence presented to me I am  in  no  doubt  that  the
       judge's record of proceedings is accurate and he then reflected this
       in his decision. There is  no  evidential  basis  to  challenge  the
       decision as Ms Hashmi cannot actually say  that  this  is  not  what
       happened.

   21. I should add that Ms Hashmi has notes of the hearing but informed me
       they did not address the issue. I  did  not  therefore  request  her
       notes as they would not have assisted me.

DECISION

   22. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a point  of  law.  I  dismiss  the
       appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as I dismissed the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
