
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01428/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 November 2019                           |On 22 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                 GODFREY [E]
                                                                   Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rashi, instructed Tann Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born on 30 October 1976 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Nigeria. He claimed asylum in March 2017 but his claim was refused by a
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 31 January 2019.  He  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal which, by a decision promulgated on 15  July
    2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside. My reasons for reaching that conclusion are as follows. First, I
    find that the judge misunderstood the evidence which  was  before  her.
    The appellant claims  to  fear  a  Mr  [D]  in  Nigeria  and  both  the
    respondent and the judge accepted that the appellant and his family had
    been engaged in a dispute over the ownership of real property with that
    individual. At [23], the judge stated why she believed the dispute with
    Mr [D] might easily be resolved and the family's  fear  of  any  future
    threats or intimidation from Mr [D] removed:

         "The appellant acknowledged during hearing that, despite Mr [D] now
         legally owning and controlling the properties,  the  appellant  and
         his siblings have withheld the title deeds to the  property.  Given
         the  lawfully  purchased  the  properties,  it   would   seem   the
         appellant's problems could be resolved by simply handing the  title
         deeds to Mr [D]."

 3. It was the appellant's clear evidence both in his written statement and
    also at the asylum interview (Question  82)  that  certain  individuals
    claiming to be related to the appellant's father  (a  claim  which  the
    appellant did not  accept)  had  purported  to  sell  the  property  in
    question to Mr [D]. It is the appellant's case that  those  individuals
    had no title to the land in question and therefore  could  not  legally
    pass the title by sale to Mr [D]. It  was  for  that  reason  that  the
    family had refused to hand over the title deeds. Indeed, as Mr  Rashid,
    who appeared for the appellant before the Upper Tribunal observed,  the
    appellant's case that he and his family owned the property is supported
    by the fact that the family, and not  the  purported  vendors,  are  in
    physical possession of the title deeds. It follows that the appellant's
    claimed problems could not be overcome simply by transferring the title
    deeds to an individual whom the appellant and his family considered had
    sought to acquire the property illegally.

 4. I agree with Mr Rashid that the judge fell into further  error  in  her
    analysis of the option of internal flight. The expert witness, to whose
    evidence the judge refers at [13], had stated, as  the  judge  records,
    that 'internal relocation is not an option.' However at [24], the judge
    simply states that, 'I find the appellant  could  safely  return  to  a
    different part of Nigeria, away from his home area... If he  still  has
    concerns about Mr [D].' She  does  not  explain  why  she  rejects  the
    conclusions of the expert knowledge or does she give any reasons at all
    for her finding.

 5. I set aside the decision on account of the judge's misunderstanding  of
    the evidence. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The appeal will
    have to be determined de novo.










    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that tribunal to remake the decision  at  or  following  a
    hearing of the appeal de novo.






Signed                              Date 18 November 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






















































