
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01022/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On December 21, 2018                         |On January 21, 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               Navatheesan [Y]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P J Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Jein Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom  on  June  12,
    2009 as a Tier 4 (General)  Student.   His  leave  was  extended  until
    August 30, 2014 but on April 3, 2014 the respondent curtailed his leave
    with effect from June 4, 2014.  The appellant lodged an application for
    an EEA residence card which was refused on  July  24,  2014.   He  then
    lodged a further EEA residence card application but  this  was  refused
    again by the respondent on November  4,  2014.   He  lodged  an  appeal
    against that decision but the First-tier Tribunal dismissed his  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on June 16, 2015  and  permission  to  appeal
    that decision was refused.

 2. The appellant remained in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum on July
    26, 2016 having notified the respondent of his intention  on  July  19,
    2016.  The respondent refused his application on January 18, 2017.

 3. The appellant appealed this decision on February 1, 2017 under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  his
    appeal came before a  panel  of  Judges  on  March  2,  2017  and  they
    dismissed his appeal in a decision promulgated on April 3,  2018.   The
    Upper Tribunal set the decision aside  on  the  grounds  of  procedural
    unfairness and remitted the appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The matter then came before Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Manuell and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Smith who sat as  a  panel
    and they dismissed the appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated  on
    July  20,  2018.   Permission  to  appeal  was  initially  refused   by
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Macdonald  on  August  22,
    2018 but Upper Tribunal Judge Gill subsequently granted  permission  to
    appeal on November 16, 2018 on grounds 4-7 of the original  grounds  of
    appeal.  In particular, she found the Judges may have erred by  failing
    to take into account the appellant's evidence that he was taking a high
    level LTTE person from LTTE controlled Vanni to  Columbo  in  assessing
    his credibility.

 4. No anonymity order was made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Mr Lewis submitted that there was a clear error of law and  that  there
    had been a failure to have  regard  to  the  account  provided  by  the
    appellant and a failure to consider the claim in the overall context of
    what was happening and had been happening in Sri Lanka  at  that  time.
    His claim was that he had escaped from the north and travelled  with  a
    high level member of the LTTE and that this had come to  the  attention
    of the authorities and he was  suspected  of  helping  this  person  to
    escape.  This was the issue highlighted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in
    granting permission.  Mr Lewis went on to point out that findings  made
    within the decision were inconsistent with objective  evidence  and  in
    particular he made reference to the ability to leave the country and he
    also made reference to the fact that an ability to leave did  not  mean
    there would be no interest.  Reference was made to the country guidance
    decision of GJ and Others (Post-Civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319.  In short, he submitted that the Judges failed  when
    considering the appellant's account to consider the findings in GJ  and
    the objective evidence that was before the Tribunal.

 6. Mr Duffy had originally indicated that the application was opposed  but
    having considered the submissions put forward by Mr Lewis in support of
    the grounds of appeal he conceded that there was an error  in  law  for
    the reasons outlined by Mr Lewis.

 7.  Having  considered  the  decision,  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    submissions advanced I accepted that there was an error in law  in  the
    assessment of credibility for the reason set out above.

 8. I therefore gave consideration as to whether this matter could properly
    be dealt with in this Tribunal but  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the
    credibility findings would need to be made afresh I was satisfied  that
    Section 12(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 applied
    and this was a case that would have to be remitted back to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard by a Judge other than Designated Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal  Woodcraft,  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Manuell,  Designated  Judge  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    Macdonald., Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Craft  and  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Smith.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

 9. There is an error of law.

10. I set aside the original decision and I remit the matter  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal under Section 12(1) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         10/01/2019
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date         10/01/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
